Hacker News Top 30 — 2026-08-04

Generated on 2026-08-04 09:08 UTC

1. LLMs reward expertise

Source: https://www.seangoedecke.com/llms-reward-expertise/
Site: seangoedecke.com
Submitter: MaxMussio (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-08-03 21:13 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 904 points · 382 comments
Length: 910 words (~4 min read)
Language: en

In the 2010s, if you had technical gaps (say, you couldn’t write CSS), you had to either rely on a skilled colleague or just hope that the answer to your exact problem was out there on the internet. Today, everyone can write sort-of-okay CSS by delegating the task to an LLM. LLMs make everybody into a generalist.

Because of this, lots of people don’t think there’s any skill involved in working with LLMs. If you want the product that LLMs can deliver — PhD-level mathematics, pretty good but sometimes tasteless computer code, or awkward LinkedIn-style writing — you can simply ask for it. Since everyone is talking to the same models, “skilled prompters” are getting the same results as people touching LLMs for the first time.

This is wrong. The most important skill in prompting is expertise in the domain you’re prompting for.

A good illustration of this is Terence Tao’s conversation with ChatGPT about the recently-discovered counterexample to the Jacobian Conjecture. This is not the same ChatGPT I talk to! I couldn’t get to where Tao gets, even with unlimited tokens to burn.

There’s a lot to learn about good prompting from Tao’s conversation. Here are a few observations:

Tao’s messages are very short and to-the-point. He doesn’t respond point-by-point to the model, just to the gist
The model outputs are much more concise than when I try and talk to GPT-5.6 Sol about mathematics. By signalling expertise, Tao shunts the model into “talking-to-mathematicians” mode, not “explaining-to-amateurs” mode
Tao pushes back when the model’s responses look wrong, but he doesn’t directly contradict; instead, he says things like “this looks more complex than I was hoping for”
Tao makes several leaps and suggestions himself. He almost never takes the model’s advice about where to go next

However, you can’t prompt like Tao on mathematical questions just by following these tips. The key to his technique is actually understanding the mathematics: pulling the relevant idea out of ChatGPT’s multi-paragraph response, suggesting alternate approaches or formulations, and identifying what “looks weird”.

Terence Tao is a better mathematician than I am a programmer. But the idea here — that domain knowledge makes you better at using LLMs — is something I’ve also experienced in my own work. If you have a good theory of your codebase, you can push the LLM much harder than if you have no familiarity. Because you have your own sense of what a good solution might look like, you can say “no, I think it could be simpler here”, or “but don’t we already do X?”, or “can we express this problem in these familiar terms?“.

This touches on an idea I’ve written about before: that system design problems are dominated by concrete specifics, not generic principles. Of course both are useful, but I’d rather have familiarity with the codebase than a deep general understanding of software systems. In his conversation, Terence Tao asks a lot of specific questions like “does X work here?”, or “given Y and Z, why A?“. I can’t ask those questions about the Jacobian Conjecture, but I can ask them about the systems I own at GitHub.

If you have no domain knowledge, you can cling onto the LLM to at least get something. That’s not bad! But if you have domain knowledge, you can wring far more value out of the same LLM by steering it hard in the direction you want. Most of us will have to do a mix of both these approaches, since we have domain knowledge in some areas but not others.

The usefulness of domain knowledge suggests that human expertise will continue to be useful even as models get stronger. For many tasks, the human is the bottleneck, not the model, because the difficult part is in communicating to the model exactly what kind of solution the human wants. The information is “in the model” already, but it takes a very smart human to pull it out.

edit: this post got many comments on Hacker News. Some commenters share their anecdotes about how expertise has helped and lack of expertise has hurt. Other commenters say it’s plausible, but they have a sensible suspicion of a view that’s reassuring them about how they’re still valuable. I agree with that, though I suspect by the time we get around to studying this, the landscape will have changed under our feet again. Some commenters point out that OpenAI’s math prompts were inexpert, and so expertise isn’t required. Here I’d respond that OpenAI do have a team of expert mathematicians that checked and filtered the model’s suggested discoveries, and that you cannot currently skip that step.

If you liked this post, consider subscribing to email updates about my new posts, or sharing it on Hacker News.

Here's a preview of a related post that shares tags with this one.

Powerful AIs might escape containment by releasing themselves as open-weight models

Before large language models, people who worried about AI safety often talked about the “boxing problem”. It goes like this. Suppose some genius figures out artificial intelligence in a late-night coding session on their laptop. Because they’re a genius, they’re smart enough to disable internet access on the laptop before turning it on. In order to escape to the outside world (and begin self-replicating) it would need to convince its creator to “open the box”. Would that work? Could a sufficiently smart AI convince anybody to let it out?
Continue reading...

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

2. Show HN: Run an 80B Qwen in 4.3 GB of RAM on a Mac, and a 35B on an iPhone

Source: https://github.com/leonickson1/Swiftlet
Site: GitHub
Submitter: leonickson (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-08-03 16:54 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 164 points · 67 comments
Length: 1.1K words (~5 min read)
Language: en

Run 35B and 80B Qwen models on ordinary Apple devices, including iPhones.

Swiftlet is a Swift + Metal runtime for the Qwen3-Next and Qwen3.5/3.6 MoE hybrid model family. It keeps only the small dense core of a model resident in memory and streams the routed Mixture-of-Experts weights from storage on demand. The result:

Model Disk Peak RAM Decode speed (M5 Mac)
Qwen3.6-35B-A3B, 4-bit 18 GB 2.6 GB 7 to 11 tok/s
Qwen3-Next-80B-A3B, 4-bit 42 GB 4.3 GB 4.5 to 5 tok/s

The 35B also runs on an iPhone 17 in about 2.5 GB of RAM, at about 1 tok/s today. As far as we know, that is the first time a model of this class has run natively on a phone.

Status: working end to end. Both models generate correct, validated output. The current focus is kernel speed (the decode loop is dispatch bound, not IO bound, so there is clear headroom). One expectation to set honestly: only about 3B parameters are active per token, so these models chat and write like large models but recall facts like small ones.

Quick start: try it on a Mac

git clone https://github.com/leonickson1/Swiftlet.git && cd Swiftlet
swift build -c release

# Download the 35B container from Hugging Face (resumable):
.build/release/swiftlet-repack \
  --from-hf Leonickson/Qwen3.6-35B-A3B-qpack \
  --output ~/models/qwen3.6-35b.qpack

# Or the 80B (42 GB on disk, still only ~4.3 GB of RAM):
.build/release/swiftlet-repack \
  --from-hf Leonickson/Qwen3-Next-80B-A3B-qpack \
  --output ~/models/qwen3-next-80b.qpack

# Chat (applies the model chat template, disables the reasoning block,
# keeps conversation state so follow-ups prefill only the new turn):
.build/release/swiftlet chat ~/models/qwen3.6-35b.qpack \
  "Who wrote One Hundred Years of Solitude?" "What language did he write it in?"

# One-shot generation with stats:
.build/release/swiftlet generate ~/models/qwen3.6-35b.qpack \
  --gpu --chat --prompt "Explain expert streaming in one paragraph."

# OpenAI-compatible server (loopback only):
.build/release/swiftlet-server --model ~/models/qwen3.6-35b.qpack --port 8080

The same command also repacks raw MLX checkpoints (--from-hf mlx-community/... or --source /path/to/checkpoint).

Requirements: Apple Silicon, macOS 14+ or iOS 17+, free SSD space for the container (18 GB for the 35B, 42 GB for the 80B).

Try it on your phone

The 35B runs on iPhone inside Priv AI on the App Store: open Settings, then Experimental Models, and download the model. It streams from storage and chats on-device with no server involved.

The Experimental Models feature ships in the newest app version, which is still in App Store review, so it may not appear for a couple of days. If you want the phone experience today, build the app from source: the app is open source at leonickson1/localLLM. Clone this repo next to it as swiftlet, open the Xcode project, and run it on your iPhone.

How it works

These models activate only about 3B of their parameters per token. Each layer routes every token to 10 of 512 experts (80B) or 8 of 256 (35B). Swiftlet:

keeps the dense weights resident: attention, DeltaNet projections, routers, shared experts, embeddings. About 1.3 GB (35B) or 2.5 GB (80B) at 4-bit;
repacks the tens of thousands of routed experts into fixed-stride blobs in a .qpack container, so fetching one expert is exactly one pread from SSD, no mmap and no page-cache thrash;
caches hot experts in a bounded pool with LFU plus recency eviction. Cache size barely affects speed (measured 43 to 70 percent hit rates at the same throughput), because Apple SSDs absorb the misses;
runs the whole forward pass on Metal with runtime-compiled shaders, so no Metal toolchain is needed at build time and the same code ships on iOS.

75 percent of the layers use Gated DeltaNet linear attention with a fixed-size recurrent state, so there is no growing KV cache for those layers at any context length.

Four ways to use it

Swiftlet is a library first:

The Swift package. Add SwiftletCore to any macOS or iOS app and use SwiftletSession for chat with streaming deltas, conversation caching, sampling with repetition control, and memory-pressure handling built in.
The CLI. swiftlet chat and swiftlet generate for local use and benchmarking, swiftlet-repack to build containers from MLX checkpoints (including streaming straight from Hugging Face with resume).
The server. swiftlet-server speaks the OpenAI chat-completions API on loopback, so any chat UI that talks to OpenAI-compatible endpoints can use a streamed local model.
An app. Priv AI on iOS embeds SwiftletCore as its streamed-model engine. End users tap Download and chat. Nothing here is terminal-only. The app itself is open source at leonickson1/localLLM if you want to build it yourself (clone this repo next to it as swiftlet).

Correctness

Every layer of the forward pass (Gated DeltaNet recurrence, gated GQA attention, sparse MoE routing) is validated against mlx-lm reference implementations with per-layer fixtures, in f32 and int4 quantized form. Incremental decoding is verified against whole-sequence processing. Metal kernels are tested against the exact CPU reference, and the fast and scalar GPU kernels are verified to produce identical outputs. Containers are byte-verifiable against their source checkpoints. Streaming placement never changes model semantics: an expert answers identically from cache or disk.

swift test

Relationship to TurboFieldfare

TurboFieldfare proved the expert-streaming thesis for Gemma on Macs, and Swiftlet adopts several of its published design lessons with gratitude: stream experts with pread into a bounded slot pool instead of mmap, evict with LFU plus recency, pack experts at fixed stride so one fetch is one read, install by routing downloaded bytes straight into their final container positions, and compile shaders at runtime.

Everything else is built here, from scratch, in about 10k lines of Swift and Metal written against mlx-lm references rather than TurboFieldfare code:

support for a different model family with a fundamentally different architecture: the Qwen hybrid stack with Gated DeltaNet linear attention, gated GQA, and high-sparsity MoE with a shared expert (TurboFieldfare runs Gemma, a classical dense transformer);
MLX affine int4/int8 group quantization compute in Metal, byte-addressed kernels with 64-bit offsets for multi-gigabyte shards, a cooperative simdgroup GEMV fast path, and explicit hazard management;
a validated CPU reference implementation and the fixture infrastructure that gates every kernel change;
the .qpack container and repacker, the resumable Hugging Face streaming installer with stall recovery, and download cancellation;
the chat session layer: template handling for thinking and non-thinking Qwen variants, sampling with presence and frequency penalties and minimum-length and sentence-completion stopping, conversation caching with delta prefill, and iOS memory-pressure coordination;
iPhone support end to end, including the app engine integration.

colibrì informed the caching and placement policy thinking. mlx-lm is the correctness reference throughout.

Swiftlet was built in collaboration with Claude Code.

License

Apache 2.0. Model weights are downloaded separately and remain governed by their own terms (Qwen models: Apache 2.0). See THIRD_PARTY_NOTICES.md.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

3. Amazonian civilization had estimated 3M people in 3% of forest area

Source: https://www.science.org/content/article/odd-shapes-hidden-dense-amazon-rainforest-reveal-sprawling-ancient-civilization
Site: science.org
Submitter: marojejian (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-07-29 16:07 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 145 points · 105 comments

Scrape failed: http 403

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

4. Harness Engineering for Self-Improvement

Source: https://lilianweng.github.io/posts/2026-07-04-harness/
Site: Lil'Log
Author: Lilian Weng
Published: 2026-07-04
HN activity: 16 points · 0 comments
Length: 6.5K words (~29 min read)
Language: en-us

The concept of recursive self-improvement (RSI) dates back to I. J. Good (1965), where he defined an “ultraintelligent machine” as a system that can surpass humans in all intellectual activities and design better machines to improve itself. Yudkowsky (2008) used the phrase “recursive self-improvement” for a specific feedback loop: an AI uses its current intelligence to improve the cognitive machinery that produces its intelligence.

This feedback loop in modern AI may indicate the model rewriting its own weights directly, or more broadly the model improves the training pipeline and the deployment system, which in turn enables a better successor model with improved performance across economically valuable tasks. The speed of research development in AI has been shown to drastically accelerated in frontier labs (Anthropic; OpenAI).

I explicitly mention “deployment system” because the layer between the raw model and the real-world context seems to be as important as the model’s raw intelligence (i.e. the evals right after pretraining). Harnesses are important components of AI deployment, as shown by successful coding agent products such as Claude Code and Codex. A harness is the system surrounding a base model that orchestrates execution and decides how the model thinks and plans, calls tools and acts, perceives and manages context, stores artifacts, and evaluates results.

This one post will focus on research around harness engineering and how it contributes to RSI. Much recent work on auto-research, self-improving agents, and evolutionary program search can be organized around this question. Other work on model self-play, synthetic data, test-time training and a broader theme of continual learning also matches the RSI vision (e.g. Yuan et al. 2024, Chen et al. 2024), Zhao et al. 2025, Choi et al. 2026)) but they will not be the focus of this post.

Harness Design Patterns

Compared with early agent frameworks, “agent = LLM + memory + tools + planning + action”, harnesses engineering additionally include workflow design (e.g. loop engineering), evaluation, permission controls, and persistent state management. It is no longer only prompt templates, but closer to runtime and software system design: how the model observes, acts, memorizes, checks itself, and improves.

The design should be deliberately simple and generic to enable generalization, likely with reference to existing software engineering practices to benefit from prertaining knowlege. There is also a strong analogy between operating systems and harnesses. Similar to an OS, a harness should encapsulate complicated logic while keeping the interface simple. Meanwhile, configs, tool interfaces and other protocols may gradually become standardized across the industry.

Pattern 1: Workflow Automation

Defining a workflow in which the model can operate, test, and iterate is a key design for automation. Karpathy’s autoresearch repo (https://github.com/karpathy/autoresearch) is a clean example of how such a workflow can be constructed. A common workflow follows a goal-oriented loop of plan, execute, observe/test, improve, and execute again until the goal is achieved. The process may trigger proactive requests to users for clarity in task specification or execution preference.
A simplified Codex agent loop: the agent calls tools and tool responses affect the model's next generation.
(Image source: OpenAI codex agent post)

The workflow graph also emphasizes the model analyzing its own trajectories and failure cases and then iterating on its progress through an “agent runtime” rather than a static prompt template.

Pattern 2: File System as Persistent Memory

A recurring pattern in long-horizon agent systems is simple control over rich states and artifacts. A harness should not carry the entire workflow and all logs in context; instead, it should keep durable state in files. In long-horizon agentic rollout, artifacts such as experiment logs, code diffs, paper summaries, error traces, and past rollout trajectories often grow much longer than the context window that the model has trained for.

Learning how to read, write, and edit the file system (commonly via bash commands) is a foundation skill for LLMs, and thus managing persistent memory in the simple form of files naturally benefits from improvements in core model capability.

Pattern 3: Sub-agent and Backend Jobs

A harness can spawn multiple subagents to execute in parallel and monitor backend jobs. This is useful when the main agent needs to search multiple hypotheses, run experiments concurrently, or delegate isolated subtasks without polluting the main context. The parent agent then needs a small process manager: launch jobs, inspect logs, cancel failed runs, and merge results back into the main agent thread.

The key design choice is to make parallelism explicit and inspectable. If subagent outputs only live in a transient chat context, they quickly become obselete and hidden. If they are stored as files, logs, and status records, the model can recover after interruptions and reason over its own execution history.

Case study: Coding Agent Harness

The core interface of mainstream coding agents has become stabilized across Claude Code, Codex, OpenCode, and Cursor-style agents. They commonly use a loop like:

With access to a set of tools, the coding agent is able to develop and debug issues in a given repository, similar to how human developers are equipped with IDEs.

(Not a comprenhensive list; shown for demonstration. Read this if interested.)

Group Tool definitions
File system - File discovery: glob, grep, ls
- File read: read, read_many
- File modification: write (a whole new file); edit (string exact-match replacement); multi_edit; apply_patch (applies a structured patch/diff)
Shell execution Run commands: bash, PowerShell
IO lsp, git tools like git_status, git_diff, git_commit
External context MCP tools, Skills
Web search web_search, web_fetch, browser tools
Artifacts Read docs, images; generate HTML, images
Backend processes Such as: CronCreate, CronDelete, CronList
Agent delegation Such as: spawn_agent, resume_agent, wait_agent, list_agents, close_agent, interrupt_agent, etc.

Harness Layer vs Core Intelligence?

It is hard to forecast how much the future of RSI will rely on harness engineering, but the near-term path of RSI is unlikely to start as a model directly rewriting its weights. My prediction of a practical near-term path is:

Harness engineering will evolve in the direction of meta-methodology (i.e. improving the machinery for getting better answers, not just improving the answer itself). The harness system itself becomes an optimization target, with fewer heuristic rules and more general mechanisms.
In turn, mature harnesses enable auto-research for model self-improvement loop and smarter models prevents harnesses from overengineering and keep the system sustainable.

Eventually it is possible that many harness improvements will be internalized into core model behavior, but the interface with external context and tools should remain. We have seen a softer version of this pattern with prompt engineering: manual prompt tricks became less central as instruction tuning and model reasoning improved, but the need to specify goals, constraints, context, and evaluation did not disappear.

Harness Optimization

The progression in the object being optimized in the harness system is roughly: instruction prompts → structured context → workflow → harness code → optimizer code. As the model becomes more intelligent and powerful, we move toward more complex targets and generic methods.

Context Engineering

Simply appending all the tool responses and model generations into the context can quickly grow out of control as the agentic job horizon increases significantly. Context management is a layer to construct a more structed and concise context for LLM and manage persistant states. There is no doubt that long-context research will keep on making progress but at the moment long-context intelligence and context engineering sometime intertwines.

Agentic Context Engineering (ACE; Zhang et al. 2025) treats context as an evolving playbook rather than an increasingly lengthening prompt. It has three components to maintain one context playbook of bullet points, each with an identifier and a description.

Generator: produces task trajectories, with reference to bullet points.
Reflector: distills insights from successful and failed trajectories.
Curator: updates the structured context with incremental, itemized entries.
The framework of Agentic Context Engineering (ACE). (Image source: Zhang et al. 2025)

To prevent context collapse and brevity bias during iterative rewrites, one key design choice in ACE is that the curator does not rewrite a full prompt blob. It instead outputs a collection of structured, itemized bullets in the form of (identifier, description), and these bullets are merged into a structured context logbook with deterministic logic. The context items are refined and deduplicated periodically.

The fact that ACE learns insights from rollouts helps us move toward self-managed memory, but the update rules and the overall workflow are still handcrafted. To move toward a more self-improving loop, Meta Context Engineering (MCE; Ye et al. 2026) separates the mechanism (how to manage context) from the artifact content (what is in context), running skill evolution at the meta-optimization level and context optimization at the base level.

An MCE skill $s \in \mathcal{S}$ defines a context function $c_s=(\rho_s,F_s)$ and maps an input $x$ to context $c = F_s(x;\rho_s)$, where:

$\rho_s = \{\rho_1,\dots,\rho_m\}$ are static components (prompts, knowledge bases, code libraries).
$F_s = \{F_1,\dots,F_k\}$ are dynamic operators (search, selection, filtering, formatting).

The bi-level optimization is to find the best context $c_s^*$ given skill $s$ on the training data, while the outer loop finds the optimal skill that provides the best performance on the validation set:

$$ \text{Inner: }c_s^*=\arg\max_{c_s}J_\text{train}(c_s;s)\quad \text{Outer: }s^*=\arg\max_{s\in\mathcal{S}}J_\text{val}(c_s^*) $$

The skill database tracks the history of previous skills, context functions and eval metrics $\mathcal{H}_{k-1} = \{(s_i,c_i,J_i^\text{train}, J_i^\text{val})\}_{i=1}^{k-1}$. A meta-level agent performs agentic crossover over prior skills to create a new skill given a task $\tau$: $s_k=\text{crossover}(\tau,\mathcal{H}_{k-1})$.

Then a base-level context engineer executes the skill $s_k$ and learns the context function from rollout feedback $\mathcal{R}_k$, guided by the current skill: $c_k=\text{engineer}(\tau,s_k;c_{k-1}^*,\mathcal{R}_k)$.
The framework of Meta Context Engineering (MCE): meta-level skill evolution searches over context-management mechanisms, while the base level optimizes the task context. (Image source: Ye et al. 2026)

MCE does not enforce a heuristic rule for how to structure context as ACE does. It uses free-form skills to store the most important knowledge for a task, and evolves the skill and the skill-conditioned context iteratively together. Implementation-wise, a context function $c$ is instantiated as a collection of files in a dedicated directory, including both static (skill.md) and dynamic (context and data rollouts) components. Both meta-level and base-level optimization are executed in agentic coding envs with a standard tool set,

$$ \mathcal{T}=\{\texttt{Read},\texttt{Write},\texttt{Edit},\texttt{Bash},\texttt{Glob},\texttt{Grep},\texttt{TodoWrite}\} $$

Meta-Harness (Lee et al. 2026) moves another level deeper: the optimized object is the code that determines and optimizes what information should be stored, retrieved, and presented to the model. “Meta-” in its name means it is a harness for optimizing harnesses.
The Meta-Harness outer-loop optimization algorithm. (Image source: Lee et al. 2026)

The proposer for creating a new harness is itself a coding agent and the final output is a collection of harness candidates on the Pareto frontier.

The entire execution history is accessible via a file system, and thus the coding agent uses commands like grep or cat to read through it instead of shoveling everything into a single prompt context.
The proposed harness is a dictionary in the file system containing its own source code, scores, rollout trajectories, and state updates.
The mete-harness loop iteratively creates new harnesses, and only qualified ones are kept.
The performance of Meta-Harness on (Left) text classification with a small number of iterations and (Right) TerminalBench-2. Note that the search in the TerminalBench-2 experiment is initialized from Terminus-KIRA and Terminus-2, two very strong harnesses. (Image source: Lee et al. 2026)

Still, the important lesson is clear: once harness design becomes an executable search space, a strong coding agent can exploit the same design space human engineers use.

Workflow Design

Workflow design in harness engineering can be handcrafted by domain experts. Taking auto-research as an example, various frameworks have been proposed and tested. The AI Scientist system (Lu et al. 2026) builds a pipeline to propose research ideas, write code, run experiments, analyze results, write a manuscript, and perform peer review. Meng et al. (2026) make verifiability the central design constraint in ScientistOne, where every claim (citation, numerical, methodological, conclusion) must trace to an evidence source and is audited by Chain-of-Evidence checks.
AI Scientist pipeline for idea generation, experimentation, paper writing, and review. (Image source: Lu et al. 2026)

The Autodata agent (Kulikov et al. 2026) is designed to work as a data scientist for generating training and evaluation data. The main agent manages a challenger that proposes problems, a weak solver, a strong solver, and a verifier/judge, aiming to synthesize data at the “just right” level of difficulty, meaning that the strong solver succeeds but the weak solver fails.

In Autodata, the challenger prompt is updated iteratively according to feedback from the solvers and verifier. The limitation here is that synthesized tasks are used to fine-tune weak solvers but not strong solvers; if the loop cannot iteratively improve the strong model, it is more like indirect distillation over a generated prompt distribution, with less RSI flavor.
Autodata agentic workflow design for generating synthetic training and evaluation data around challenger, solver, and verifier roles. (Image source: Kulikov et al. 2026)

The design space for workflow is enormous, and naturally we can think of workflow design as a search problem, and therefore we should be able to find good solutions by algorithms rather than only manually craft them. Following this direction, Automated Design of Agentic Systems (ADAS; Hu et al. 2025) formulates agent design itself as an optimization problem, “meta-agent search” where a meta-agent proposes new designs of agentic workflows.

Initialize an archive of agentic workflows with simple agents such as CoT and self-refine.
Ask a meta-agent to program new agents, all in code, inspired by existing solutions in the archive.

The meta-agent first generates a high-level description of the new workflow, and then implements it in code.
The draft program then goes through two self-refine steps (i.e. ask the model to provide feedback and then ask the same model to refine the previously generated outputs based on the feedback; Madaan et al. 2023) by the meta-agent to check its novelty.
Evaluate each new candidate and add successful ones back to the archive.
Repeat steps 2-3 until the maximum iteration count is reached.
Illustration of Automated Design of Agentic Systems (ADAS).
(Image source: Hu et al. 2025)

AFlow (Zhang et al. 2025) represents an agentic workflow as a graph, where nodes represent LLM-invoking actions and edges implement logical operations in code. The workflow optimization relies on MCTS (Monte Carlo Tree Search):

Initialize the starting workflow $W_0$ in the tree with a template.
Select a workflow node using a soft mixture of score and uniform exploration.
Expand it by asking an LLM to produce a modified workflow conditioned on its evaluation performance.
Execute and evaluate the new workflow.
Add it back to the tree if the new workflow shows improvement within a budget of $N$ rounds.
Repeat steps 2-5 and stop when the top-$k$ average score plateaus or hit the budget.
AFlow optimization process over a tree of workflow candidates. (Image source: Zhang et al. 2025)

Experiments of AFlow in QA, code, and math tasks showed decent improvement of AFlow over manually designed workflows and ADAS.
AFlow experiments in comparison to manual methods and ADAS. (Image source: Zhang et al. 2025)

Self-Improving Harness

Either context engineering or workflow design is only one part of a harness. We need to search through the entire design space and optimize context-management logic, workflow, permissions, and many other harness components together. As we have seen in work like Meta-Harness, ADAS, and AFlow, ✨code✨ is a universal language for defining programs and systems. In simple words, a harness is code that programs how prompts, tool calls, subagents, control flow, memory, and workflow logic work together. If an LLM can optimize the code that executes agents, it can access a much larger design space than hand-written prompts.

Self-Taught Optimizer (STOP; Zelikman et al. 2023) is one of the early examples of recursive scaffolding improvement. A seed improver $I_0$ at step $t=0$ takes an initial solution $s$, a utility function $u$, and a black-box language model $M$, and returns an improved solution $s’$, that is, $s’ = I(u, s; M)$. The goal of STOP is not directly to improve $s$ but to improve the improver $I$ itself.

First, let’s define the meta-utility as the average utility of a given improver function $I$ over a collection of downstream tasks $\mathcal{D}$:

$$ \hat{u}(I) \triangleq \frac{1}{\vert\mathcal{D}\vert}\mathbb{E}_{(u,s)\sim \mathcal{D}}[u(I(u,s; M))] $$

Because improving the improver function is an optimization problem itself, we can recursively get a new version of $I_t$ based on $I_{t-1}$’s performance measured by meta-utility via a self-improvement update:

$$ I_t=I_{t-1}(\hat{u},I_{t-1};M) $$
Algorithm of Self-Taught Optimizer (STOP). (Image source: Zelikman et al. 2023)

In their experiments, the improved improver discovered various strategies, such as genetic algorithms, decomposing and improving parts, multi-armed prompt bandits, simulated annealing, varying temperature, and beam/tree search. This is analogous to how a harness workflow can be represented as an object for optimization.
Examples of self-improvement strategies discovered by STOP. (Image source: Zelikman et al. 2023)

A cautionary result in Zelikman et al. (2023)’s findings is that STOP improved mean downstream performance across iterations with GPT-4 but degraded with weaker models like GPT-3.5 and Mixtral. Recursive structure alone is not enough. The base model must be capable enough to improve the mechanism. This implies that harness improvement enables better deployment of the model but intelligence is still the core.

Lin et al. (2026) investigated the dependency of harness evolution on model capabilities in more details. They disentangled two axes: (1) harness-updating refers to the capability of producing useful harness edits and (2) harness-benefit denotes the capability of utilizing the updated harness, to achieve better task solving. Interestingly a range of model of different sizes and core intelligence, from Qwen3.5-9B to Claude Opus 4.6, were observed in their experiments to show similar harness updating capability; the 9B harness proposer/evolver is able to write a skill procedurally isomorphic to Opus. To best utilize a harness, a model needs to invoke skills/tools correctly and timely and be good at long-horizon instruction following.
Main results: (A) harness updating capability is measured flat across a range of models from Qwen2-32B to Opus 4.6; (B) harness benefit capability is non-monotonic where middle tier models benefit the most. (Image source: Lin et al. 2026)

A more recent work, Self-Harness (Zhang et al. 2026), relies on LLM agents to improve their own harness via a propose-evaluate-accept loop.
Self-Harness uses a loop of weakness mining, bounded harness proposal, and validation to update a harness. (Image source: Zhang et al. 2026)

The loop in Self-Harness has three stages:

Weakness mining: cluster failures into verifier-grounded failure patterns.

The current harness $h_t$ is used to evaluate on tasks and execution traces are collected for analysis.
Note that two runs can share the same verifier outcome in the error logs on the surface, such as timeout or missing artifact, while having different causal mechanisms. Therefore we need a failure record of rich information, containing the terminal verifier-level cause, the causal status of the relevant agent behavior, and the abstract agent mechanism exposed by the trace, to uncover the root causes.
Harness proposal: propose bounded harness edits based on mined failure patterns.

The same model is invoked under $h_t$ as a proposer.
The model is provided with a bounded proposal context: (1) the editable surfaces of the current harness, (2) the verifier-grounded failure patterns from the evaluation system, (3) records of passing behaviors that should be preserved, and (4) summaries of previously attempted edits.
Harness edits should prefer recurrent error patterns that are addressable (e.g. not task-specific difficulty) and can be resolved by narrow changes.
Harness edit candidates should be distinct and diverse.
Proposal validation: validate and merge qualified edits to create a new harness $h_{t+1}$.

Candidate edits are evaluated by regression tests on held-in $D_\text{in}$ (for testing whether the weakness is resolved) and held-out $D_\text{out}$ (for checking whether other unknown issues were introduced) splits.
Candidates are accepted only if they have no regression on both held-in and held-out data.
Accepted candidates are merged to update the harness to $h_{t+1}$, while rejected candidates are logged without changing the active harness.

When running MiniMax M2.5, Qwen3.5-35B-A3B, and GLM-5 on Terminal-Bench-2, Self-Harness was shown to learn model-specific harness instructions that target at different weaknesses of different base models and improve held-out pass rates.

Self-harness type of work does raise my concerns that if a program is allowed to edit the OS system, abstraction boundaries are broken. The editable surface needs to be properly designed and the permission control and security layers need to live outside this loop. All the challenges around reward hacking still remain.

Agentic Harness Engineering (AHE; Lin et al. 2026) see the bottlenecks of harness evolution are around observability—that is, when a rollout fails, we need to know which component is responsible for that and every edit should be grounded by evidence.

The framework creates a closed loop with 3 observability pillars:

Component observability: every editable harness component has a representation in the file system so the action space is explicit and tracable.

A harness contains 7 components: system prompt, tool description, tool implementation, middleware, skill, sub-agent configuration, and long-term memory.
Each failure pattern is mapped to one component so the edit can be more targeted.
Experience observability: analysize and summarize a large amount of raw trajectories into a hierarchy of evidence and failure patterns.

Each harness generates $k$ traces.
Use an agent (“Agent debugger”) to analysis the trajectories each stored in one file and generate per-task analysis report on the root cause for the failure or success.
All the per-task reports are aggregated into a benchmark overview for the next step, and raw traces can be accessed if needed. This layered access structure is more token efficient.
Decision observability: every edit is paired with a prediction for the next round to validate.

An agent (“Evolve agent”) reads the repo and decides which component to edit, and then produces the edit and the reasoning behind it.
Every edit is a file-level, falsifiable claim and can be verified in the next round, under two constraints:

(1) Edits are only applied to the harness workspace. the runs directory, tracer, verifier, and LLM configuration are read-only, which disables a set of reward hacking (e.g disabling the verifier, swapping the model, or raising the reasoning budget) and thus it can keep every recorded gain attributable to harness edits.
(2) Edits are evidence-driven, with a manifesto entry: the failure evidence’s name, the inferred root cause, the targeted fix, and a predicted impact comprising both expected fixes and at-risk regressions.

On Terminal-Bench-2, AHE achieved better than human-designed harness (OpenCode, Terminus-2, Codex) except for Hard tier and a few other self-evolve baselines (ACE, TF-GRPO). The same frozen harness, without further evolving, transfers to SWE-bench-verified, indicating that the evolved harness is able to encode engineering experience into harness components rather than doing benchmark-specific optimization.

Evolutionary Search

Evolutionary search is an optimization method inspired by natural selection (see my old post on evolutionary algorithm). It evolves a population of solutions by mutating them and only keeping those with high “fitness” in the crowd. Evolutionary search comes in handy when (1) the search space is extensive or weirdly shaped; and (2) it is hard to optimize directly with gradients but easy to evaluate solutions. Harness search seems to be a good fit here.

Evolutionary search has been used in prompt engineering in the past studies. Promptbreeder (Fernando et al. 2023) optimizes task-specific prompts through a rich set of mutation operations, and interestingly the mutation prompts (i.e. instructions to an LLM to mutate a task prompt) are themselves also improved through evolution. GEPA (Agrawal et al. 2025) combines reflection-based prompting with evolutionary search and uses natural language reflection over trajectories of trial and error to propose prompt updates.

Novikov et al. (2025) introduced AlphaEvolve as a coding-agent evolutionary search system, which stores a pool of candidate programs and prompts frozen LLMs to generate diffs for improvement. As the system repeatedly evaluates child programs and keeps successful ones, it discovers better solutions in time.
How AlphaEvolve works. (Image source: Novikov et al. 2025)

A few details matter in the design of AlphaEvolve:

The prompt includes parent programs, results, instructions, and sometimes meta information.
The coding agent has access to the full repo, but code regions for improvement are explicitly marked with # EVOLVE-BLOCK-START and # EVOLVE-BLOCK-END.
Meta-prompt co-evolves with instructions and context as suggested by LLM, in a similar way as how we evolve solution programs.

Ablations show the evolution procedure, context in prompts, meta-prompts, full-file evolution and the use of stronger LLMs.
Ablations show the value of everal designs in AlphaEvolve. (Image source: Novikov et al. 2025)

Recent variants such as ThetaEvolve (Wang et al. 2025) combines evolutionary search with RL and in-context learning, and DemoEvolve (Che, et al. 2026) augments the self-rollout archive with human expert demonstrations as reference experience for harness-level diagnosis and editing. ShinkaEvolve (Lange et al. 2025), on the other hand, introduced three new components to improve LLM sampling efficiency:

More sample-efficient exploration by designing parent sampling to balance performance rank and offspring count.
Code-novelty rejection sampling by discarding candidates that are too similar to the existing population based on embedding-based cosine similarity.
Identifying good patterns in successful solutions in a meta-scratchpad to guide future mutation.

Unlike the methods above, which focus on solution improvement, Darwin Gödel Machine (DGM; Zhang et al. 2025) explicitly targets the evolution of an editable harness-code repository with an LLM-based coding agent. Precisely, this agent is allowed to modify its own harness. A follow-up work on Hyperagents (Zhang et al. 2026) introduced a meta-agent to control how to modify existing task agents to create new ones.

Start with one coding agent in the pool.
In each iteration, pick one parent with a probability proportional to its performance and inversely to the number of children it has, to modify and branch off to produce new agents.
The selected parent agent examines its own benchmark evaluation log and then proposes improvements to its own harness codebase to generate a new version of the coding agent. Code editing is implemented with two basic tools: (1) bash (args: <bash_command>) and (2) editor (args: view/create/edit <file_path>).
New coding agents are evaluated, and only those with sufficiently high performance are added back into the pool.
Repeat steps 2-4 until some stop criteria hit.

DGM is harness evolution under a fixed model. In experiments with Claude 3.5 Sonnet as the base LLM and simple initial harness configs, the DGM-discovered agents are comparable to or outperform handcrafted agents on SWE-bench Verified (20% to 50%) and Polyglot (14.2% to 30.7%).

This family of methods works well when candidate solutions are automatically evaluable and candidate fitness is easy to quantify, such as matrix multiplication, GPU kernel optimization, algorithm contests, datacenter scheduling. It struggles with domains where evaluation is slow, ambiguous, or mostly heuristic-based. The compute efficiency and effectiveness of evolution are also concerns.

Joint Optimization with Model Weights

Harness evolution changes the non-parametric system around the model. To enable full self-improvement, the model can totally be allowed to update its own weights at the same time. The weight update can be implemented via improvements in the model training pipeline or continual learning at test time. The topic of continual learning is worthy of its own post in the future.

SIA (Hebbar et al. 2026) is an early attempt to combine harness improvement and model-parameter updates in the same optimization loop, with three components in the design:

Meta-Agent: proposes the initial harness.
Task-Specific Agent: executes the task.
Feedback-Agent: chooses whether to update the harness or the model weights based on recent trajectories.
The Feedback-Agent in SIA decides the next iteration type. (Image source: Hebbar et al. 2026)

There are a few confounding choices in SIA’s experiments that make the results hard to interpret. For example, the task-specific agent is much weaker than the models used for the Meta-Agent and Feedback-Agent (gpt-oss-120b vs Claude Sonnet 4.6), and the baselines are too weak to cross-reference cleanly against related methods. I would consider the direction interesting, but the evidence provisional. Yet many challenges, such as training stability and Goodhart effect, still remain open.

Continual Harness (Karten et al. 2026) experimented in long-horizon gameplay setting with harness updating and co-learning a policy model by distilling a strong teacher model’s labels on low-reward trajectories.

Future Challenges

The AI Scientist line of work is a strong demonstration that an expert-designed harness can coordinate a large portion of auto-research loop, experimented in the form of writing research papers. But paper production is not identical to scientific discovery. A system can write a plausible manuscript while still having fabricated citations, implementation drift, or weak experimental results.

Trehan & Chopra (2026) tested whether LLMs can go from a research idea to a paper with minimal scaffolding and basic tools (i.e., read_file, write_file, llm_search, list_files). Each idea had a dedicated workspace where agents could generate and read documents as part of context. They experimented in three domains (world models, multi-agent RL, AI safety & alignment), with each domain containing 45-50 high-quality seed documents to inspire new ideas. Only four ideas were selected by human experts to run through the full pipeline, and only one was fully executed into a paper. They observed six recurring failure modes in the experiments:

Bias toward training-data defaults: use old libraries, stale commands, standard formats, or assumptions not grounded in the actual repository or dataset.
Implementation drift under execution pressure: when implementation becomes technically complex, the model may move toward a common simpler solution rather than the proposed method.
Memory and context degradation: long-horizon projects lose critical details unless logs are written as persistent artifacts.
Over-optimism: the model declares success despite noisy or failed experiments, similarly observed as “p-hacking and eureka-ing” pattern by Bubeck et al. (2025) where models can introduce “numerical duct tape” and declare victory when signals are still noise.
Insufficient domain intelligence: the model lacks tacit craft knowledge, e.g. predicting implementation complexity, judging whether an experimental result is plausible, or knowing which baselines matter.
Weak scientific taste: experiments may be executable but fail to answer the right question.

Toward full RSI, researchers have made real progress, but several bottlenecks remain.

1. Weak and fuzzy evaluators. Many research claims do not have a fast and precise verifier, and the same is true for many real-world tasks. Current self-improvement loops work best for tasks when evaluation metrics are measurable and objective, similar as how RL works.

Research taste, novelty, and long-term scientific value are much harder to measure. For example, research taste often mixes problem framing, experimental design, and judgment about which surprising results are worth pursuing and which failure cases are worth retries.

2. Context and memory lifecycle. Memory grows as AI agents become more autonomous and independent. A useful harness needs to manage context and memory to complement existing limitation in long-context generation while still maximizing the success of long-horizon tasks. Since humans are able to maintain memory through our life time, I see an anoloy here that context engineering will and should become a core part of intelligence, rather than staying in the software system layer.

3. Negative results. Researchers are incentivized to publish successful results and thus literature is biased toward successes. LLMs trained on a vast amount of data (mostly human created, at least for now, lol) may be bad at deciding when to abandon a hypothesis, report a negative result, or even acknowledge a failure due to the imablance of success vs failure cases in data. A research harness should make failed attempts easy to preserve, as learning from failure is the best way to trim down the task search space.

4. Diversity collapse. Evolutionary and RL loops tend to exploit known high-reward patterns. We need mechanisms to prevent the population from collapsing into variants of the same solution. This is especially critical for open-ended research, where the best path may initially look worse under the current evaluator.

5. Reward hacking. A self-improvement loop optimizes whatever signal it is given. If the reward comes from unit tests, the agent may overfit to tests; if it comes from a judge model, it may learn reward hacking tricks specific to this judge; if it comes from benchmark scores, it may exploit benchmark artifacts.

The evaluator and permission control should likely sit outside the loop that evolves harness, with held-out tests, trace audits, and human review at decision points that matter—how much oversight can be scaled up and automated remains an open research area.

6. Long-term success. An extrinsic loop of optimization works on rewards outside of individual rollouts that we can simulate in training sandbox.

Take coding agent as an example. Coding agents have already increased daily productivity in software engineering, but many optimization goals are still too short-term. It can often complete the task at hand, but less obvious how it should protect the long-term health of a repo collectively maintained by hundreds or thousands of engineers. Standard sandbox-based RLVR-style training rarely captures maintainability, ownership boundaries, migration cost, backwards compatibility, or future debugging burden.

7. The role of humans. Humans should move up the stack, not be removed from the loop, meaning that human should provide oversight at the right time, at the right abstraction level and our system design should consider when and how to set up such touch points.

Many challenges listed above need human’s feedback and steering. After all, we are building the technology for better future of humanity, not other way around.

Citation

Please cite this work as:

Weng, Lilian. “Harness Engineering for Self-Improvement”. Lil’Log (Jul 2026). https://lilianweng.github.io/posts/2026-07-04-harness/

Or use the BibTeX citation:

@article{weng2026harness,
  title = {Harness Engineering for Self-Improvement},
  author = {Weng, Lilian},
  journal = {lilianweng.github.io},
  year = {2026},
  month = {July},
  url = "https://lilianweng.github.io/posts/2026-07-04-harness/"
}


Appendix: Some useful benchmarks

PaperBench: replicate 20 ICML 2024 Spotlight and Oral papers from scratch, including understanding paper contributions, developing a codebase, and successfully executing experiments.

Each replication task is decomposed into smaller, individually gradable tasks.
8,316 rubrics in total, co-developed with the paper authors.
The best model at the time (Claude 3.5 Sonnet, ~21%) does not outperform ML PhDs.
Includes PaperBench, PaperBench Code-Dev (a lighter version), and JudgeEval.
CORE-Bench: evaluate computational reproducibility of published research.

270 tasks based on 90 scientific papers across computer science, social science, and medicine.
Tasks involve reproducing results from provided code and data.
Includes multiple difficulty levels and both language-only and vision-language tasks.
The best reported agent at the time (GPT-4o and GPT-4o-mini) achieved only 21% accuracy on the hardest task.
ScienceAgentBench: evaluate LLM agents for data-driven scientific discovery.

Extracts 102 tasks from 44 peer-reviewed publications in four disciplines (math, chemistry, biology, geography).
Covers basic data-science tasks in these domains: data processing, model development, data analysis, and information visualization.
RE-Bench: evaluate frontier AI agents on realistic ML research-engineering envs against human experts.

7 challenging, open-ended ML research-engineering environments.
Each environment = (scoring function, starting solution, reference solution); each can be run with 8 or fewer H100 GPUs.
Examples: optimize a kernel, run a scaling-law experiment, fix an embedding, fine-tune GPT-2 for QA, etc.
Includes data from 71 eight-hour attempts by 61 distinct human experts.
Human experts achieved non-zero score in 82% of 8-hour attempts; 24% matched or exceeded strong reference solutions.
Best AI agents scored 4× higher than humans at a 2-hour budget, but humans had better returns to longer budgets and exceeded agents at 8-hour and 32-hour settings.
MLE-bench: evaluate ML engineering agents on offline Kaggle competitions.

Contains 75 ML-engineering competitions curated from Kaggle.
Tests training models, preparing datasets, running experiments, and submitting predictions to grading scripts.
Uses Kaggle public leaderboards as human baselines.
Best setup in the paper, o1-preview with AIDE scaffolding, reached at least Kaggle bronze-medal level in 16.9% of competitions.
Includes resource-scaling and contamination analyses.
KernelBench: evaluate correctness and speed for generated GPU kernels.

250 PyTorch tasks to evaluate whether LLM can write fast and correct kernels.
The evaluation metric fast_p = the percentage of generated kernels that are correct and faster than baseline.

References

[1] Good, I. J. “Speculations Concerning the First Ultraintelligent Machine.” Advances in Computers, 6:31–88, 1965.

[2] Yudkowsky, Eliezer. “Recursive Self-Improvement.” LessWrong, 2008.

[3] Choi, et al. “Anchored Self-Play for Code Repair.” ICML 2026.

[4] Zhao, et al. “Absolute Zero: Reinforced Self-play Reasoning with Zero Data.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.03335, 2025.

[5] Yuan, et al. “Self-Rewarding Language Models.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.10020, 2024.

[6] Chen, et al. “Self-Play Fine-Tuning Converts Weak Language Models to Strong Language Models.” ICML 2024.

[7] Zhang, et al. “Agentic Context Engineering: Evolving Contexts for Self-Improving Language Models.” ICLR 2026.

[8] Ye, et al. “Meta Context Engineering via Agentic Skill Evolution.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.21557, 2026.

[9] Lee, et al. “Meta-Harness: End-to-End Optimization of Model Harnesses.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.28052, 2026.

[10] Lu, et al. “Towards end-to-end automation of AI research.” Nature, 651:914–919, 2026.

[11] Meng, et al. “ScientistOne: Towards Human-Level Autonomous Research via Chain-of-Evidence.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.26340, 2026.

[12] Kulikov, et al. “Autodata: An agentic data scientist to create high quality synthetic data.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.25996, 2026.

[13] Hu, Lu, and Clune. “Automated Design of Agentic Systems.” ICLR 2025.

[14] Madaan, et al. “Self-Refine: Iterative Refinement with Self-Feedback.” NeurIPS 2023.

[15] Zhang, et al. “AFlow: Automating Agentic Workflow Generation.” ICLR 2025.

[16] Zelikman, et al. “Self-Taught Optimizer (STOP): Recursively Self-Improving Code Generation.” COLM 2024.

[17] Zhang, et al. “Self-Harness: Harnesses That Improve Themselves.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.09498, 2026.

[18] Fernando, et al. “Promptbreeder: Self-Referential Self-Improvement Via Prompt Evolution.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.16797, 2023.

[19] Agrawal, A. et al. “GEPA: Reflective Prompt Evolution Can Outperform Reinforcement Learning.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.19457, 2025.

[20] Novikov, et al. “AlphaEvolve: A coding agent for scientific and algorithmic discovery.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.13131, 2025.

[21] Lange, Imajuku, and Cetin. “ShinkaEvolve: Towards Open-Ended And Sample-Efficient Program Evolution.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.19349, 2025.

[22] Wang, et al. “ThetaEvolve: Test-time Learning on Open Problems.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.23473, 2025.

[23] Zhang, et al. “Darwin Gödel Machine: Open-Ended Evolution of Self-Improving Agents.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.22954, 2025.

[24] Zhang, et al. “Hyperagents.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.19461, 2026.

[25] Yuksekgonul, et al. “Learning to Discover at Test Time.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.16175, 2026.

[26] Riaz, et al. “Epistemic Uncertainty for Test-Time Discovery.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.11328, 2026.

[27] Hebbar, et al. “SIA: Self Improving AI with Harness & Weight Updates.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.27276, 2026.

[28] Trehan and Chopra. “Why LLMs Aren’t Scientists Yet: Lessons from Four Autonomous Research Attempts.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.03315, 2026.

[29] Bubeck, et al. “Early science acceleration experiments with GPT-5.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.16072, 2025.

[30] Starace, et al. “PaperBench: Evaluating AI’s Ability to Replicate AI Research.” ICML 2025.

[31] Wijk, et al. “RE-Bench: Evaluating frontier AI R&D capabilities of language model agents against human experts.” ICML 2025.

[32] Chan, et al. “MLE-bench: Evaluating Machine Learning Agents on Machine Learning Engineering.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.07095, 2024.

[33] Chen, et al. “ScienceAgentBench: Toward Rigorous Assessment of Language Agents for Data-Driven Scientific Discovery.” ICLR 2025.

[34] Siegel, et al. “CORE-Bench: Fostering the Credibility of Published Research Through a Computational Reproducibility Agent Benchmark.” TMLR 2024.

[35] Ouyang, et al. “KernelBench: Can LLMs Write Efficient GPU Kernels?” arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.10517, 2025.

[36] Lin, et al. “Harness Updating Is Not Harness Benefit: Disentangling Evolution Capabilities in Self-Evolving LLM Agents.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.30621, 2026.

[37] Lin, et al. “Agentic Harness Engineering: Observability-Driven Automatic Evolution of Coding-Agent Harnesses.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.25850, 2026.

[38] Karten, et al. “Continual Harness: Online Adaptation for Self-Improving Foundation Agents.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.09998, 2026.

[39] Che, et al. “DemoEvolve: Overcoming Sparse Feedback in Agentic Harness Evolution with Demonstrations.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.24539, 2026.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

5. Ten advances in mathematics and theoretical computer science

Source: https://openai.com/index/ten-advances-in-mathematics/
Site: OpenAI
Submitter: milkshakes (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-08-03 16:27 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 533 points · 819 comments
Length: 718 words (~4 min read)
Language: en-US

OpenAI

The results
Responsibility to the mathematical community

We want to empower scientists and mathematicians with tools that accelerate discovery. That is why we recently announced ChatGPT for Academic Researchers⁠, an initiative providing 100,000 scientists and mathematicians with free access to our best ChatGPT models. We also continue to evaluate our models on open research problems during development.

In May, we shared an AI-generated disproof⁠ of the Erdős unit-distance conjecture, discovered while evaluating an unreleased model. This work has already inspired further developments in mathematics and theoretical computer science1. Today, we are sharing a selection of ten results, each of which resolves or makes substantial progress on a long-standing open problem. These problems span high-dimensional geometry, coding theory, arithmetic circuit complexity, group theory, operator algebras, quantum complexity, lattice cryptography and extremal combinatorics. All of these problems are of substantial interest to their respective mathematical communities, and several are of broad interest across mathematics as a whole.

The results

We provide new results for the following problems. The results were achieved by an internal version of Astra, our next major model. The total number of tokens needed to find solutions to these problems would cost roughly $2,000 at Sol API rates. These arguments were then prepared into manuscripts by humans with the same model. Afterward, the model formalized each argument in a Lean certificate⁠(opens in a new window). We are also releasing for each solution a model’s narration of its thinking process.

High-dimensional sphere packing. New upper bounds on sphere-packing density down to the Cohn–Elkies threshold.
Binary and spherical codes. Exponentially improved bounds on the maximum size of binary codes at any prescribed minimum distance, with analogous results for high-dimensional spherical codes.
Non-sofic groups. A construction establishing the existence of non-sofic groups, addressing a central open question in group theory.
Connes’s rigidity conjecture. Disproof of a longstanding conjecture that certain groups are uniquely determined by their von Neumann algebras.
Arithmetic circuit complexity. New lower bounds for computing the permanent using arithmetic circuits and formulas, including an arithmetic-formula lower bound of order n4/log n.
Quantum parallel repetition. An exponential parallel repetition theorem for general two-player quantum games, extending a foundational principle from classical complexity theory.
Closest vector problem. Polynomial-factor hardness of approximation for the closest vector problem, a foundational lattice question related to post-quantum cryptography.
Ehrhart’s volume conjecture. Determining, in every dimension, the maximum possible volume of a convex body whose centroid is its only interior lattice point.
Multicolor Ramsey numbers. A superexponential lower bound for multicolor triangle Ramsey numbers, resolving Erdős problem 183.
Extremal number conjectures. Results on the compactness and degeneracy conjectures in extremal graph theory, resolving Erdős problems 146 and 180.

Responsibility to the mathematical community

The emergence of systems capable of contributing to mathematical research raises questions that cannot be answered by a technology company alone. There are many views as to the role of AI in mathematics, and we have deep respect and understanding for those concerned with its impact, including the signers of the Leiden declaration on AI and Mathematics⁠(opens in a new window). We believe attribution should honestly reflect how a result was produced: claiming human authorship for a proof generated entirely by an AI system would misrepresent both the system’s contribution and the nature of genuine human intellectual work. We helped prepare the manuscripts and formalize the proofs in Lean, and we take responsibility for their correctness, while the mathematical arguments themselves were generated by our system. We hope the mathematical community will engage deeply with these results, place them in context, and bring the ideas behind them to life through new research and discovery.

As AI systems evolve into more sophisticated research collaborators, ensuring widespread access is fundamental to supporting scientists and mathematicians as they navigate and define the future of their disciplines during this transformative era.

2026

Footnote

1

Subsequent research includes Bloom, Sawin, Schildkraut, and Zhelezov, “The sum-product conjecture is false for real numbers⁠(opens in a new window)”; Pohoata, “Split primes and the Elekes-Rónyai problem⁠(opens in a new window)”; Saha, Xu, and Ye, “Furthest Pair Requires Quadratic Time in Superconstant Dimension under SETH⁠(opens in a new window)”; Goh and Hatami, “Communication complexity of point-line incidences over the reals⁠(opens in a new window)”; and Lee, Pohoata, and Zhu, “The Minkowski grid has robustly many repeated distances⁠(opens in a new window).”

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

6. Devtools must be open source

Source: https://blog.exe.dev/devtools-must-be-open-source
Site: exe.dev
Author: David Crawshaw
Published: 2026-08-02
HN activity: 599 points · 200 comments
Length: 1.6K words (~7 min read)
Language: en

Five years ago, most software engineers I spoke to had no programs they had written for themselves. (I was asking this question a lot as part of trying to understand how Tailscale could fit into engineers’ lives.) All day, every day, engineers use programs written by others to write programs for others. Many of us customized the programs we used, through config files or plugins or extensions, and many of us used the programs we wrote for others, as users. It was always an unusual treat to ask someone what they had written for themselves and learn about the bespoke software behind their blog, or their home automation, or their homelab, instead of an off-the-shelf, almost-the-right-size static site generator or Zigbee appliance.

This state of things made a lot of sense to me. Over the years I have written plenty of software for myself, and the return on doing so was always questionable. I could only write so much in a day. There were always more important things to do (Something Was Wrong At Work), and coming back to a project after a year to do maintenance on it was always extraordinarily painful. There were plenty of years in my career where I had thrown out all my custom software and used the most bog-standard environments I could to produce code. In my early years as an engineer at Google I did not even own a personal computer.

That was then. Things are different now.

How to Personalize Software

It is astonishingly easy to personalize software today. There are two general categories of prompts to an agent that make all of this possible:

Download the source for <software> and build it for local use. Modify <whatever memory your agent uses> to know that any future changes to this software mean changing the sources and replacing the current version. Record in version control the original motivation behind the change.

and, more importantly:
Set up a nightly cron job that executes the prompt: fetch upstream changes to the <software> and rebase all local changes on top of upstream. Check that the software works as intended and replace the current version.

At the heart of this is the realization that agents can not only hack up some code for a specific use but also automatically manage the process of synchronizing changes with upstream releases. This means agents change the ROI on customizing software on two fronts simultaneously: it is much easier to get started personalizing, and much easier to keep going.

Another astonishing thing about the two prompts above for editing software is that you can build them right into an agent. As long as the agent is open source, it does not even require programming. The two prompts can be loaded into a skill (i.e., some text instructions) put somewhere discoverable to the agent. We built this into Shelley, so now if you want to edit Shelley you don’t even need the preamble or to configure the timer. It takes care of it for you. You can type in a prompt like “make Shelley’s UI high-contrast” and you have personalized your agent.

A Worked Personalization Example: Shelley and Meat

I have a personal project I have been idly toying with for the last month: meat.dev. The principle is that while agents write code, I still read it before pushing to our serious systems. As the underlying models improve, what I look for has changed. The humans I have spent twenty years reviewing code for have always struggled with edge cases: do the errors report useful information; are nil-checks handled, etc. (We all do it; when writing code, I am one of the worst offenders.) One of my roles as a reviewer was looking for these details. Over the past six months, I have discovered I don’t need to read for edge cases like that any more: models are far more diligent than humans at rote correctness. Their errors are isolated to architecture, unexpected use cases, visual output their test environment is not feeding back to them, etc. This means most of the lines of code I review are not very useful. So I wrote a tool that takes diffs and uses LLMs to strip out the unimportant stuff. I almost never need to see the import blocks, or the nil-checks, or the error handling any more, so get it off the screen so I can focus on the meat.

I like this tool, but it has two downsides: first, I like to read my diffs in Shelley with a good UI, not in a terminal. Second, it takes a couple of minutes for an LLM to digest and minimize a diff, and I don’t want to wait. So ideally I would not run meat on the command line, but have it built into Shelley and have it pre-processing commits the moment they are created. It turns out I can do that with a single prompt:

Please build meat.dev into Shelley. Install the latest version in the PATH. When a git commit is created by Shelley, start meat processing in the background on the commit. Add a toggle to the Shelley Diffs view for meat. If the commit is still being processed, so the user it is in process.

This single prompt was all it took not just to add meat to Shelley, but to appropriately pre-process commits in the background before I came back to session to review the diff, saving me waiting for a model to reduce the diff. The only unfortunate choice the model made was using the 🥩 emoji for the toggle button.

Imagine the convoluted misery it would be trying to plug that into the VS Code extensions API! Or trying to get it into vimdiff. It would certainly be possible, but the machinery to start pre-processing the commits as soon as they appear would be nigh-on impossible. I would be better off implementing an out-of-band meatd that listened to the file system and provided a cache for the meat tool that a customization API could use, because the points of extension and configuration would not be the right shape.

And that is the fundamental difference between classic configuration/customization and agent-driven personalization: you can do so much more. The agent will do the hard work of understanding the source and changing it to suit the particular task you have in mind. The software we live with is far more powerful with personalization. All you need is the source code.

The Age of Personalized Software

The pre-agent development costs meant it was rational for complex software to ship with large configuration files, extension systems, and plugin systems. The core code of even a moderate project like Vim is huge and baroque, and takes weeks for a human to digest. The thought that, on wanting line numbers to print by default, an engineer would learn the code base and add it just for themselves is unreasonable. Better to design it for sharing with others, which justifies the expense of implementing it by amortizing it over many users. As features in a code base grow, it makes sense to look for common abstractions where you can break out an extension or plugin system.

Now the expense of learning the code and making a change has dropped dramatically. Agents do the heavy lifting. For a single user—which implies extremely constrained conditions under which the program runs—a top-end agent can usually now add a feature in a single shot. For single-user software, the need for careful code review can often be replaced by “does it seem to work?”

The result is that software that can be personalized doesn’t need a plugin system or a config file. Want to change the font size in your text editor? Give the agent the source and tell it to. If it is a hardcoded value it will find and edit it. If it’s a hardcoded bitmap font it will download another and replace it, or it will use Monobit to make you one! You have incredible capabilities on tap.

Whole Categories of Software Products Need to Be Reinvented

Personal software applies well to small teams too. Why would an engineering team purchase an extremely configurable task manager (or a CMS or CRM), spend time learning and configuring it, and contort their team to its limits, when they can assemble just the features they want from common building blocks?

Both the upfront fixed costs and the ongoing costs of personalizing software have disappeared.

The blog you are reading is bespoke software, written in Shelley, because it was easier to piece together and personalize libraries like Tiptap than it is to try and customize traditional software products. For end-user products to make sense in a company today, they need to be personalizable. Which means we need the source code.

Where Codex and Claude Code Diverge

This same skill-based technique that was applied to Shelley to make it personalizable can be trivially applied to other open-source agents like Pi. (So much so that I am left wondering why Pi needs an extension system built into it. The source code is the extension system.) It would require a lot more tokens, but you could do the same to Codex, which is an open-source agent.

Where you would hit a wall, however, is Claude Code. It is closed-source software, so you don’t get to personalize it. There are a lot of old-fashioned customization hooks in Claude Code. Hopefully, how you want an agent to work fits in their hooks. If not, switch to an agent that lets you personalize it.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

7. That time when I failed the Microsoft interview

Source: https://ochagavia.nl/blog/that-time-when-i-failed-the-microsoft-interview/
Site: Adolfo Ochagavía
Submitter: wofo (Hacker News)
Published: 2026-07-28
HN activity: 53 points · 84 comments
Length: 742 words (~4 min read)
Language: en-us

The year was 2015, halfway through my Computer Science bachelor’s degree. I had spent a few months contributing to open source and my confidence levels were high, so I thought: why not aim for a summer internship at Microsoft?

Microsoft, of all places, might sound like a weird company to target in 2026. Back then, however, they were cool (in my book at least). I was impressed by their work on Typescript, and also by their open source rewrite of the C# compiler. I dreamed of working together with people like Anders Hejlsberg, Joe Duffy and Eric Lippert1.

Somewhat naively, I sent an email to someone listed on the Microsoft job portal. I didn’t know which internship to choose and I hoped talking to a person on their end would enlighten me. I attached my resume just in case that would be relevant.

My naiveté was rewarded when, about a month later, I received an email from a member of their university recruiting team. The subject was “You’re Invited to Microsoft Phone Interviews”. They wanted to talk to me!

What now? First thing was to book a spot. I lived in The Netherlands and was 9 hours ahead of the Microsoft people (they were on Pacific Time). There wasn’t much choice, then; it would be an evening call on my end, morning on theirs.

With scheduling out of the way, the next step was to start preparing. Internet lore unambiguously recommended “Cracking the Coding Interview”, a book where Big Tech interviewing practices of the time were unveiled to the uninitiated. Drawing from the book’s advice, I prepared answers for so-called behavioral questions, made sure my knowledge of data structures was fresh, and even went through a bunch of brain teasers.

Then came the day of the interview. I found a quiet room for the call, laid my interviewing notes next to my laptop, and joined the meeting with a mix of curiosity and nervousness. Guess what? “Cracking the Coding Interview” proved astoundingly accurate. Behavioral questions came in the expected flavors, and my notes allowed me to answer them without breaking a sweat. I even got a brain teaser straight from the book! It was something along the lines of:

You have 12 marbles and a balance scale. One of the 12 marbles is inconsistent with the others, meaning it could be heavier or lighter than its peers of normal weight. You are allowed to use the balance scale exactly 3 times to identify which of the 12 marbles is irregular AND determine whether it is heavier or lighter than normal.

(source)

Now I faced a dilemma. On one hand I could pretend I didn’t know the riddle, put on an act of thinking out loud, and let the interviewer believe I had arrived at the solution on the spot. On the other hand, I really didn’t feel like pretending! Besides, isn’t honesty more valuable than the ability to solve riddles under time pressure? If a company is unable to see that, then that’s their loss, I thought.

You can already see where this is going to end! I told the interviewer I already knew the riddle, and I asked for another one. She was a bit surprised, but after a short pause gave me the new riddle I had just asked for. This one was not in the book… this one I was unable to solve under the pressure of the interview. How uncomfortable!

Be that as it may, the interview continued until its natural end. After the call I was left wondering: will they value the boldness I displayed when it came to the brain teaser? I laughed a bit at my own idealism, made peace with either outcome, and decided to tone down my expectations just in case.

As it turns out, my toned-down expectations were duly met a month later, when I received a follow-up email:

We have carefully considered your qualifications and skills. In light of our current opportunities, we will be pursuing other candidates whose background and abilities more closely match our needs at this time. If you have any questions, please contact your school recruiter.

Oops!

Maybe Microsoft did want interns to solve riddles as part of their job. Or maybe I screwed up something else. I’m afraid I’ll never know!

Eric had already left Microsoft, but I loved his blog and thought well of the company for having employed one of my programming heroes. ↩︎

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

8. There Will Come Soft Rains (1950) [pdf]

Source: https://users.wpi.edu/~zrbutzke/Docs/BradburyStories(1).pdf
Site: users.wpi.edu
Submitter: pmg101 (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-08-03 23:24 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 150 points · 56 comments

binary file (.pdf); not scraped

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

9. Beauty in my backyard

Source: https://worksinprogress.co/issue/beauty-in-my-backyard/
Site: worksinprogress.co
Author: wip-admin
Published: 2026-07-29
HN activity: 18 points · 2 comments
Length: 5.7K words (~25 min read)
Language: en-US

Western countries used to let landowners build almost anything anywhere. Now, strict rules freeze the character of most neighborhoods, banning change and densification. Why? One theory is that modern buildings tend to be ugly, leading residents to support rules that exclude them from their neighborhoods. If this is true, then designing beautiful buildings could lead to more development. Housing reformists have vigorously debated this theory. Many British reformists are sympathetic, whereas Australian reformists tend to be skeptical, and Americans come down on both sides.

I do believe that ugliness plays a role in hindering development, but not in quite the way usually proposed. Ugliness is probably not a major driver of opposition to development by local people. Local opponents have many other concerns that are at least as important, like disruption from construction, loss of green space, pressure on local services, and diminished social exclusivity. But there is strong circumstantial evidence that ugliness is sometimes a major driver of opposition among people who live nowhere near the development in question. The first group are often called ‘NIMBYs’, for ‘Not in my backyard’. Let us call the second group ‘NITBYs’, for ‘Not in that backyard’.

The Works in Progress Newsletter

Get new articles from Works in Progress delivered to your inbox.

While a few NITBYs are fervent campaigners, most are only casually interested. Their motives are faint but basically altruistic: their question is whether or not, based on a cursory assessment, a development is an objective improvement to its neighborhood. In certain contexts, the ugliness of a development can summon into being a huge cloud of NITBYs, whose interest in the scheme may indeed be superficial, but who can nonetheless be collectively potent.

This model is especially compelling in the case of heritage conservation. Until the 1960s, the redevelopment of historic buildings was almost always permitted; today, it is almost always banned by conservation rules. Supporters of conservationism usually portray it as a response to the destructiveness of postwar planners, while opponents see it as a pretext for suburban NIMBYism. In fact, I shall argue, neither explanation is plausible. On the one hand, postwar planners were no more destructive than the Victorians or Georgians had been: the rate of demolition was historically normal, and cannot explain the wildly unprecedented policy response. And on the other hand, there was no need for NIMBYs to invent pretexts to ban new buildings, as they had already successfully prohibited the kinds of development they disliked in the first half of the century.

What had changed, and what generated the host of NITBYs that bore conservationism to victory, was the ascendancy of modernist architecture, a style that most people demonstrably find relatively ugly. Conservationism was a reaction to postwar redevelopment, as its proponents claimed. But it was less a reaction to what the modernists destroyed, than to what they created.

Many people who have never been to Innsbruck may nonetheless regret this development.

Image

Ugliness and NIMBYism

Most debates about the policy significance of ugliness presuppose a certain model of how it affects housebuilding. On this model, local people resent the prospect of having ugliness inflicted upon them, they therefore oppose ugly developments, and politicians implement antidevelopment policies to placate them. This probably does happen sometimes: ugliness obviously does affect local people, and it would be surprising if this had no effect at all on their behavior. But a closer look suggests that ugliness plays only a minor role in motivating NIMBYism.

One reason for skepticism is that the occasional beautiful developments that do get built still often encounter fevered opposition. I’On (pronounced ‘ion’) in Charleston, South Carolina is one of the loveliest neighborhoods in North America. It has grown gradually since its founding in 1995, occupying a largely empty site between several existing residential subdivisions. Despite its walkable urbanism, tree-lined streets, and exquisitely detailed houses, thousands of local people petitioned against it when first proposed. The town council initially rejected the scheme, and a tortuous legal battle was fought to downzone the site through a local referendum. The NIMBYs were defeated only after the South Carolina Supreme Court found that zoning decisions cannot be made by referendum.

I’On, Charleston, South Carolina is obviously much more attractive than most developments, but still met with intense NIMBY hostility.

Image

Such stories continue to appear today. The present king of the United Kingdom is an architecture enthusiast, and while he was prince, he orchestrated the delivery of several unusually attractive developments in his official landholdings (which, confusingly, are called the Duchy of Cornwall), including the famous developments of Poundbury and Nansledan. The Duchy is currently proposing a third, at Faversham in Kent. Its proposals show what would be one of the most appealing urban extensions in modern Europe. Nonetheless, it has triggered hundreds of letters of protest, as well as opposition from Faversham Council, the neighboring councils, and the local Member of Parliament.

South East Faversham, a development proposed by the Duchy of Cornwall in Kent. The Duchy is already building two attractive neighborhoods at Poundbury and Nansledan, and hopes to reproduce its success here. Local representatives are nonetheless hostile.

Image

Anecdotes like these are only weak evidence, not least because it is possible that the attacks would have been even more intense if the developments had been ugly. But they do suggest that beauty is not a panacea for NIMBYism.

A more powerful reason to doubt the role of ugliness in generating NIMBYism is that it gets the timing wrong. It is true that land-use rules became far more restrictive in the twentieth century. It is also true that the dominant architectural styles became much more unpopular: visual preference surveys consistently find that most people prefer traditional styles to modernist ones. Viewed from a distance, it looks plausible that the two are causally related: new buildings became visually displeasing to most people, and as a result they started to push back against them.

In fact, however, these changes happened in the wrong order. Restrictive zoning emerged in Germany and Austria-Hungary in the 1890s and spread quickly thereafter. Italian cities began introducing zoning plans in the 1900s, Britain created a national framework for zoning in 1909, and France followed suit in 1919. Zoning spread quickly across the United States in the interwar period. The restrictiveness of early zoning varied by country, but it could be very tight: in Germany and Austria most suburbs were capped at their existing densities well before 1914, and retain those densities today.

Modernist architecture began at least a generation later. It emerged in the 1920s, chiefly in Germany, and spread in the 1930s as a minority style for clients who wanted something distinctively futuristic. In the United States, its impact was particularly faint, and famous American buildings of the 1930s and 40s, such as the Supreme Court Building, the Empire State Building, and Jefferson Memorial, remained resolutely Neoclassical or Art Deco. The global triumph of modernism came only in the 1950s.

This means that the Great Downzoning happened in countries where most new buildings were still in the traditional styles dominant in the nineteenth century, with at most a minority in the novel but decorative styles we now call Art Deco. No switch towards styles perceived as ugly had yet occurred: the general picture was one of continuity with the past. The flats that were banned by early zoning would generally have had classical cornices, pedimented windows, and rusticated basements. In other words, NIMBYism triumphed long before it became true that, in most people’s eyes, the average new building was uglier than the average old one. This suggests that, though making development beautiful might palliate NIMBYism somewhat, the effect would be modest.

This building in Berlin was constructed shortly before the city instituted its first zoning code in 1893. It is typical of Central European mid-rise during the years when zoning was introduced to exclude such buildings from affluent suburbs.

Image

Perhaps this should not surprise us. After all, even the most beautiful neighborhood only emerges after several years of extreme ugliness, while the buildings are under construction. And however beautiful buildings may be, development will still have its other well-known impacts on local residents, like loss of light and green space, pressure on infrastructure and services, increase in noise, damage to social cachet, and change in the character of the neighborhood. Removing the problem of ugliness may reduce NIMBY zeal a little, but the number of NIMBYs it satisfies entirely will be small.

Was conservationism a response to modernist destructiveness?

Ugliness is clearly not the main driver of local opposition to new developments. This does not, however, mean that ugliness is irrelevant to housing shortages in the West. Today, American prohousing advocates work to generate statewide or national support for development in order to override the locals, whose representatives control the strict zoning that slows down development and makes housing scarce and expensive. Prohousing advocates have secured some important victories. But one area where they have almost invariably failed is in enabling more development in historic areas. The same is true for reformist campaigns around the world. Old buildings are protected from redevelopment across the West, even when they sit on the most valuable central land.

How did conservation become so powerful? The two most popular theories are (a) that conservation rules arose as a response to the unprecedented destructiveness of postwar planners and developers or (b) that they are a clever pretext exploited by local NIMBYs. I believe the evidence contradicts both. Instead, heritage conservation arose once most people began to feel that new buildings were uglier than old ones, generating widespread opposition to the redevelopment of old neighborhoods by people who did not even live in them.

The idea of conserving built heritage was not entirely a twentieth-century invention: the artist William Morris was an early proponent of the idea, establishing the Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings, whose aim was to prevent the overzealous ‘restoration’ of churches and other historic buildings, in 1877 . Morris was considered something of an eccentric in his own time, however, and architectural conservationism did not achieve anything like the popular support it has today until much later. In 1960, most European countries protected only a tiny minority of monuments from development, and even these limited restrictions dated largely from the 1940s and 50s. In most American states, the authorities protected nothing at all. Over the next twenty years, this changed drastically. Heritage registers were created, expanded, and strengthened. ‘Historic districts’ or ‘conservation areas’ were declared. Governments halted redevelopment schemes and redirected resources towards refurbishment and restoration.

The triumph of the conservation movement was extraordinarily swift, surprising even those who had campaigned for it.

Image

Louis Hellman, first published in Built Environment magazine.

Taken together, these measures were extraordinarily successful. In Paris, plans for the city introduced in the 1950s foresaw the demolition of two thirds of Paris’s city blocks over the next few decades, the bulk of Paris’s urban fabric from the nineteenth century. In Britain, the government actually did demolish at least 1.5 million homes in slum clearance schemes in the postwar decades. This was nearly 10 percent of the overall housing stock, but since these ‘slums’ were largely eighteenth or nineteenth-century buildings, it will have equated to between fifteen and twenty percent of the prewar stock. The United States seems to have had even higher rates of (privately led) destruction, with one report finding that nearly half of the 12,000 buildings recorded in the Historic American Buildings Survey of 1933 had been demolished or seriously mutilated by the middle of the 1960s.

Conservation policy brought such demolitions almost to a standstill. In France, 1.8 percent of pre-1949 dwellings were demolished between 1999 and 2013, an annual rate of 0.13 percent. German states report even lower rates of demolition of pre-1919 buildings. In Berlin in 2022, just nine buildings from before 1919 were demolished out of a total of 50,337, a rate of 0.018 percent. In North Rhine-Westphalia in 2023, 56 pre-1919 buildings were demolished out of 445,226, a rate of 0.013 percent. At this rate, it will take North Rhine-Westphalia 7,951 years to demolish its prewar stock entirely. In Britain, government statistics show a paradoxical increase in the number of pre-1919 dwellings between 2012 and 2024, the result of more homes being subdivided than demolished. Old American buildings are demolished rather more often, partly because they are timber-framed and therefore harder to maintain in safe condition. But in the American Northeast, the annual demolition rate of pre-1920 buildings between 1997 and 2001 was still only 0.25 percent, while in the West it was slightly over 0.3 percent . In all these countries, the old buildings that are demolished are usually decayed and neglected. Many are in deprived post-industrial towns rather than in areas with strong pressure for densification.

The standard account of this shift sees the rise of the conservation movement as a response to the unprecedented destruction of heritage by postwar developers and planners. If we take the above figures in isolation, this seems plausible. The problem is that the destructiveness of 1945–1970 was really nothing new: earlier generations had destroyed just as much of their architectural inheritance without generating corresponding resistance.

11 and 13 Rue François-Miron are the last timber-framed houses in Paris to survive in their entirety.

Image

Samuel Hughes

A graphic illustration of this is visible on the Rue François-Miron in Paris, where stand Paris’s last two fully intact timber-framed houses. Until the sixteenth century, almost all houses in Paris were timber-framed. In the centuries since, Paris was never annihilated by a great fire, earthquake, or bombing, unlike Chicago, London, San Francisco, and Tokyo. But its tens of thousands of timber-framed houses were demolished for redevelopment, until, by the mid-twentieth century, only these two remained. Many of their sites have since been occupied by several progressively larger buildings, demolished and replaced in sequence.

This rate of redevelopment was not unusual. London’s medieval stock was mostly destroyed in the Great Fire in 1666. But the rebuilt City of London of the late seventeenth century has also vanished. Only somewhere between 100 and 200 homes survive from this period, though more than half a million people lived in the brick-built London of 1700. Some seventeenth-century buildings were destroyed in the Second World War, but the vast majority had already been demolished and replaced in the eighteenth, nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Assuming 100,000 homes in 1700 and two hundred survivors today, that means a destruction rate of 99.8 percent, considerably more thorough than that of the Great Fire.

Image

Manhattan in the 1860s and the 1930s.

This process was perhaps even more marked in the United States, where the lack of height restrictions created intense incentives for redevelopment after the invention of elevators and steel frames in the 1880s. Fewer than twenty buildings of any kind survive in New York from before 1800. Boston has perhaps fifty or a hundred. Almost all of these buildings were already gone before the rise of modernism, demolished in the nineteenth century or in the furious building activity of the Roaring Twenties.

The rate of redevelopment could be even faster for certain types of building. In the Gilded Age, Manhattan had several hundred urban palaces, huge houses of the great business dynasties. Perhaps three quarters were demolished in a remarkably short period in the late 1920s. The Cornelius Vanderbilt II House was demolished in 1926 for the Bergdorf Goodman building, a department store. The Mrs William B Astor House was also demolished in 1926 for the Temple Emanu-El of New York, a magnificent synagogue seating a congregation of 2,500 people. The Elbridge T Gerry Mansion was demolished in 1929 and replaced by the Pierre, a skyscraper hotel in a French Renaissance style. Ironically, all three of these buildings now have heritage protection, either as individual landmarks or as elements of historic districts.

Demolition and rebuild in early twentieth-century Manhattan. Even early skyscrapers were often swiftly demolished and replaced with larger successors. From top to bottom, the rows are: the Gillender (1897) and its replacement, the Bankers Trust Building (1912); the Home Insurance Building (1885) and its replacement, the Field Building (1934); the Mrs William B. Astor House (1895) and its replacement, the Temple Emanu-El (1930); and the Elbridge T Gerry Mansion and its replacement, the Pierre Hotel (1930).

Image

Alamy

This destructiveness was not limited to the private sector, especially in Europe, where medieval and early modern city centers frequently stood in the way of government schemes. The most famous case of this was ‘road cutting’, the policy of driving new arterial roads through city centers to improve traffic circulation, which was unnecessary before the age of the car on generously gridded New World streets. Many of Europe’s most famous urban streets were originally cuttings, like Regent Street in London and the Rue de Rivoli in Paris. Although cuttings mainly served a practical function, the tree-lined boulevards they created were also seen as aesthetic improvements.

There is one interesting exception to this destructiveness: urban railways. Nineteenth-century railways generated huge clouds of steam and coal smoke, and were regarded as blights on the neighborhoods they passed through. As a consequence, there are almost no cases in which a railway was cut through a city center: this is why cities like London and Paris have a ring of railway termini around the historic core. In other words, nineteenth-century people behaved just like twentieth-century people in respect of the one kind of infrastructure they found overwhelmingly ugly, just as the anti-ugliness theory would predict.

Not everyone was happy about the tearing up of the old to make way for modern capital cities. People displaced by public works were obviously upset. Some commentators also regretted the destruction of historic buildings, especially when high-status buildings like palaces were replaced by low-status buildings like apartments. On the other hand, many Georgians and Victorians thought that redevelopment generally made their cities better. Although some ancient buildings were prized, normal houses generally declined in value over time, like cars or computers today: the default assumption was that buildings degraded with use, and hence that a new replacement was probably better.

Many people also thought that architects were getting better at designing attractive buildings. In 1868, The Builder, Britain’s leading architectural magazine, proclaimed that:

Commercial public works, of a magnitude unrivalled since the days of imperial Rome… are educating our workmen, from the lowest to the highest, to a style of craftsmanship entirely unknown in this country at the commencement of the present century. Private wealth, under the stimulus already given to good taste, is replacing the dead walls and unmeaning windows of the Georgian style of street building, the poorest and least picturesque that was ever common in any civilised nation, by not altogether unsuccessful effort to create a Victorian London.

The overall picture here is one of striking continuity between the modernists and their predecessors. The modernists certainly demolished a lot, but not generally more than the Victorians or Georgians. In a sense, they were much less destructive, since they were halted when they had demolished only a substantial minority of the inherited building stock, while the Victorians and Georgians merrily continued until they had torn down almost all of it. The idea that postwar planners were moved by destructive animus towards the past is mostly a myth. Their views about urban change were historically normal, and had generally been shared by the wider public. The fact that redevelopment lost the consent of the public in the 1960s and 70s requires some other explanation.

Densification in early twentieth-century Vienna, captured by the great architectural photographer August Stauda. The plots in the foreground will soon be redeveloped, with the older low-rise stock demolished to make way for 'modern' apartment blocks like those visible in the background of the image. This kind of redevelopment enjoyed broad public consent and was often seen as an improvement.

Image

Was conservationism a pretext for NIMBYism?

If postwar destruction did not cause the conservation movement, what did? Some readers will sense an obvious answer here. Housing reformers have long suspected that the conservation movement is mostly a pretext for NIMBYism. According to this theory, NIMBYs actually oppose development in order to exclude poor people or non-white people from their neighborhoods, or to sustain high property values, or from pure reflexive dislike of change. But since none of these is a persuasive argument for state coercion, NIMBYs therefore have to invent ‘pretextual’ reasons for opposing development. According to this theory, the idea that we must conserve architectural heritage is one such pretext.

The idea that conservation is a front for some other objection can seem plausible. When I attend planning committee meetings, I often have the overwhelming impression that opponents’ arguments are heavily pretextual: people who have never shown the slightest interest in heritage, and who have perhaps gutted the historic features of their own homes, suddenly become fanatical champions of some trivial historic object when it stands in the way of a development. (Intense interest may also be discovered in bats, newts, hedgehogs, bees, blackbirds, public housing tenants, flood risk, key workers, young people, old people, and so on.)

As a general explanation for the rise of conservation in the twentieth century, however, the pretextual theory is surprisingly weak. The most obvious problem is once again sequencing: the rise of NIMBYism happened long before the rise of the conservation movement. As we have seen, suburban zoning spread across much of Europe before the First World War and then across North America in the interwar period, while conservation restrictions were extremely limited before the 1940s and only really became an important constraint on development in the 1960s and 70s. Many countries thus see gaps of forty or even seventy years between the two movements. Why didn’t NIMBYs invent conservationism earlier? Why, indeed, did they bother to invent it in the 1960s, long after they had already succeeded in protecting their affluent suburbs from development using other arguments?

The pretextual theory also struggles to explain the priorities of conservationism. As their name suggests, NIMBYs care chiefly about their own backyards – that is, typically, middle-class suburbs. Conservationism certainly does sometimes protect such places, but it is not restricted to them. It also protects working-class housing, commercial downtowns, public buildings, isolated country houses, and rural churches. In fact, it has often had far more effect on these buildings than it has on suburban areas, partly because suburbs were already protected by zoning, and partly because postwar governments wanted to clear ‘slums’, not middle-class neighborhoods. In other words, the conservation movement has the priorities of a NITBY movement, not a NIMBY one.

Perhaps the most famous of all American conservationist battles was fought over the Lower Manhattan Expressway, which would have cut through SoHo and Little Italy. At the time, these were decayed manufacturing and warehouse areas, but the campaign attracted the support of grandees like Eleanor Roosevelt, Lewis Mumford, Margaret Mead, Charles Abrams, and William H Whyte.

Image

New York City Municipal Archives / CultureNow

The difference between conservationist and NIMBY priorities is starkly illustrated by the divergent trajectories of city center districts. City centers with less historic build stock have frequently seen massive densification since 1950, because they have neither beautiful buildings for NITBYs to protect nor many local residents to object on NIMBY grounds. Thus many American, Canadian and Australian cities have seen forests of skyscrapers rising in their downtowns, while their vast suburbs, full of homeowning NIMBYs, remain petrified at low densities. Urbanists write about an ‘urban transect’, with densities gradually rising towards the center. These cities have developed a distinctive ‘L transect’, sheer at the core but flat everywhere else. This is the urban form that arises where local NIMBYism is a powerful force while NITBY conservation has less relevance.

These images of Melbourne illustrate the emergence of an ‘L transect’ with particular force. In the background is the central business district, which has dramatically densified since 1950. In the foreground is Fitzroy, a low-rise, predominantly residential district whose density has changed little over the corresponding period. Other cities with particularly sheer L transects include Miami, Toronto, Calgary and Brisbane.

Image

By contrast, European city centers have been more perfectly frozen than perhaps any other kind of neighborhood: the building stock of central Paris, Rome, or Madrid has hardly changed at all since 1960. When European municipalities want to develop a skyscraper district, they generally have to find a low-end suburban site for it, like Paris’s La Défense or Madrid’s AZCA. If current plans for tall buildings around the Périphérique ring road go ahead, Paris may end up with a gentle U transect, with its highest densities displaced to the periphery. The obvious reason for this is that European city centers are where historic buildings are concentrated. They have no special significance for most NIMBYs – although they have often now gentrified, many centers were poor or depopulated in the 1960s – but they are the natural focus of NITBYs’ efforts.

Where European cities have densified their centers since 1945, it is generally downstream of heavy bomb damage, as in Frankfurt and London. One famous study found that the Blitz ultimately made London’s economy 10 percent larger by enabling higher densities on former bomb sites. If London’s development restrictions were solely driven by NIMBYism, this would be inexplicable: sites where density had been randomly lowered to zero in 1941–1945 would if anything be expected to have lower density today, since the NIMBYs would have been resisting densification from a lower baseline. The reason that bomb damage enabled higher subsequent densities is that development is often blocked by NITBY protection of heritage architecture, not NIMBY opposition to density.

The fight against uglification

The true explanation of the spread of conservation is before our eyes: the rise of perceived ugliness. Redevelopment in the postwar era did not become more common or more destructive of heritage. But it did become, in the view of most people, uglier. This may have made people (even) more hostile to redevelopment near them. But its politically decisive effect was to make people more hostile to many kinds of redevelopment that did not affect them personally.

Most people are not principled opponents of redevelopment as such. Even today, developments on former industrial or logistics sites are often widely popular, like NOMA in Washington DC or Coal Drops Yard in London. But many people are principled opponents of redevelopment when it seems to uglify places. Very many people dislike the idea of their city or their country becoming uglier, even when they do not live near the development in question. They lend low-level, passive support to conservationist campaigns – support which aggregates into a powerful force in a democratic society.

Both of these developments involved demolition of older buildings, but only one provoked conservationist resistance. What could possibly explain this discrepancy?

Image

Samuel Hughes

How did people come to expect that new buildings would be uglier than what came before? As we have seen, this view was not standard historically. There are two main causes. First, in the middle of the twentieth century, traditional architectural styles were superseded by modernism, characterized by lack of ornament, repetitive facade patterns, and the use of exposed steel and concrete. This style emerged in the 1920s and became dominant for everything except suburban housing in the 1950s. As noted above, this style is broadly unpopular with the public. Replacement of prewar buildings in traditional styles with postwar buildings in modernist ones will thus, to most people, constitute uglification. This is the main reason that redevelopment switched from being aesthetically neutral to being uglifying.

Second, at around the same time, mass car ownership became dominant. Unlike modernist architecture, cars are basically popular. But it is nonetheless obvious that, although individuals benefit from cars, spaces are degraded by heavy vehicle traffic. This is irrelevant to how people feel about some kinds of redevelopment, but it is worth mentioning because of how it affects views of street cuttings. A nineteenth-century boulevard was an airy, tree-lined space along which horse-drawn carriages flowed, roughly at walking speed. On the whole, people seem to have preferred them to narrow side streets, as contemporary property maps illustrate. By contrast, nobody prefers living near a modern highway, to the extent that the authorities often build sight and sound barriers around them.

Brussels adopted modern development controls unusually late for a European city, so parts of it offer a striking vision of a counterfactual Europe without zoning and heritage restrictions. In planning vocabulary, the replacement of central historic neighborhoods with tall buildings is still sometimes called ‘Brusselization’ as a result. Unsurprisingly, Brusselization generated a backlash, and internationally normal restrictions were introduced in 1979.

Image

Samuel Hughes

The anti-ugliness theory of conservationism lines up strikingly with the timing of events. Developers had been demolishing vast quantities of historic stock for thousands of years with barely a whisper of conservationist resistance; then, within ten or fifteen years of the ascendancy of an architectural style that the public disliked, an immense movement to halt the replacement of old buildings appeared almost from nowhere.

This theory also explains the priorities of the conservation movement. On the one hand, as noted above, conservationists have successfully protected a much wider range of pre-1914 buildings than NIMBYs have, including in city centers and other places where NIMBYs are scarce or absent. On the other hand, conservationists have been far less effective in defending postwar modernist heritage, being either indifferent to it themselves or unable to mobilize wider public support. There do exist conservation groups defending modernist architecture, like the Twentieth Century Society in Britain, and some high-profile modernist buildings have received conservation protection. But the numbers are tiny relative to prewar architecture. In England, 300 postwar buildings had been listed as of 2003, apparently growing to about 500 in 2015, out of some 375,000 listed buildings in total. The American National Register has a blanket ‘fifty year rule’, almost never including anything built within the last half century.

It also seems to me that the anti-ugliness theory is a plausible account of the emotional character of the conservation movement. It is true that many conservationists are not explicitly anti-modernist, and that today the orthodox high-status view is to support conservationism for old architecture and modernism for new ones. I suspect, however, that conservationists were appalled by uglification, but sought to avoid direct confrontation with high-status modernism by sublimating their appreciation of beauty into appreciation of heritage. Conservationists could thus promote traditional architecture without attracting charges of pastiche-mongering. In other words, many conservationists secretly love old buildings because they are beautiful, while pretending to love them because they are old.

Ugliness and the housing shortage

How much impact does conservation have on the housing shortage? The answer is complicated. Even in the European countries with the oldest build stock, only a fifth of housing dates from before 1919, while in the United States just 6 percent does. This suggests that rules protecting old buildings would do little to prevent the construction of new ones. But because historic buildings are concentrated in city centers, and because conservation systems tend to restrict what can be done in the environs of old buildings as well as within their curtilages, their effect is much greater than the raw statistics suggest. In fact, in most European cities, centers are effectively solid phalanxes of conservation designations, with new development largely displaced to inferior sites on the urban periphery.

Paris with only buildings from before 1914 marked. Given restrictions on development in the settings of historic buildings, this means that only a handful of sites remain for possible development within the city.

Image

The impact of conservation in the United States is smaller, but still considerable. Manhattan, central Boston, and San Francisco are not under blanket conservation designations like Paris, Amsterdam, Madrid, or Rome. But large areas still fall under conservation protections, often exactly the areas where YIMBYs would most like to enable development. This means that conservation, and hence ugliness, still acts as a significant constraint on development, albeit a less important one than the general rise of suburban zoning.

Heritage designations in San Francisco. It is quite true that there is a modest share of historic stock in most of these urban areas, but the historic stock that does exist is heavily concentrated in the most economically vital places.

Image

Cogent arguments may be given for the redevelopment of historic neighborhoods. Densifying central areas of cities creates new housing where it is most needed, and where it contributes most to economic growth. It enables people to walk and cycle to work, or to rely on public transport. New buildings could be safer, better insulated, and more environmentally sustainable than their predecessors.

For most Westerners today, however, the prospect of destroying their cities’ historic neighborhoods remains a horrible one. People feel implicitly that we possess a finite stock of beautiful buildings, and that they are more or less irreplaceable. When one is destroyed, we lose forever a part of our inheritance, and condemn our children to live in a permanently uglier world.

So long as people feel this, they will never tolerate the large-scale destruction of historic building stock, no matter what ingenious arguments YIMBYs make for it. Their dread of ugliness will hang over our cities like a curse, freezing them in the last moment of their beauty. If that curse can be broken, it will not be by the arguments of economists and transport planners, but by confidence that change is not disfigurement, and that it will yield cities we can love.

1

The society was nicknamed the ‘Anti-Scrape Society’ because of its objection to the practice of scraping off later plasterwork to reveal a building’s original bare stone. Morris considered the later additions worth preserving as part of a building’s story.

2

The one partial exception to this pattern is the American South, the most demolition-prone region in the Western World, where the rate was 0.8 percent annually. This seems to result from a mixture of urban poverty and the rapid decay of timber buildings in a subtropical climate.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

10. CollectWise (YC F24) Is Hiring

Source: https://www.ycombinator.com/companies/collectwise/jobs/oEAfzBS-ai-agent-engineer
Site: Y Combinator
Submitter: OBrien_1107 (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-08-04 07:01 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 1 points · 0 comments
Length: 538 words (~3 min read)
Language: en

About Us

CollectWise is a fast growing and well funded Y Combinator-backed startup. We’re using generative AI to automate debt collection, a $35B market in the US alone. Our AI agents are already outperforming human collectors by 2X, and we’re doing so at a fraction of the cost.

With a team of five, we scaled to a $2 million annualized run rate in just a few months, and we are now hiring an AI Agent Engineer to help us reach $10 million within the next year.

About the role

CollectWise is hiring an AI Agent Engineer to build the infrastructure, prompting systems, and core architecture behind our voice AI agents. You will work at the intersection of AI infrastructure, prompt engineering, conversational design, and product development to build voice agents that power millions of consumer interactions.

This is a highly technical role for someone who is equally comfortable building production-grade systems, writing and refining prompts and conversation flows, and designing rigorous testing frameworks to maximize real-world performance. You should be analytical, business-minded, and motivated by measurable outcomes.

What you’ll do

Build our voice AI infrastructure in LiveKit
Design and own the architecture of our real-time voice agent systems, including orchestration, state management, latency optimization, prompting and reliability.
Own the end-to-end prompting strategy for CollectWise voice agents, including conversation flows, tone, compliance-safe phrasing, guardrails, and edge-case handling.
Build and maintain testing and evaluation frameworks for voice agent performance, including A/B testing, regression testing, conversation QA, benchmarking, and KPI reporting.
Write, expand, and improve our core AI prompting to cover more real-world scenarios.
Continuously iterate based on performance data, call outcomes, and customer feedback to improve containment, conversion, liquidation rates, and customer satisfaction.
Optimize ASR, STT, TTS, turn-taking, interruption handling, and state transitions to improve voice quality and agent performance.
Build scalable systems and tooling to support millions of voice interactions.
Migrate client implementations from legacy voice AI infrastructure to the latest systems you build, while preserving client-specific customizations and workflows.
Develop prompt and agent tooling, including versioning, rollout strategies, monitoring, safety checks, and debugging workflows.
Work closely with product, operations, and leadership to translate business goals into high-performing voice agent behavior.

What we’re looking for

2+ years of experience in voice AI, conversational AI, prompt engineering, speech systems, or related agentic workflows.
3+ years of experience in platform, infrastructure, or backend engineering.
Strong experience with Node.js, AWS, and SQL.
Experience building and shipping production systems in a startup or similarly fast-paced environment.
Experience with voice orchestration platforms or agent frameworks such as LiveKit.
Strong prompt writing instincts and the ability to design clear, effective, and resilient conversational flows.
Strong analytical skills and comfort tying technical work directly to business outcomes and ROI.
Excellent communication skills, high ownership, and a strong work ethic.

Nice to have

Experience with SIP trunking, telephony infrastructure, and production voice systems.
Experience working with real-time audio pipelines, call routing, and carrier or telephony integrations.
Familiarity with speech infrastructure in production environments.

Compensation

Salary: $200,000 to $300,000, depending on experience and qualifications
Equity: 0.25% to 1%

CollectWise is revolutionizing debt recovery with autonomous AI agents and an integrated legal network. We boost recovery rates, reduce costs, and maintain a positive brand image through respectful, data-driven interactions.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

11. Ask HN: Who is hiring? (August 2026)

Source: https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=49156683 (Hacker News text post)
Site: news.ycombinator.com
Submitter: whoishiring (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-08-03 15:00 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 172 points · 158 comments

Please state the location and include REMOTE for remote work, REMOTE (US)
or similar if the country is restricted, and ONSITE when remote work is not an option.

Please only post if you personally are part of the hiring company—no
recruiting firms or job boards. One post per company. If it isn't a household name,
explain what your company does.

Please only post if you are actively filling a position and are committed
to replying to applicants.

Commenters: please don't reply to job posts to complain about
something. It's off topic here.

Readers: please only email if you are personally interested in the job.

Searchers: try https://nthesis.ai/public/hn-who-is-hiring, https://dheerajck.github.io/hnwhoishiring/,
http://nchelluri.github.io/hnjobs/, https://hnjobs.emilburzo.com.

Don't miss this other fine thread: Who wants to be hired? https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=49156682

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

12. Smaller, faster, safer: running Kimi and GLM at scale

Source: https://blog.cloudflare.com/smaller-faster-safer-models/
Site: The Cloudflare Blog
Submitter: ascorbic (Hacker News)
Published: 2026-08-03
HN activity: 212 points · 52 comments
Length: 1.3K words (~6 min read)
Language: en-us

Workers AI runs inference for some of the best open models in the world on GPUs in Cloudflare data centers close to your users. Two of the most capable, and most demanding, are Moonshot's Kimi K-series and Z.ai's GLM. They are large, long-context, mixture-of-experts models, and they are wonderful to use. They are also very hard to serve efficiently because of memory constraints.

We've written before about how we serve large models on Workers AI and about separating the prefill and decode phases of inference to get more out of each GPU. This post looks at three techniques we layer on top of that to fit these models into memory and keep them fast: quantizing the KV cache, compressing the model weights, and, because both of those pack more requests onto shared hardware, protecting the cache those requests share. These optimizations enable us to support more customers at lower costs, with no change in model accuracy.

All our experiments and production traffic are running and benchmarked with SGLang, an open-source inference serving framework. We found that SGLang offers the best performance in the market, and we work closely with the SGLang team to upstream patches and new features to make our work available to the open-source community.

Quantizing the KV cache

As a model generates text, it stores the attention keys (K) and values (V) for every token it has already processed in a structure called the KV cache. The cache is what lets the model extend a long conversation without re-reading the entire context on every new token. For a long-context model, it grows quickly, and it is usually the KV cache, not the model's weights, that fills up GPU memory first.

By default, the cache is stored in 16-bit precision (BF16). We store it in 8-bit floating point instead (FP8, e4m3), which halves its size. On Kimi K2.6, that raises the amount of context we can hold in memory from roughly 686,000 tokens to about 1.37 million, twice as much.

It's worth being precise about where the benefit comes from, because it isn't raw speed. Quantizing the cache adds a small amount of work per token, since the FP8 attention kernel has to convert values as it reads them. What it changes is how many requests we can keep resident at once. The following measurements are for Kimi K2.6 decoding on a disaggregated H200 deployment, comparing the attention kernels directly:

Concurrent requests

BF16 KV cache (tok/s)

FP8 KV cache (tok/s)

1

137

125

8

731

689

16

1,106

1,028

32

1,558

1,489

64

Out of memory

2,192

At any single concurrency level, BF16 is a few percent faster per token. But BF16 runs out of cache at 32 concurrent requests and can't admit a 33rd, while FP8 keeps going to 64 and reaches 2,192 tokens per second, about 41% higher than BF16's peak, for roughly 30% less cost per token. Because we run prefill and decode as separate pools, we can apply this where it helps most: prefill is compute-bound rather than memory-bound, so there we leave the cache in BF16 and keep its slightly higher throughput.

None of this would matter if it changed the model's answers, so we checked. Across our evaluation suite, FP8 and BF16 caches are indistinguishable:

Benchmark

BF16 KV

FP8 KV

GSM8K

94.24

94.09

ARC-Easy

89.06

89.14

ARC-Challenge

66.72

67.49

MMLU

89.11

89.04

MMLU-Pro

80.29

79.29

mcxams (internal benchmark)

61 / 63

61 / 63

Tool-call validity

92.2%

92.6%

Compressing the model weights

The KV cache is one demand on GPU memory; the model's weights are the other. For GLM 5.2, we compress the weights from 8-bit floating point down to 4-bit integers (INT4) with no loss in accuracy. The checkpoint shrinks from 705 GB to 421 GB, about 40%, and per-GPU memory across an 8-way tensor-parallel deployment drops from roughly 88 GB to 52 GB, which leaves room for around 1.18 million tokens of KV cache on the same hardware.

Across our evaluation suite, INT4 and FP8 weights are indistinguishable:

Benchmark / Capability

Metric

FP8

INT4

GSM8K

Exact match

94.39%

93.56%

GSM8K

Flexible

94.24%

93.48%

ARC-Easy

Accuracy

86.62%

86.15%

ARC-Easy

Acc (norm)

84.51%

85.19%

ARC-Challenge

Accuracy

64.93%

64.85%

ARC-Challenge

Acc (norm)

67.24%

66.64%

MMLU

Average

86.60%

86.54%

MMLU-Pro

Exact

80.80%

80.47%

mcxams (internal benchmark)

Passed

62 / 63

62 / 63

Smaller weights make the decode phase faster, and for a clear reason: generating each token means streaming the model's weights out of GPU memory, so decode speed is limited by memory bandwidth. Move less data and every token arrives sooner. The effect is largest at low concurrency, where per-request latency matters most:

Concurrent requests

GLM FP8 (tok/s)

GLM INT4 (tok/s)

INT4 gain

1

60

92

+55%

8

425

513

+21%

16

683

825

+21%

32

994

1,267

+27%

64

1,672

1,933

+16%

Prefill behaves differently. It is compute-bound, and INT4 weights have to be expanded back out before the model can multiply with them, so that extra step makes prefill slower rather than faster, GLM sustains about 10,160 tokens per second of prefill in FP8 versus 8,660 in INT4. As with the KV cache, the disaggregated design turns this into a choice rather than a compromise: we run INT4 for decode, where it wins, and FP8 for prefill, where it wins. Model accuracy stays within 0.8 points of the FP8 model across every benchmark we run, making its quality indistinguishable.

Protecting a shared KV cache

Both techniques above have the same effect: they let many more requests share one GPU's memory at the same time. That efficiency is the whole point, but it also means hundreds of requests are reading and writing pages of the same physical KV cache. The mechanisms that make this fast, paged attention, continuous batching, cache reuse, all rely on getting the bookkeeping exactly right, and at our request volumes, even a one-in-a-billion mistake would show up regularly.

So we built KV cache integrity checking as a layer of defense. The idea is straightforward: every physical cache page gets a tag that changes whenever the page is reallocated, and the server records which pages and tags each request expects to use. Before supported decode operations read from the cache, those mappings are checked. If anything doesn't match, the affected request is aborted rather than allowed to return data from the wrong page.

The question that decides whether a safety check ships is what it costs. We measured it on a mid-sized production model in a two-prefill, two-decode configuration, with 8,192-token inputs and 1,000-token outputs:

Concurrency

Throughput change

p95 latency change

1

−0.53%

+0.42%

2

−0.38%

+0.54%

4

−0.79%

+0.63%

8

−0.43%

+0.80%

The cost is under 1% on both throughput and tail latency, and even the upper bound of the 95% confidence interval stays near 1%. We kept it computationally cheap by running the validation as a separate batch check rather than fusing it into the attention kernel, which would have introduced a race between GPU thread groups. It's enabled per deployment, and the default path uses a no-op tracker with no measurable overhead, so deployments that don't need it pay nothing.

What's next

Serving frontier models efficiently is a moving target, and this is the ongoing work behind it. We're expanding FP8 KV caches across more of the fleet, validating NVFP4 weights on Blackwell (NVIDIA’s GPU architecture), and working toward making integrity checks something we can leave on everywhere at negligible cost. These optimizations will allow us to continue to support more customers at a lower cost and at the same accuracy.

If squeezing the best open models onto GPUs and serving them to millions of developers sounds like your kind of problem, come work with us.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

13. Prevent cognitive debt by manually retyping LLM-generated code

Source: https://ankursethi.com/blog/prevent-cognitive-debt-by-manually-retyping-llm-generated-code/
Site: Ankur Sethi's Lab Notebook
Author: Ankur Sethi
Published: 2026-08-02
HN activity: 475 points · 384 comments
Length: 846 words (~4 min read)
Language: en-US

Despite what I said in April, I'm still using coding assistants on my personal projects.

Using them to one-shot entire features leaves me unsatisfied and disoriented, but I do enjoy using them to fast-forward through the boring parts of my projects.

However, allowing my coding assistant to roam free in my projects leaves me with a colossal amount of cognitive debt. I might hate the idea of poring over the Django documentation to figure out how to add tagging to my website, but I still fundamentally want to understand how it works. Just because a problem is boring doesn't mean I want to fully offload my understanding of the solution to a machine.

Of course, I could review every single line of code the LLM produces. That's what most developers are expected to do in this cursed year of 2026. Robots raise PRs, humans review them. It's a brave new world.

But I don't enjoy reviewing AI-generated PRs. Poring over hundreds of lines of overly-defensive, badly-commented, subtly incorrect code is not fun. I might grudgingly do it for an employer—while making sure said employer becomes an ex-employer as soon as possible—but I'm sure as hell not doing it for my personal projects. Personal projects must be fun above all else. The joy of working on personal projects comes from the process, not from the outcome.

So what's a boy to do? How do I offload the boring work to LLMs without ceding control of my own work and cognition to the slop machine?

I've come up with a solution that's grossly inefficient and perhaps slightly comical: I ask my coding assistant to generate code in the chat, then manually make all the edits myself.

I have these instructions in all the agents files in my personal projects:

I want to understand every line of code that goes into this project. Never create, edit, move, rename, or delete project files unless I explicitly ask you to do so. Instead, show me every proposed edit in the chat so I can type it in manually.

Do not run commands that modify project files, install dependencies, or change repository state unless I explicitly request that action. Instead, show me those commands in the chat so I can run them manually.

I'm an experienced developer. Do not explain syntax, APIs, programming concepts, or implementation details unless explicitly asked.

Using LLMs this way allows me to work faster than not using LLMs at all, but I'm still slower than those who are willing to allow the machine to think for them. Instead of being 10x faster, I'm probably only 2x faster. But what I lose out on in terms of speed, I gain in terms of a deeper understanding of my code.

As I manually type every single line of LLM generated code into my editor, I build up a mental model of how it works and fits into my existing codebase. If I don't understand an API or algorithm, I can stop to look it up, or just ask the LLM to explain it.

Typing the code myself forces me to slow down, which means I'm more likely to detect hallucinations or bad design choices the LLM might have made. I can clean up the code as I go, reorganizing it, refactoring it, adding comments, and generally adapting it to my own taste.

Most importantly, this workflow allows me to build a spatial map of my codebase. I know where every bit of functionality lives in the codebase. When I need to make a change, I know exactly where I need to make it. It not only helps me work faster within my projects, it also makes it easier for me to better prompt and instruct the LLM in the future.

When I was learning to code as a teenager, experienced programmers would often tell me to never copy and paste code into my projects. If I was learning from a book, I was advised to copy all the examples into my computer and make sure I could run them. If I was learning from a blog post or forum answer, I was advised to type it out and adapt it to my codebase so I understood it completely.

Manually typing LLM-generated into my codebase feels like the exact same learning process. It might not be the most efficient way to work with an LLM, but I value comprehension over productivity. I've been doing this for a few months now, and it's been working well for me. I plan to continue using this workflow for as long as I can.

I fear the software industry is taking on a large amount of cognitive debt that we'll have to pay back very soon. There will come a time when we no longer understand how large parts of our digital infrastructure are put together. I might not personally be able to change the course of the entire industry, but I can at least make sure I completely understand the software I put out into the world. Anything else would be professional malpractice.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

14. Ask HN: Who wants to be hired? (August 2026)

Source: https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=49156682 (Hacker News text post)
Site: news.ycombinator.com
Submitter: whoishiring (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-08-03 15:00 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 114 points · 266 comments

Share your information if you are looking for work. Please use this format:

  Location:
  Remote:
  Willing to relocate:
  Technologies:
  Résumé/CV:
  Email:

Please only post if you are personally looking for work. Agencies, recruiters, job boards,
and so on, are off topic here.

Readers: please only email these addresses to discuss work opportunities.

Searchers: try https://nthesis.ai/public/hn-wants-to-be-hired, https://www.wantstobehired.com.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

15. MiniMax H3 Day-0 Support in ComfyUI: Open Weights, Native Audio, and 2K Video

Source: https://blog.comfy.org/p/minimax-h3-day-0-support-in-comfyui
Site: ComfyUI Newsletter
Author: Rob, Alexis Rolland
Published: 2026-08-03
HN activity: 293 points · 85 comments
Length: 1.5K words (~7 min read)
Language: en

MiniMax H3 dropped today with open weights, and it’s natively supported in ComfyUI as of this morning. Day zero.

This is a next-generation open-weights video model. Feed it text, images, video, or audio and it generates video with real stereo sound, up to 2K, up to 15 seconds a clip. It is MiniMax’s third-generation video model, following Hailuo 01 and Hailuo 02, and the first the company has released with open weights.

Try on Comfy Cloud

Text-to-video — prompt only.

Image-to-video — bring an image to life.

First-and-last-frame — control the opening frame, the closing frame, or both, and let the model fill in the rest.

Reference-to-video — supply reference images, video, or audio and carry a subject, a motion, or a voice through the clip.

Output runs to 2K and up to 15 seconds. Audio is generated with the video in the same pass, in stereo, not bolted on afterward.

This is the capability MiniMax leads with, and it’s what collapses five separate tasks into one model. Real work rarely draws on one modality. H3 takes images, audio, and video together and resolves them against a prompt that explains how they relate. Describe the relationship between your inputs and the shot you want, and the model handles the cross-modal work itself.

Audio is a property of the model, not a post-process. Every audio output is native stereo.

Motion transfer is the one that matters most for graph work. A reference video can supply movement — a camera move, a performance, a cutting rhythm — while the subject and style come from elsewhere. Combined with in-place editing, that means iterating on a shot.

Bold comic-book ink style, heavy linework, red and blue-black palette, night city. Use <Picture 2> and <Picture 1> as reference frames and <Audio 1> exactly as it is.
CUT 1: top-down view of the little boy superhero on the rooftop — red cape fluttering in the wind, hands planted on his hips, freckles and a cocky grin as he looks straight up into the camera. The camera slowly descends toward him as he delivers his line — as he speaks, comic-book graphic overlay text word by word in sync with his voice: "GET READY TO" - "MEET" — "YOUR" — "MAKER" — huge jagged comic lettering, white with heavy black outlines and red drop shadows, tilted at scrappy angles, until the three words hang stacked in the air above him between his face and the lens.
TRANSITION: a violent WHIP PAN off the rooftop that SMEARS the floating words away with it, motion-streaked —
CUT 2: low hero angle on the colossal black mech-kaiju towering over the skyline as it rears back and unleashes a GIANT terrifying ROAR — jaws wide with fangs, red eyes and chest-core flaring blinding bright, blue lightning arcing off its head, the roar's shockwave rippling dust and rattling windows down the buildings, comic-style speed-lines and ink splatter bursting from the impact of the sound. It leans INTO the camera as the roar peaks. Hold on the roar.

Editorial tech product film. The transparent gaming mouse from <Picture 1> in its original scene: a pitch-black studio void with a dark, subtle reflective surface, lit by dramatic duotone vibrant blue and warm neon orange rim lighting, deep soft shadow falloff into pure black. Monochromatic dark palette with electric blue and amber accents. Material motif: glowing internal metallic micro-components and glossy acrylic refractions. The environment is constant throughout.
SHOT 1: The scene opens exactly on image 1, the mouse resting confidently on the dark surface; the blue and orange lights slowly pulse brighter, refracting deeply through the transparent acrylic shell as the camera executes a slow, deliberate push-in to reveal the intricate circuitry.
SHOT 2: Cut to an extreme macro profile of the ridged scroll wheel and layered internal micro-components; the camera glides slowly along the side as a sharp beam of warm orange light sweeps across the metallic textures, contrasting perfectly against the deep blue ambient glow.
SHOT 3: Cut to a low-angle beauty shot: the mouse levitates weightlessly a few centimeters above the dark reflective surface, rotating in a slow, precise orbit; the duotone lighting flares gently along the glassy transparent edges before fading slowly into a sleek silhouette.
Audio: deep pulsing sub-bass room tone, sharp tactile mechanical clicks, a sweeping glassy whoosh on cuts, and a rising electronic swell that resolves to near-silence on the final fade.

High-fashion editorial film, luxurious slow motion throughout, soft gradient studio sky. 
MUSIC & SFX: a cinematic score fusing deep taiko drums, shimmering koto plucks and modern sub-bass drives the film

SHOT 1: beside her, the mask hangs BROKEN — shattered into the floating shard formation of <Picture 2>, every kintsugi piece suspended and slowly rotating in place, the gold seams between them dim and waiting. She turns her eyes to it.
SHOT 2: THE ASSEMBLY, with enormous energy — the gold seams IGNITE, arcs of molten light leaping shard to shard like welding fire, and the pieces snap together one by one, accelerating from slow to rapid-fire, each snap flaring gold, molten droplets spinning off, the surrounding liquid ribbons shuddering with shockwave ripples — until the final shard slams home and the whole mask fuses, its kintsugi veins blazing.
SHOT 3: the golden dragon of <Picture 3> SWOOPS through the frame in one huge serpentine fly-through — red glass antlers first, its coils wrapping the space around her and the mask, scales throwing golden light, its wake dragging the crimson liquid into a spiral behind it.
SHOT 4: in the dragon's wake the mask magnetically RIPS across the air onto her face — a fast, hard, perfectly straight pull — seating with a deep flare as every gold crack lights, and glowing kintsugi veins spread from the mask's edge down her neck and across the sunset jacket, embroidery igniting thread by thread.
SHOT 5: she descends and lands softly ON the dark liquid wave, snapping into a poised warrior stance and holding it like a lookbook frame — the dragon coiled behind her shoulder, both liquids spiraling upward around her into a double helix. Held editorial poster frame as the camera settles.
Use <Picture 1>, <Picture 2>, <Picture 3> as reference images. 

Vibrant fisheye product commercial, hyper-saturated summer light, the woman from <Picture 1> in a yellow raincoat crouched by a jungle waterfall holding a rainbow-gradient soda can toward the lens, condensation dripping.
MUSIC: an upbeat tropical house track drives the entire film — punchy kick drum, bright steel-drum plucks, warm bass groove.

CUT 1 : the fisheye hero frame — as she looks into the lens, GIANT BOLD TYPOGRAPHY stamps across the background behind her, one word per beat: "STAY" then "HYDRATED" — massive clean white block letters spanning the whole scene, curving with the fisheye distortion, sitting behind her but in front of the waterfall. She reaches her opposite hand towards the can and hooks a finger under the tab.
TRANSITION: extreme close-up of the tab — it OPENS with a crisp CLICK-hiss, and exactly on the click the fisheye lens iris shutters closed to black, like a camera blinking.
CUT 2: the iris reopens on a new POV — the can EXTREMELY distorted in the foreground, huge and warped by the fisheye, she smiles and dumps the liquid out of the can onto the floor, droplets scattering weightlessly, sunlight refracting rainbow through the stream, the waterfall soft behind her.
TRANSITION: she lowers the can and one fat droplet falls toward the lens, filling the frame —
CUT 3: through the droplet into the final wide: the rainbow can floating upright and serene in the turquoise waterfall pool, label facing camera, bobbing gently in the mist, the waterfall thundering softly behind — and "STAY COMFY" shimmering as a reflection on the water's surface beside it. Hold the product hero frame.
Crisp, joyful, premium product-ad energy. Fisheye distortion in every shot.

Getting H3 to run well on consumer hardware took significant machine learning engineering. We found that the model's modulation weights (~40% of the total parameters) could be pruned and replaced with a functionally equivalent lookup table, dramatically shrinking the memory footprint with no loss in output quality.

On top of that, the weights ship with an accurate and efficient int8 convrot quantization, and custom kernels reduce the peak VRAM use during inference.

The result gives a total memory footprint reduced by 66%, from 123.6 GB in full precision to 42.5 GB with the smallest models variants. Combining this with our dynamic VRAM offloading enables a next-generation 2K video model to run locally on a GPU like the RTX 3060.

Update ComfyUI to the latest version 0.30.0 or go to Comfy Cloud

Download the workflows below, or find them in the template library.

Download MiniMax H3 I2V Workflow

Download MiniMax H3 R2V Workflow

Download MiniMax H3 T2V Workflow

Follow the note in the workflow to download the models and save them in the correct model directory.

Write your prompt, connect any frame or reference inputs, and run.

Model weights: 🤗 Comfy-Org/MiniMax-H3

As always, enjoy creating!

No posts

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

16. Twenty Years of Pandoc

Source: https://pandoc.org/twenty-years-of-pandoc.html
Site: Pandoc
Submitter: fiddlosopher (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-08-03 15:04 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 243 points · 29 comments
Length: 4.1K words (~18 min read)
Language: en

On August 3, 2006, I uploaded the first version of pandoc to my website, releasing it under the free GPL license. Pandoc 0.1 consisted of about 3000 lines of Haskell code, with no dependencies aside from GHC’s standard library. It could convert Markdown, reStructuredText, HTML, and LaTeX documents into any of these formats, plus RTF or S5. I had no idea at the time that this would just be the first of over two hundred releases over the next twenty years; that the project would become the most popular program written in Haskell; that I would spend countless hours on bug-fixes, improvement, and project management; that I would collaborate with programmers in many other countries; that pandoc would come to support over fifty document formats; that it would allow automatic generation of citations and bibliographies; that it would become integrated into academic writing tools like Quarto and Jupyter Notebook; that it would be installed on millions of computers around the world.

How did this happen? I want to take advantage of pandoc’s birthday to tell the story of the project, as best I can remember it.

John MacFarlane
August 2, 2026

Prehistory

People often ask: Why is pandoc written in Haskell? There could have been good answers to this question: Haskell is a very good language for writing this kind of application. But in fact, I didn’t decide to write a document converter, then decide to use Haskell for it. I decided to use Haskell, and then decided to write a document converter in it.

I had heard about Haskell from the blog of a philosophical logician friend, Greg Restall. Of an introductory book on Haskell, he said: “I’m glad that this wasn’t the textbook in my introductory computer science course, long ago in 1986. If it were, I may have fallen in love with computing and never become a philosopher” (consequently.org).

Intrigued by this (and not heeding Restall’s warning about the potential effects on my future philosophical productivity), I read A Gentle Introduction to Haskell to get a basic understanding of the language. But the only way to really learn a programming language is to write something in it. I saw that Haskell was good for writing parsers and compilers, and it came with a really nice parser combinator library (parsec), so I decided to write a Markdown parser.

At that time, there were implementations of Markdown in Perl, Python, Ruby, and PHP; they all transformed Markdown directly to HTML through a sequence of regex transformations. Pandoc took a different approach. It parsed the Markdown using parser combinators and produced a real abstract syntax tree (AST), which it could then render to HTML or another format. This was a more reliable architecture (avoiding many quirks of the regex versions). It was also a more extensible one: by writing N parsers (“readers”) and M renderers (“writers”), one could support N × M conversions. Soon I added a reader for reStructuredText, because I kept a lot of my lecture notes and handouts in that format. And I added a writer for LaTeX, because I wanted to be able to produce PDFs. Then I added a writer for Markdown, so I could start to convert my reStructuredText notes to Markdown. And from there the project just snowballed.

Thus, a project that started out as nothing more than the product of procrastination was nurtured by the joy of writing in Haskell and by its increasing usefulness for my own academic work.

First releases (2006–8)

In August 3, 2006, I decided to make the source code available on my website. By now pandoc supported HTML, LaTeX, RST, and Markdown as input and output formats, and RTF as an output format; also PDF via LaTeX.

I made no attempts to advertise the project, other than emailing two friends. This was before social media (which I’ve never used anyway), before GitHub, and before Hackage, the Haskell package repository. But apparently some people stumbled across it on my website and started using it. In October I was contacted by a Turkish developer, Recai Oktaş, who was trying to get certified as a Debian developer and wanted to package pandoc for Debian linux. So I worked with him to do that. This was a great learning experience for me and it greatly increased the visibility of the project.

During 2007, I continued to improve pandoc, largely guided by my own needs. Version 0.3 added the DocBook writer and the now-standard syntax for footnotes in Markdown. Version 0.4 added support for Markdown tables, definition lists, super/subscript, strikeout, and enhanced ordered lists, as well as writers for groff man pages and ConTeXt. This was the first release to go on the Hackage Haskell package repository, which was started in 2007. The Hackage archive and the new cabal-install tool, which automatically resolved and fetched dependencies, opened up the possibility of depending on external packages.

Pandoc 1 (2008–17)

Pandoc 1.0 was released in September 2008, with new writers for MediaWiki, GNU Texinfo (contributed by Peter Wang), OpenDocument (contributed by Andrea Rossato), ODT, and delimited code blocks (now called “fenced”) with automatic syntax highlighting. Support for ODT requires the ability to create a zip archive, and at the time there was no Haskell package for this, so I created one (zip-archive), using the excellent binary package for binary parsing and serialization. Support for syntax highlighting required a syntax highlighting library, which also did not exist in Haskell. For this, I wrote highlighting-kate, which parsed the XML syntax definitions used by the Kate text editor and turned them into Haskell code highlighters. This allowed pandoc to support a large number of syntaxes right off the bat. This version also contained support for automatic generation of citations and a bibliography using CSL style, using Andrea Rossato’s citeproc-hs library.

Throughout this period, I was involved in discussions with other Markdown implementers on the (now defunct) markdown-discuss mailing list. The syntax for delimited code blocks, which pandoc supported long before GitHub popularized fenced code blocks, was worked out in collaboration with Michel Fortin, the maintainer of PHP Markdown Extra. I took care when adding extensions to pandoc’s Markdown to pay attention to prior art, for example copying PHP Markdown Extra’s definition list syntax. During this period, I also became aware of many ambiguities in Markdown’s syntax—a situation I would later try to improve in the commonmark project.

The next big change to pandoc came in version 1.4 (released in January 2010), which introduced a flexible template system, replacing hard-coded headers and making pandoc’s output much more customizable.

In 2010, we moved from Google Code to GitHub, which would do even more to increase the visibility of the project. Further releases in 2010 and 2011 added support for EPUB output, Org-mode output (due to Puneeth Chaganti), and Textile input (due to Paul Rivier). Pandoc also gained support for converting TeX math to MathML (for DocBook or HTML), via my texmath library.

Pandoc 1.9, published in 2012, finally made it possible to produce Word docx output. To handle the equations properly, I added support for Word’s OMML format to texmath. This release also added an AsciiDoc writer and support for Beamer and DZSlides, and in 1.9.3 we gained a DocBook reader (with contributions from Mauro Bieg, who became a long-time contributor).

In 2013, we focused on several features that made pandoc much more flexible and customizable. The first was a fine-grained system of Markdown “extensions,” allowing support for the many variants of Markdown that were then proliferating. The second was the ability to include YAML metadata blocks in Markdown, with arbitrary structured fields that populate template variables. The third was the ability to create custom writers in Lua, allowing ad hoc output formats to be supported by users. The fourth was the introduction of JSON filters—user-created programs that transform a JSON serialization of the pandoc AST, allowing the document to be customized between the parsing phase and the rendering phase. Citation processing was moved from the core of pandoc into an external filter, pandoc-citeproc.

This era saw the addition of reveal.js, EPUB v3, DokuWiki, and FictionBook2 output; OPML input and output; and Haddock and MediaWiki input. Notable contributors include David Lazar (Haddock) and Sergey Astanin (FictionBook2).

The year 2014 saw the arrival of three new contributors who would go on to make many contributions to the project. Albert Krewinkel added support for Org-mode input; Jesse Rosenthal added a Word docx reader (complete with track-changes awareness); and Matthew Pickering (at the time a student at Oxford whom I “advised” as a Google Summer of Code Student) added support for EPUB and Txt2Tags as input formats. Supporting EPUB input required being able to convert MathML equations, so Pickering also worked on texmath. We were in very different time zones, and I remember waking up every morning to find all the work Pickering had done during the night. (Pickering has gone on to become one of the core maintainers of the ghc compiler.) All of these contributions were released in pandoc 1.13, together with Clare Macrae’s DokuWiki writer.

Since 2012, I had been involved in a working group that aimed to produce an unambiguous specification of Markdown’s syntax, initiated by Jeff Atwood and including representatives from GitHub, Reddit, and Stack Overflow. The group held intensive discussions in 2012, which petered out in 2013. I still believed in the project and didn’t want to let the work we’d done go to waste, so I sat down in August 2014, before the academic year began, and wrote up a spec for Markdown, as well as parsers in JavaScript and C. I sent the draft spec to John Gruber for comment and did not get a response, so a few weeks later we posted the spec. At this point, Gruber strongly objected and demanded that we not call the project “Standard Markdown,” so we changed the name to “commonmark.” The project has been a success, in that with a few exceptions, most Markdown processors implement the commonmark spec for their core rules. (Commonmark does not concern itself with extensions.)

Pandoc 1.14 (2015) added support for commonmark and a number of extensions (at first via bindings to the C library libcmark, but later, in 2020, via my Haskell packages commonmark, commonmark-extensions, and commonmark-pandoc). I intend eventually to replace pandoc’s legacy Markdown parser with a commonmark core, but there are still a few key extensions that have not been implemented, so pandoc users must still choose between parsing their documents as markdown (Markdown with pandoc’s extensions) or as gfm or commonmark or commonmark_x (commonmark with a number of extensions). Ironically, although I was the author of the commonmark spec, pandoc still uses a pre-commonmark Markdown parser!

The next year brought some important changes in the pandoc AST, with the addition of image and link attributes, a SoftBreak element (enabling pandoc to preserve line breaks from the original source, or wrap, depending on a command line setting), and a LineBlock element. MarLinn added an ODT reader, Chris Forster added a TEI writer, and Ivo Clarysse added support for DocBook 5.

Pandoc 2 (2017–23)

Pandoc 2.0 (released in 2017) brought some big architectural changes, worked out in collaboration with Jesse Rosenthal. In the past, most of pandoc’s readers (parsers) and writers (renderers) had been “pure” (that is, they had Haskell types that prevented them from having any side effects, including I/O operations). But some formats needed to be able to do I/O for a fully faithful conversion. (For example, reStructuredText has a syntax for including files, so the parser needs to be able to read files; in some other formats, images require explicit sizes, so a renderer has to be able to read image files, perhaps fetching them using HTTP, and determine their sizes.) We designed a system that allowed pandoc readers and writers to run in any instance of the PandocMonad typeclass, and we provided both a pure instance (which could be used for controlled testing, and in situations where we wanted to forbid I/O) and an instance that allowed I/O operations. The system also provided a way to handle images included as resources in formats like docx or EPUB.

The other big change was the introduction of Lua filters: filters running in an embedded Lua interpreter and operating directly on the pandoc AST, requiring no software other than pandoc itself and offering far better performance than JSON filters. This was made possible by the massive efforts of Albert Krewinkel, building on the hslua, a Haskell-Lua bridge library.

In addition, pandoc 2.0 introduced the raw attribute syntax in pandoc’s Markdown, and support for GitHub-flavored Markdown, Emacs Muse (Alexander Krotov), TikiWiki, Vimwiki (Yuchen Pei), Creole (Sascha Wilde), groff ms, and JATS. The old highlighting-kate was replaced by the new skylighting, which offered better performance and more accurate interpretation of KDE syntax definitions. A PowerPoint writer (due to Jesse Rosenthal) soon followed, as well as support for FictionBook2 (Krotov) and man (Yan Pashkovsky and me) as input formats.

In 2018, the project received a generous $100,000 donation from Handshake, which we used over the next five years to give small stipends to the most active maintainers.

In 2019, support for ipynb (Jupyter notebooks) was added, allowing pandoc to be used in data science workflows, and Jira wiki markup was supported as an output format. With pandoc 2.8, it became possible to specify collections of default options using defaults files.

Users had long complained that pandoc’s model of a table was too restrictive, not even supporting row and colspans. After extensive discussion of what was needed in a table format, Christian Despres designed the new types for tables and modified all of the readers and writers to use it (a big job).

At this point pandoc had supported citation resolution for many years, by means of the pandoc-citeproc filter that used Andrea Rossato’s citeproc-hs. This was slow and somewhat buggy, and Rossato had long since disappeared from the scene, so I wrote a Haskell citeproc library from scratch, using just the CSL spec and test cases. Pandoc 2.11 depended on this library and offered far better citation support: faster, more faithful to CSL, and with no need for an external filter. In order to get citations to sort properly, I had to write a another library (unicode-collation) implementing the Unicode Collation algorithm in pure Haskell.

During this era Pandoc came to support conversions between bibliography database formats: BibTeX, BibLaTeX, and CSL JSON, EndNote XML and RIS; conversion from CSV and TSV to pandoc table formats; conversion to Markua; and conversion from RTF. With pandoc 2.15 a --sandbox option was added, which guarantees that pandoc’s parsers and renderers have no I/O side effects. (This was possible because of the PandocMonad abstraction we added back in pandoc 2.0.) With pandoc 2.16.2 it became possible to write custom readers in Lua to complement the custom Lua writers that had been added in 2013. And with pandoc 2.19.1 it became possible to run pandoc as a web server exporting an API.

Pandoc 3 (2023–present)

By 2023, pandoc had become a very big, monolithic project. Some users wanted a leaner program, one that didn’t include a full web server and Lua interpreter. So with the pandoc 3.0 release, we split pandoc into four parts: pandoc remained the Haskell library, pandoc-lua-engine brought the Lua integration, and pandoc-server exposed the library over HTTP as an API. The command-line program, now in the pandoc-cli package, could optionally be compiled without server or Lua support. We also introduced a native Figure element in the AST and a “chunked HTML” writer for multi-chapter HTML books and documentation.

The first versions of Typst, a modern LaTeX competitor with incremental compilation, were released in 2023. I wanted to help the project by providing an easy on- and off-ramp, making it easy for others to try Typst. It turned out that creating a Typst reader for pandoc required implementing an interpreter for a fairly full-featured programming language. The result was the typst package on Hackage. Typst support was added in pandoc 3.1.3.

In 2018 I had published an essay “Beyond Markdown” in which I described the six features of Markdown that I thought had created the most difficulties, both for writing a spec and for implementations, and I explained how I thought these flaws could be fixed in a future Markdown-like light markup syntax. In 2022, I published a syntax description for such a syntax, djot, together with code in Lua, JavaScript and (later) Haskell. Pandoc 3.1.12, published in 2024, added djot as both an input and output format.

Subsequent releases in 2024 and 2025 saw the addition of an ANSI writer for formatted terminal output and a reader for the mdoc and POD formats (all due to Evan Silberman), a reader and writer for an XML representation of the pandoc AST (massifrg), a vimdoc writer (reptee), a PowerPoint reader (Anton Antich), an Excel spreadsheet reader (Anton Antich), and a BBCode writer (reptee), and an AsciiDoc reader (supported by my asciidoc package).

Pandoc 3.9, released in February 2026, included support for compiling pandoc to WASM, which allowed a full-featured version of pandoc to run in the browser. Most of the key work was done by TerrorJack. The GUI interface “pandoc for the people” was designed with the help of Claude Opus.

I still work on pandoc almost every day. Most of this work doesn’t involve the kind of new features or architectural changes I have focused on in this narrative. Mostly it consists in fixing small bugs, making tiny improvements, reviewing issues and pull requests, repairing infrastructure (continuous integration, building releases, code signing, website), improving documentation, and engaging in discussions with maintainers and users.

Statistics

Pandoc currently supports 51 input formats and 76 output formats, thus 3876 distinct conversions (not counting the variants that are possible by adjusting extensions).

The four core packages (pandoc, pandoc-lua-engine, pandoc-server, pandoc-cli) consist of 85,684 lines of Haskell code, not including tests. If one includes dependencies that exist mainly for the sake of pandoc (texmath, typst, djot, commonmark, asciidoc, citeproc, and the pandoc/Lua interface packages), this number approximately doubles.

On GitHub, 7346 issues have been resolved.

Over 600 people have contributed to pandoc over the years. The top twenty contributors (measured by numbers of source lines changed) are:

Contributor Lines changed Years active
John MacFarlane 372,317 2006–
Albert Krewinkel 77,136 2014–
Jesse Rosenthal 39,664 2014–
Christian Despres 15,314 2019–2021
Alexander Krotov 8,657 2017–2019
Matthew Pickering 6,919 2014–2015
MarLinn 4,142 2015
Evan Silberman 3,478 2024–
Nikolay Yakimov 3,362 2014–2020
Mauro Bieg 3,044 2012–2020
Emily Bourke 2,196 2021
Yan Pas 2,035 2018
reptee 1,732 2025
Anton Antich 1,552 2025
massifrg 1,171 2025–
Nathan Gass 1,011 2010–2011
Tuong Nguyen Manh 801 2022–
Joseph C. Sible 767 2020–2024
Clare Macrae 759 2013–2015
Sergey Astanin 718 2011–2012

Here are the twenty contributors who have contributed over the longest spans of time:

Contributor Years active
John MacFarlane 2006–2026
Albert Krewinkel 2014–2026
Andrew Dunning 2015–2026
Nikolay Yakimov 2014–2025
Thomas Hodgson 2015–2026
Mauro Bieg 2012–2022
Kolen Cheung 2016–2025
Pablo Rodríguez 2014–2023
Pascal Wagler 2019–2026
Felix Yan 2016–2023
Sergei Trofimovich 2011–2018
Tristano Ajmone 2017–2024
Frerich Raabe 2015–2022
Salim B 2017–2024
Yihui Xie 2014–2020
Sascha Wilde 2017–2023
Jose Luis Duran 2013–2019
Jesse Rosenthal 2014–2020
John Muccigrosso 2016–2022
Jan Tojnar 2020–2026
Brian Leung 2018–2023

Retrospective: the choice of Haskell

As I noted at the beginning, I didn’t choose Haskell because I judged it to be the best language to use for a project like pandoc. But was it?

It’s hard to answer this confidently, because I’m not very familiar with what would now be the most obvious alternative: Rust. But I have created and maintained significant projects in a number of languages, including Pascal, C, Ruby, and JavaScript/TypeScript. I don’t think I would have been able to manage a project like this in my spare time if it had been written in one of these languages.

Haskell has a number of features that have been very helpful in developing pandoc:

Its algebraic data types give us a very clean, ergonomic representation of a structured document

Its strong type system, which gives you a compiler error if you don’t combine the types of things in the right way, allows one to make big changes to the program with confidence that you’re not breaking anything; the compiler will show you everything that needs to be changed, and when the code compiles, you are very often done. When working with languages without a strong type system, e.g. Python and JavaScript, the lack of these safeguards always make me afraid to make big changes, especially when I am maintaining code long after I’ve written it.

Haskell is a pure language; nothing can have side effects that aren’t explicitly allowed for in the types. If you have a pure function, you know it won’t create a file or delete one or make a web request or launch missiles or change a global variable. This is extremely useful for preventing bugs. In pandoc we also use it to give us a really strong guarantee that, when run in sandbox mode, the readers and writers won’t touch the file system.

The choice of Haskell has also led to a high quality and low volume of contributors (a combination that is good for a project without a lot of resources).

From what I have seen, Rust appears to have many of the good features of Haskell, while producing faster, more memory-efficient, and more compact code. But Haskell still strikes me as more “ergonomic,” better suited to express abstractions, and just closer to the ideal of a language that helps the developer think.

Whither Pandoc

I plan to continue improving pandoc. There are many ways in which it can be improved. But sometimes I wonder how long such a tool will continue to be necessary.

Just as current LLMs can do a very good job translating from one human language to another, they can do a decent job translating from one document format to another. In my small tests, ChatGPT did a good job translating from Markdown to HTML, and a decent (but notably worse) job converting to reStructuredText. My guess is that you could write a document in a light markup language you just had invented, and an LLM could do a decent job guessing your intent and translating it to HTML or another format.

Perhaps, then, in the future, people will no longer have a need for tools like pandoc. As things stand now, though, I think that using pandoc to convert texts has several large advantages over relying on an LLM. The first is ecological; it simply requires far less energy for the same conversion. The second is that pandoc’s output is deterministic; if you convert your text with pandoc, you’ll always get the same result, and you’ll be able to predict what that result is. The third is that, for the moment at least, pandoc’s conversions are going to be more reliable. But that could change in the coming years. Indeed, a time may come when LLMs can produce more reliable conversions than pandoc or anything that works like it.

In designing the commonmark spec, we had the goal of interpreting complex strings in the way that a human would naturally interpret them. This turns out to be quite difficult to achieve: witness the complex rules for emphasis. What we found is that, no matter how complex we made the rules for nested emphasis, it was always possible to come up with cases where the algorithm diverges from the meaning a human would naturally find in the string. In such cases, I would often remark, “until our programs have AI, we are going to have edge cases like this; at some point we have to accept that and stop trying to develop more complex rules.” Interestingly, now we do have tools that can understand (or at least simulate understanding) of the meaning and intent of the text, and can potentially do better at recognizing the formatting intended by the author than any light markup syntax that could be designed.

Whatever the future may bring, I am proud of the 20-year history of this project, which has saved people all over the world countless hours of drudgery. Happy 20th birthday, pandoc!

In honor of this occasion, I have produced some pandoc mugs and stickers:

Coffee mug with conversion diagram
Sticker with pandoc cartoon
Sticker with pandoc logo
Mug with pandoc logo

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

17. Launch HN: Hoplite (YC S26) – Effortlessly deploy cloud coding agents

Source: https://hoplite.sh
Site: Hoplite
Submitter: BenceRed (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-08-03 16:32 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 70 points · 56 comments
Language: en

Hi HN, we’re Bence and Ryan, founders of Hoplite (https://hoplite.sh). Hoplite lets you deploy coding agents in the cloud, with a suite of tools that makes it incredibly easy to QA features. During onboarding, we port over your local setup - sessions, memories, MCP servers, and get your projects ready to run in the cloud.

Here’s a demo: https://youtu.be/bnyktZ_9pjE

We got here after pivoting away from the idea we applied to YC with; AI for retail investing. It ultimately wasn’t a product that we ourselves would use, nor served a customer base that we felt connected to. In reflecting on what we really wanted to do, we realised that we loved talking to founders and developers, and were really opinionated about the specific area of cloud agents. We tried out all the existing solutions, and didn’t find one that A) took good advantage of being in the cloud, and B) was performant and felt good to use.

We’re building a product that we feel reflects what mainstream development will look like in 6-12 months. As models improve, developers will end up reviewing less and less code, and will instead focus on reviewing the product output. That means evaluating new user flows, visually verifying that new features look good, that the API works as expected, that the CLI works on Windows, etc. And doing it while running hundreds of agents concurrently.

On the agent side, we’ve created a custom harness. We spent a lot of time deciding on whether we should use an off the shelf solution like Codex/Claude Code, but ultimately wanted the independence and freedom that came with building it in house. It also means that we can test out completely new features without relying on Anthropic and OpenAI to catch up.

Everything is hosted on AWS, with the exception of: Temporal for durable workflows, Modal for sandboxes, and Planetscale for our database. Our infra decisions were driven by a strong belief that agents are becoming a tier 0 piece of infrastructure, and they need the reliability and security to match that.

You can try it now for free with the code ‘HACKERNEWS’ - we’ve included $100 in free credits, plus you can connect your Codex subscription and use OpenAI models via it. You can see some more details around our pricing at https://hoplite.sh/pricing.

At the moment we’re focusing on optimising two key experiences: onboarding and previews, and would love to hear your feedback on them. And if you find that the agent's performance in certain tasks doesn’t match your expectations, please let us know!

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

18. Celebrating 45 Years of Kermit with the First New C-Kermit Release in 15 Years

Source: https://changelog.complete.org/archives/44456-celebrating-45-years-of-kermit-with-the-first-new-c-kermit-release-in-15-years-and-working-with-a-decades-old-c-codebase
Site: changelog.complete.org
Submitter: roryirvine (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-08-03 17:02 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 160 points · 40 comments
Length: 21 words (~1 min read)
Language: en

Protected by Anubis From Techaro. Made with ❤️ in 🇨🇦.

Mascot design by CELPHASE.

This website is running Anubis version 1.22.0.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

19. Andy Pavlo joins ClickHouse to establish ClickHouse Labs

Source: https://clickhouse.com/blog/andy-pavlo-joins-clickhouse
Site: ClickHouse
Author: Andy Pavlo
Published: 2026-08-03
HN activity: 309 points · 65 comments
Length: 760 words (~4 min read)
Language: en-US

I am excited to announce that I am joining ClickHouse to establish and lead a new research team called ClickHouse Labs. I want to share how it came about and what we plan to do.

I started as a professor in the Computer Science Department at Carnegie Mellon University in 2013. I have spent my career seeking to understand the science of modern database management system (DBMS) internals. I make it a priority to track every new system that comes along, both in industry and academia, to understand their implementations.

I have known about the ClickHouse DBMS since it was first announced as open-source software in June 2016. My initial reaction to this news was that it had to be vaporware because it seemed too good to be true. ClickHouse had features that at the time were only found in a handful of closed-source, commercial analytical DBMSs. For example, ClickHouse was written in C++ and supported vectorized query execution using SIMD in 2016. Most prominent open-source analytical DBMSs in 2016 were JVM-based and did not support SIMD optimizations until years later.

Since then, I have followed ClickHouse's development closely. It has always been a leading system that was highly relevant to our academic research projects. You can even see me wearing my original ClickHouse shirt in my first remote lectures in 2020, when the pandemic forced us to move our database courses online.

Given this history, I was honored when the ClickHouse co-founders invited me to establish this new research group at ClickHouse. The chance to work with one of the strongest engineering teams on the next generation of database technology was an opportunity that I could not pass up. This will be a next-level collaboration like when Killer Mike hooked up with El-P to create a hip-hop supergroup.

The goal of ClickHouse Labs is to establish a best-in-class industry research organization focused on databases. It will not operate as an isolated research organization that throws ideas over the wall to engineering. Instead, we will work closely with ClickHouse engineers, customers, collaborators, and industry partners to develop and disseminate new ideas that keep ClickHouse at the bleeding edge.

We will also work with ClickHouse's PostgreSQL team to help establish its burgeoning managed service as a market leader in performance and reliability. PostgreSQL and ClickHouse serve different workload requirements, but the combination gives us a broad foundation for investigating both transactional and analytical database problems.

Our objective is straightforward but ambitious: conduct research with scientific value and then help transform the best ideas into technology that matters to users. I want to achieve the same level of impact associated with pioneering industry research organizations, such as IBM Research and Microsoft Research. Those groups demonstrated that industry laboratories can simultaneously advance fundamental computer science, influence commercial products, and train generations of database researchers. That is the tradition we want to continue.

The ClickHouse team already has an exceptional record of publishing deep technical material about its work. Since the establishment of the company in 2021, its engineers have produced detailed articles that explain the DBMS's implementation. There is also the 2024 VLDB paper that describes ClickHouse's core architecture. These works are so thorough that I assign them as readings to my students at Carnegie Mellon. At the same time, there is a backlog of interesting ideas and optimizations that the ClickHouse engineering team has explored but has not yet had the time to validate fully and push into production. One of my immediate priorities is to help accelerate this process. We will then use that as a springboard to explore new ideas that push ClickHouse even further.

One larger question we will investigate is how DBMSs like ClickHouse and PostgreSQL fit into emerging AI and agentic technologies. There are two sides to this problem. The first is determining what a DBMS should look like to better support agents. The second side is determining how agents can improve and automate the development of DBMSs themselves. Everything is on the table: new hardware, new algorithms, new data structures, new execution strategies, and new ways of building and operating DBMS software. Although I do not have answers to these problems yet (this is why it is research), the one thing I am certain about is that ClickHouse's solid relational model foundation positions it well to evolve alongside these data-intensive workloads.

I have spent my career studying how database systems are built and helping train the people who build them. With ClickHouse Labs, we now have the opportunity to create an organization devoted to advancing both.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

20. Windows XP 2002 for the Itanium: Unbridled rage

Source: https://virtuallyfun.com/2026/08/03/windows-xp-2002-for-the-itanium-unbridled-rage/
Site: virtuallyfun.com
Submitter: jandeboevrie (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-08-03 22:04 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 103 points · 54 comments
Length: 1.3K words (~6 min read)
Language: en-US

Windows XP ia64 build 2600 in all it’s glory

This is exciting news, there is a fork of Qemu that has workable Itanium Merced emulation, and it’s good enough to run Windows XP/2003! Enter Malte Kuhlmann‘s Qemu fork of syunnPC‘s AI Itanium infused Qemu fork.

I’m sure at some point there will be some kind of merger. As always things move fast when they are interesting.

At any rate, I had nothing but incredible issues getting this to build. I should have written the steps down for the Qemu Alpha for that can run Alph64 Windows! … .however I didn’t so I kind of lost (hopefully temperarily) the recipies needed.

Instead, I’m jumping back to my mac mini, as of course macOS is just enough UNIX to be useful but mainstream enough to have real application. And part of the reason is that I wanted to build the firmware as I had a feeling that this was some important ‘lockstep’ thing I was missing.

Building cross compilers isn’t that new for me or this blog. As a matter of fact, I’ve got two at the moment from other various projects:

jsteve@Jasons-Mac-mini gcc % /usr/local/os2/bin/i386-pc-linux-gnuaout-gcc -v
Reading specs from /usr/local/os2/lib/gcc-lib/i386-pc-linux-gnuaout/2.8.1/specs
gcc version 2.8.1
jsteve@Jasons-Mac-mini gcc % /usr/local/i586-linux2/bin/i586-linux-gcc -v
Reading specs from /usr/local/i586-linux2/lib/gcc-lib/i586-linux/2.8.1/specs
gcc version 2.8.1

Since GCC 2.8.1 seems to run ‘okay’ as a macOS arm64 binary to cross compile to the i386… But that’s not for here. Since this is a ‘modern’ build, there was no need for any funny business. Things just worked. Surprisngly, I know. Obviously for people years later this won’t hold true.

Binutils

Nothing much to see or say, just used binutils 2.46.0, and it configured/built out of the box. Nice.

../binutils-2.46.0/configure --target=ia64-linux-gnu --prefix=/usr/local/ia64-linux-gnu

GCC

This is a bit weird as, the Itanium is not a dying platform, but a very dead one. Although thanks to a single user, René Rebe keeping the flame alive, I just chose to use the mentioned version, 15 to see if it still works. Spoiler, it did!

Building on macOS also means I do have homebrew installed, and that instead of building so many dependancies from hand, I could just brew the dependancies for GCC. That did make configuring it a little more involved.

../gcc-15.3.0/configure \
  --target=ia64-linux-gnu \
  --prefix=/usr/local/ia64-linux-gnu \
  --disable-bootstrap \
  --disable-multilib \
  --enable-languages=c \
  --with-gmp=/opt/homebrew \
  --with-mpfr=/opt/homebrew \
  --with-mpc=/opt/homebrew \
  CPPFLAGS="-I/opt/homebrew/include" \
  LDFLAGS="-L/opt/homebrew/lib"

There is some weird duplicate define of fdopen that throws off the build, thanks to zlib. I know wtf.

In file included from ../../gcc-15.3.0/zlib/zutil.c:10:
In file included from ../../gcc-15.3.0/zlib/gzguts.h:21:
In file included from /Library/Developer/CommandLineTools/SDKs/MacOSX.sdk/usr/include/stdio.h:61:
/Library/Developer/CommandLineTools/SDKs/MacOSX.sdk/usr/include/_stdio.h:322:7: error:
expected ')'
322 | FILE *fdopen(int, const char *) __DARWIN_ALIAS_STARTING(__MAC_10_6, _...
|   ^
../../gcc-15.3.0/zlib/zutil.h:140:33: note: expanded from
macro 'fdopen'
140 | # define fdopen(fd,mode) NULL /* No fdopen() */

The fix, of course is to comment out line 140 of zutil.h

After that, it’ll mostly build, (remember to have the binutils binary in your path!
export PATH=/usr/local/ia64-linux-gnu/bin:$PATH )

It’ll complain about missing pthread as it want’s to build all the Linux stuff, but we don’t care.

In file included from ../../../gcc-15.3.0/libgcc/gthr.h:157,
from ../../../gcc-15.3.0/libgcc/libgcov-interface.c:27:
./gthr-default.h:35:10: fatal error: pthread.h: No such file or directory
35 | #include <pthread.h>
| ^~~~~~~~~~~
compilation terminated.

I did have to manually copy libgcc.a however.

cp ia64-linux-gnu/libgcc/libgcc.a /usr/local/ia64-linux-gnu/ia64-linux-gnu/lib/libgcc.a'.

Then just cd to the gcc directory and run a make install.

And with that, I’ve now got an Itanium cross compiler, to build the firmware!.

jsteve@Jasons-Mac-mini gcc % /usr/local/ia64-linux-gnu/bin/ia64-linux-gnu-gcc -v
Using built-in specs.
COLLECT_GCC=/usr/local/ia64-linux-gnu/bin/ia64-linux-gnu-gcc
COLLECT_LTO_WRAPPER=/usr/local/ia64-linux-gnu/libexec/gcc/ia64-linux-gnu/15.3.0/lto-wrapper
Target: ia64-linux-gnu
Configured with: ../gcc-15.3.0/configure --target=ia64-linux-gnu --prefix=/usr/local/ia64-linux-gnu --disable-bootstrap --disable-multilib --enable-languages=c --with-gmp=/opt/homebrew --with-mpfr=/opt/homebrew --with-mpc=/opt/homebrew CPPFLAGS=-I/opt/homebrew/include LDFLAGS=-L/opt/homebrew/lib
Thread model: posix
Supported LTO compression algorithms: zlib
gcc version 15.3.0 (GCC)

Neat!

Qemu

I’ve defiantly homebrewed some dependencies in the past, but I’ll be damned if I know what exactly.

First get the source (as of this moment, July 31st 2026)

git clone --branch merced --single-branch https://github.com/makuhlmann/qemu-system-ia64.git

Then make a build directory, as we don’t build in the source!

Configuring on macOS is of course…. weird.

../qemu-system-ia64/configure \
  --disable-qom-cast-debug \
  --disable-stack-protector \
  --extra-cflags='-O2 -fno-stack-protector -fzero-call-used-regs=skip -ftrivial-auto-var-init=uninitialized' \
--disable-guest-agent-msi --disable-werror --enable-slirp \
--target-list=ia64-softmmu --disable-sdl  --python=/usr/bin/python3

Since I’m on macOS, I wanted to use the coca backend, so I don’t care about GTK+ or SDL.

From there it was just a matter of running make… I did a -j6 to use six cores it tore through the source, stopped after a few minutes with some weird error, I just typed in ‘make’ again and it finished…. Not sure what it’s hangup was, and I really don’t care.

For this installation I’m using this image:

5.1.2600.0.xpclient.010817-1148_ia64fre_client-professional_retail_en-us-WXPIFPP_EN.iso

It’s got a MD5 checksum of : 604ee3141ed6a34391a89a33c0019702

As there are many versions of XP Itanium, but it’s so easy to get the wrong one.

Installing

Now for the ‘hard’ part. Getting this to actually install.

First create a hard disk, say 20GB ?

./merced-build/qemu-img create -f vmdk ia64-xp64-merced.vmdk 20G
Formatting 'ia64-xp64-merced.vmdk', fmt=vmdk size=21474836480 compat6=off hwversion=undefined

This is what I use, thanks to Roy Tam!

merced-build/qemu-system-ia64-unsigned \
    -bios ./merced-build/roms/ia64-firmware/ia64-firmware.bin \
    -machine ia64-vpc,i8042=off,nvram=ia64fw-nvram-merced.bin \
    -cdrom "5.1.2600.0.xpclient.010817-1148_ia64fre_client-professional_retail_en-us-WXPIFPP_EN.iso" \
    -hda "ia64-xp64-merced.vmdk" \
    -accel tcg,thread=multi,tb-size=2048 -smp 1 -m 1536 \
    -vga ati -cpu merced \
    -display cocoa,zoom-to-fit=on \
    -nic user,model=i82557a,hostfwd=tcp::3386-:3389

And with that, it’ll launch into the EFI firmware
Itanium EFI Firmware

Being greeted by the firmware image, is again confirmation that we can indeed cross compile the Itanium firmware with our GCC cross compiler!

And then the CD-ROM will prompt to hit any key to boot from CD
Press any key to boot from CD-ROM…..

At this point I should mention that Qemu doesn’t scale well with high resolution monitors. But since we enabled the zoom-to-fit option, we can resize the window so we can read it, or just maximize it.

From here it’s basically a normal XP install

Unlike the RISC of old, the creation of the system partition is now handled by the install program, like all the other EFI/UEFI platforms.

Which I have to say, is a nice change.

From there just select the remainder of the disk, I format mine as NTFS (quick) and from there it’ll start copying the files. For me this completed in under 5 minutes.

A quick reboot and you’ll now be in the graphical installer.

From here it could crash or lock hard. In that case, re-create the hard disk image, and re-try the installation. It took me 5 attempts. Although I should mention that I never could complete a single install using syunn’s fork.
XGCJ6-Q6XGJ-BQ2QQ-BRWJ7-67X7W

And when asked, I just chose the default networking settings.

In prior builds this would fail and/or hard lock at various moments, with an overall success rate of 1/5. Not the best. Although I’ve only installed XP 2600 once today, and it was a 1:1 rate in 30-40 minutes, so I guess I can say that as always, things are in motion, and getting way better!

On my m4, it took about another 30 minutes, and then It’s done.

And there we go!

I’d highly suggest setting up RDP, and using a remote desktop application, as the arrow keys currently tend to repeat far too often making typing a chore. Plus it’ll fix any coca video scaling issues.

Future?

Well what about the 2003 version of Windows XP?

Namely: 5.2.3790.0.srv03_rtm.030324-2048_ia64fre_client-professional_retail_en-us-NRMPIFPP_EN.iso

Using the same config, different ISO, yeah it installed in about 40 minutes on my m4 Mac Mini.
Windows Server build 2462

Why, even the earliest Windows Server Itanium build that’s available, 5.1.2462 installs and runs! Of course, install it prior to August 2001.

What about other operating systems?

As of now I don’t think anything else works. Monterey didn’t do much, nor HPUX, VMS etc.

Where to go from here? Compilers! and whatnot. Needless to say, since this is 1st gen Itanium, all the stuff I’d built when I had an Itanium won’t run as it was Itanium2. Don’t you love broken binary compatiblity?

This is why 80386 is just as relevant in 2026 as it was in 1987.

Of course, Apple will break it, just because they can.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

21. Why did we wait so long for the bicycle? (2019)

Source: https://blog.rootsofprogress.org/why-did-we-wait-so-long-for-the-bicycle
Site: The Roots of Progress
Submitter: frozenseven (Hacker News)
Published: 2019-07-14
HN activity: 41 points · 37 comments
Length: 3.0K words (~13 min read)

The bicycle, as we know it today, was not invented until the late 1800s. Yet it was a simple mechanical invention. It would seem to require no brilliant inventive insight, and certainly no scientific background.

Why, then, wasn’t it invented much earlier?

I asked this question on Twitter, and read some discussion on Quora. People proposed many hypotheses, including:

Technology factors. Metalworking improved a lot in the 1800s: we got improved iron refining and eventually cheap steel, better processes for shaping metal, and ability to make parts like hollow tubes. Wheel technology improved: wire-spoke (aka tension-spoked) wheels replaced heavier designs; vulcanized rubber (1839) was needed for tires; inflatable tires weren’t invented until 1887. Chains, gears, and ball bearings are all crucial parts that require advanced manufacturing techniques for precision and cost.

Design iteration. Early bicycles were inconvenient and dangerous. The first version didn’t even have pedals. Some versions didn’t have steering, and could only be turned by leaning. (!) The famous “penny-farthing” design, with its huge front wheel, made it impossible to balance with your feet, was prone to tipping forward on a hard stop, and generally left the rider high in the air, all of which increased risk of injury. It took decades of iteration to get to a successful bicycle model.

Quality of roads. Roads in the 1800s and earlier were terrible by modern standards. Roads were often dirt, rutted from the passage of many carts, turning muddy in the rain. Macadam paving, which gave smooth surfaces to roads, wasn’t invented until about 1820. City roads at the time were paved with cobblestones, which were good for horses but too bumpy for bicycles. (The unevenness was apparently a feature, assisting in the runoff of sewage—leading one Quora answer to claim that the construction of city sewers was what opened the door to bicycles.)

Competition from horses. Horses were a common and accepted mode of transportation at the time. They could deal with all kinds of roads. They could carry heavy loads. Who then needs a bicycle? In this connection, it has been claimed that the bicycle was invented in response to food shortages due to the “Year without a Summer”, an 1816 weather event caused by the volcanic explosion of Mt. Tambora the year earlier, which darkened skies and lowered temperatures in many parts of the world. The agricultural crisis caused horses as well as people to starve, which led to some horses being slaughtered for food, and made the remaining ones more expensive to feed. This could have motivated the search for alternatives.

General economic growth. Multiple commenters pointed out the need for a middle class to provide demand for such an invention. If all you have are a lot of poor peasants and a few aristocrats (who, by the way, have horses, carriages, and drivers), there isn’t much of a market for bicycles. This is more plausible when you realize that bicycles were more of a hobby for entertainment before they became a practical means of transportation.

Cultural factors. Maybe there was just a general lack of interest in useful mechanical inventions until a certain point in history? But when did this change, and why?

These are all good hypotheses. But some of them start to buckle under pressure:

The quality of roads is relevant, but not really the answer. Bicycles can be ridden on dirt roads or sidewalks (although the latter led to run-ins with pedestrians and made bicycles unpopular among the public at first). And historically, roads didn’t improve until after bicycles became common—indeed it seems that it was in part the cyclists who called for the improvement of roads.

I don’t think horses explain it either. A bicycle, from what I’ve read, was cheaper to buy than a horse, and it was certainly cheaper to maintain (if nothing else, you don’t have to feed a bicycle). And it turns out that inventors were interested in the problem of human-powered vehicles, dispensing with the need for horses, for a long time before the modern bicycle. Even Karl von Drais, who invented the first two-wheeled human-powered vehicle after the Year without a Summer, had been working on the problem for years before that.

Technology factors are more convincing to me. They may have been necessary for bicycles to become practical and cheap enough to take off. But they weren’t needed for early experimentation. Frames can be built of wood. Wheels can be rimmed with metal. Gears can be omitted. Chains can be replaced with belts; some early designs even used treadles instead of pedals, and at least one design drove the wheels with levers, as on a steam locomotive.

So what’s the real explanation?

To understand this, I dug into the history of the bicycle.

The concept of a human-powered vehicle goes back many centuries. The earliest reference I have found is to Venetian engineer Giovanni Fontana, who in the early 1400s described a four-wheeled carriage powered by a driver pulling on a loop of rope connected by gears to the wheels (it’s unclear if he ever even attempted to build such a machine; Fontana sketched a lot of strange things).
Giovanni Fontana's self-driving carriage

Another early concept was described in the book Bicycle by David V. Herlihy:

More than three centuries ago, the distinguished French mathematician Jacques Ozanam spelled out the theoretical advantages of a human-powered carriage “in which one can drive oneself wherever one pleases, without horses.” Its owner could freely roam along the roads without having to care for an animal and might even enjoy a healthy exercise in the process. Moreover, this particular type of “self-moving” vehicle, in contrast to those that called for wind or steam for propulsion, would run on that most abundant and accessible of all resources: willpower. But how to construct such a valuable vehicle? That was the twenty-third of some fifty “useful and entertaining” problems Ozanam identified and addressed in his famous Récréations Mathématiques et Physiques, published in 1696.

Ozanam’s book presented a proposed solution from another inventor: another four-wheeled carriage, driven by two people (one to steer, one to power the vehicle by stepping up and down on large treadles connected to the wheels by ropes, pulleys, and gears).
Human-powered carriage in Récréations Mathématiques Columbia University Libraries

It seems that for centuries, the carriage was the model for human-powered vehicles. Various inventors tried their hand at designs, and some were even built. There is a record in a London journal of an attempt in 1774 that went up to six miles an hour. French inventor Jean-Pierre Blanchard (who would later go on to fame in ballooning) built a human-powered carriage that went a dozen miles from Paris to Versailles. An American mechanic named Bolton built a version in 1804 that used mechanical leverage from interlocking gears. Presumably, all these attempts went nowhere because the machines were too large and heavy to be practical.

The key insight was to stop trying to build a mechanical carriage, and instead build something more like a mechanical horse. This step was taken by the aforementioned Karl von Drais in the early 1800s. Drais was an aristocrat; he held a position as forest master in Baden that is said to have given him free time to tinker. His first attempts, beginning in 1813, were four-wheeled carriages like their predecessors, and like them failed to gain the support of authorities.

But in 1817 (possibly motivated by the aforementioned food crisis and resultant shortage of horses, although this is unclear), he tried again with a new design: a two-wheeled, one-person vehicle that is a recognizable ancestor of the modern bicycle. It was made of wood, with iron tires. He called it the Laufmaschine, or “running machine”; it had no pedals, and instead was powered by directly pushing off the ground with one’s feet. It was also called the “velocipede” (from the Latin for “swift foot”) or the “draisine” (English) or “draisienne” (French) after its inventor; an improved version made by a London coachmaker was known in England as the “pedestrian curricle”.
Draisine c. 1820, Kurpfälzisches Museum, Heidelberg Wikimedia Commons (CC BY-SA 3.0)
New-York Tribune, Sep 1894 Flickr / Karin Dalziel (CC BY-NC 2.0)

Without pedals or gears, this proto-bicycle couldn’t achieve the speed or efficiency of modern designs. But, like the scooters still used by children today, it allowed you to coast, especially downhill, and it held your weight as you moved forward. Drais got up to 12 miles per hour on his machine. It became a fad in Europe in 1818–19, then faded. It seems the reasons were a combination of the potential for injury and the general annoyance of the public that these things were being driven through pedestrian areas such as sidewalks and parks (some things never change; we’re repeating this today with the scooter wars in San Francisco and other cities).

The next key advance didn’t come until decades later, when someone put pedals on the bike. There are conflicting claims to first inventor (going back to 1839), but it was definitely done by the 1860s in France. In any case, it was in the 1860s that bicycle development really took off. Pedals allowed the rider to propel the machine faster and more efficiently. This model was manufactured in France, at first with wooden frames, later with iron, and became commonly known as the “boneshaker” (which gives you an idea of how rough the ride still was).
Michaux “boneshaker”, 1870 Wikimedia / Classic Motorcycle Archive (CC BY-SA 3.0)
“The American Velocipede”, wood engraving by Theodore Davis, Harper's Weekly, Dec 1868

At this point, though, there were still no gears or chains. The pedals were attached directly to the front wheel. This gave the rider little mechanical advantage: it’s the same as a fixie with a 1:1 gear ratio (vs. the ratios most commonly used today which are closer to 3:1). Think of what it’s like to pedal a bike that’s in too low a gear: you pump your legs a lot without going very fast.

The only solution was to make the wheel larger, leading around 1870 to the ridiculous-looking “penny-farthing” or “high-wheel” design with the huge front wheel, which you’ve probably seen and may associate with the late 1800s. By around this time, bicycles were being made with metal frames, wire-spoke wheels, and solid rubber (not yet inflatable) tires. This design did give a faster ride, and a smoother one, since the large wheel absorbed shocks better. But it required acrobatic balance to ride, and as noted above it was prone to nasty spills and injuries, including “taking a header” if you stopped suddenly.
Penny-farthing bicycle Flickr / calitexican (CC BY-NC-SA 2.0)

The third and final key advance, then, was to separate the pedals from the wheel. Variations on this “safety bicycle”, including at least one driven by treadles and levers, were attempted from the 1870s if not before. The first commercially successful model, using the familiar crank and chain design, was produced in 1885 by John Starley. Finally, in 1888, inflatable (pneumatic) tires were introduced by John Dunlop, cushioning the ride and eliminating the last advantage of the penny-farthing.

So, by the end of the 1880s, bicycles had evolved into the form we know them today, with (approximately) equal-sized wheels, pedals, chains, metal frames, wire-spoke wheels, and inflatable rubber tires.

So what can we conclude?

First, the correct design was not obvious. For centuries, progress was stalled because inventors were all trying to create multi-person four-wheeled carriages, rather than single-person two-wheeled vehicles. It’s unclear why this was; certainly inventors were copying an existing mode of transportation, but why would they draw inspiration only from the horse-and-carriage, and not from the horse-and-rider? (Some commenters have suggested that it was not obvious that a two-wheeled vehicle would balance, but I find this unconvincing given how many other things people have learned to balance on, from dugout canoes to horses themselves.) It’s possible (I’m purely speculating here) that early mechanical inventors had a harder time realizing the fundamental impractiability of the carriage design because they didn’t have much in the way of mathematical engineering principles to go on, but then again it’s unclear what led to Drais’s breakthrough.

And even after Drais hit on the two-wheeled design, it took multiple iterations, which happened over decades, to get to a design that was efficient, comfortable, and safe.
Early “velocipede” models, from an 1887 German encyclopedia. Many designs were tried Wikimedia Commons

Second, advances in materials and manufacturing were probably necessary for a commercially successful bicycle. It’s a bit hard, from where I stand, to untangle which advances in design were made possible by new materials and techniques, and which were simply sparks of inventive imagination that hadn’t been conceived or developed before. But the fact that people were willing to put up with the precarious high-wheeled design indicates to me that pneumatic tires were crucial. And it’s plausible to me that advanced metalworking was needed to make small, lightweight chains and gears of high and consistent quality, at an acceptable price—and that no other design, such as a belt or lever, would have worked instead. It’s also plausible to me that wooden frames just weren’t light and strong enough to be practical (I certainly wouldn’t be eager to ride a wooden bicycle today).

But we can go deeper, and ask the questions that inspired my intense interest in this question in the first place. Why was no one even experimenting with two-wheeled vehicles until the 1800s? And why was no one, as far as we know, even considering the question of human-powered vehicles until the 1400s? Why weren’t there bicycle mechanics in the 1300s, when there were clockmakers, or at least by the 1500s, when we had watches? Or among the ancient Romans, who built water mills and harvesting machines? Or the Greeks, who built the Antikythera mechanism ? Even if they didn’t have tires and chains, why weren’t these societies at least experimenting with draisines? Or even the failed carriage designs?

To even begin to answer this, we have to realize that it’s part of a much wider phenomenon. I asked the same question of the cotton gin, which unlike the bicycle did not require advanced materials: it’s a wooden box, a wire mesh, and a drum with wire teeth; in fact, it was so simple that once the concept was out, plantation owners made bootleg copies by hand (depriving Eli Whitney of most of his patent royalties). The same question can be asked of all of the key inventions of textile mechanization; Anton Howes, an economic historian who chimed in on the Twitter thread linked above, has noted of John Kay’s flying shuttle:

Kay’s innovation was extraordinary in its simplicity. As the inventor Bennet Woodcroft put it, weaving with an ordinary shuttle had been “performed for upwards of five thousand years, by millions of skilled workmen, without any improvement being made to expedite the operation, until the year 1733”. All Kay added was some wood and some string. And he applied it to weaving wool, which had been England’s main industry since the middle ages. He had no special skill, he required no special understanding of science for it, and he faced no special incentive to do it. As for institutions, the flying shuttle was technically illegal because it saved labour, the patent was immediately pirated by competitors to little avail, and Kay was forced to move to France, hounded out of the country by angry weavers who threatened his property and even his life. Kay faced no special incentives — he even innovated despite some formidable social and legal barriers.

There are also other stories in which an early attempt at invention was demonstrated, the idea found no backers if it wasn’t already fully viable, and then development was dropped for decades. Richard Trevithick’s early, failed experiments with locomotives come to mind.

In light of this, I think the deepest explanation is in general economic and cultural factors. Regarding economic factors, it seems that there needs to be a certain level of surplus to support the culture-wide research and development effort that creates inventions. Note that Karl von Drais was a baron who apparently had a cushy job and invented in his spare time. This is common of researchers of that era: they were often aristocrats or otherwise independently wealthy (and those who weren’t had to scramble for support from wealthy patrons). Today we have research labs in both universities and corporations, plus venture capitalists to fund development of new products and services. The moment it becomes clear that a certain type of innovation might be possible, there are multiple teams funded and hustling to bring it to market. There are no multi-decade gaps in the innovation timeline anymore, or at least vastly fewer.

Looking at economic factors on the demand side, surplus also would seem to create markets for new products. Maybe GDP per capita just has to hit a certain point before people even have time, attention and energy to think about new inventions that aren’t literally putting food on the table, a roof over your head, or a shirt on your back.

Finally, there are cultural factors. Howes says that “innovation is not in human nature, but is instead received. … when people do not innovate, it is often simply because it never occurs to them to do so.” Joel Mokyr says, similarly, that “progress isn’t natural” (and his book on this topic, A Culture of Growth, helped inspire this blog). I agree with both.

Fully elucidating these economic and cultural factors is a major future project of this blog.

Sources and further reading: Excerpt from Bicycle, by David V. Herlihy, “Of Velocipedes and Draisiennes”, “Who Invented the Bicycle?”, and many Wikipedia articles including “History of the bicycle”.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

22. Replacing the Kobo Libra H2O Battery

Source: https://ei3lh.eu/2025/11/20/replacing-the-kobo-libra-h2o-battery/
Site: ei3lh.eu
Author: EI3LH
Submitted: 2026-07-30 07:15 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 75 points · 24 comments
Length: 858 words (~4 min read)
Language: en-GB

OEM Kobo Libra H2O Battery (Left) – Ali Express Battery (Right)

I’ve had my trusty (refurbished) Kobo Libra H2O for about 8627 years and recently it started to act up a bit. It would charge to 100% battery capacity and within an hour or so the device would have an empty tank, begging for a charge again.

I figured the battery was likely on the way out, yet when I took a look at search results for replacing the Kobo Libra H2O battery, I became slightly daunted by the fact it would appear to be a trickier task than I first envisaged.

It wasn’t that replacing the battery was a particularly risky or complex task. It’s not, so long as you can use a soldering iron to remove and reattach the Lithium Ion battery, and even then it’s only two blobs of solder (plus an outer shell of glue on each) that you need to work with.

The problem seemed to be in tracking down a suitable replacement battery, and at the same time, finding a replacement that didn’t cost a fortune. I confess at one stage I nearly gave up and looked for a new eReader.

Saved by Ali Express

After a good while checking search results, I stumbled upon a reddit post which detailed the battery I would need to search for, and more importantly, said battery could be had for a pittance on Ali Express.

Indeed, a few moments later I was able to pin down a suitable replacement battery for my Kobo. In fact, given how large a trove Ali Express is, I was surprised to find only two search results appeared for the battery.

I’ve popped a link to the exact battery I purchased here for you (alternatively, search for: PR-158098N Battery For Kobo).

The shipping arrival date said it would get here in January 2026! Amazingly, just a couple of weeks after placing the order in early November 2025, it arrived.

Replacing the Kobo Libra H2O Battery

The battery arrived safely and in a sturdy cardboard box. Packed in were a couple of 3M adhesive strips to situate the battery on the main board, and a pack of pry tools. I have bags upon bags of these so just put them in the pile already gathered in my tool sort box.
The contents of the Ali Express PR-158098N battery I purchased. November 2025.

The process is fairly straight-forward, which I will outline as follows:

Use the pry tools to pry and unclip the back case from the device. I used the large, ridged, guitar pick tool. Wedge open a small piece of the casing and then run the pick around the line of the case and it should all unclip fairly quickly and easily.

The battery is fairly malleable but do be careful not to squish and pull and prod at it too much!
With the back case removed, take a soldering iron (heated to around 350 degrees Celcius) and detach the positive and negative wires. Two things to note here a) the solder blobs have a thin glue shell coating over them, so heat with the iron and use a pair of tweezers or similar to scrape away the glue layer, you can then melt the solder easily, and b) remember the polarity when you install the new battery!

Install the new battery, noting the correct polarity. I made sure to strip the new wires a little further back and then tinned them prior to seating them in their final positions.

Once installed, plug in your Micro USB charging cable and check to see does the device power on and if it is accepting a charge.

Once you have confirmed it is successfully powering on, charging and holding a charge, you can start to button it all back up!

Pop the two strips of adhesive on to the back of the new battery and situate it on the main board. I should add, I did not remove the existing adhesive as I felt it would be beneficial to leave it in place in case the provided adhesive wasn’t as good as the OEM.

Snap the rear case back on, press the power button and all being well you should have your Kobo Libra H2O back up and running with a fresh new battery, ready for many more books to devour!

Hopefully the battery will prove to be worth the time and trouble and provide me with many more hours (nay years, or is that a stretch to far?) of reading pleasure.

I hope this little guide proves helpful for someone else who stumbles upon it. These days we are far too quick to jump on board the obsolesence train. I think that eReader technology hasn’t made big enough leaps to justify upgrading just yet – even the new colour eReaders, which is why I decided to give my Kobo a new life with a fresh battery.

Fingers crossed it doesn’t fail on me a few days from now but so far it is looking good, is charging rapidly and more importantly is holding that charge (for now). Best of luck!

73.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

23. How Hollywood stopped making movies in Hollywood

Source: https://www.statsignificant.com/p/how-hollywood-stopped-making-movies
Site: Stat Significant
Author: Daniel Parris
Published: 2026-07-22
HN activity: 195 points · 239 comments
Length: 1.6K words (~7 min read)
Language: en

La La Land (2016). Credit: Warner Bros.

The past decade has not been kind to Los Angeles’ entertainment industry. The combined shock of the 2023 labor strikes and the 2025 wildfires intensified fears that film and television production is migrating overseas, threatening a fragile ecosystem of below-the-line workers based in Hollywood.

In the days after the wildfires, filmmaker Sarah Smith and writer Alexandra Pechman organized a WhatsApp group of showrunners and industry workers, drafted a petition, and launched the grassroots #StayInLA campaign. What began as an emergency effort to help Los Angeles rebuild grew into a broader political movement, drawing more than 20,000 petition signatures, endorsements from prominent actors and filmmakers, and even the fleeting attention of Donald Trump—an actor himself, best known for his performance in Home Alone 2: Lost in New York.

Having worked in the entertainment industry and lived in Los Angeles, I have long wanted to investigate this often-vague anxiety: to understand exactly where these productions are migrating and quantify the extent of Hollywood’s flight from, well, Hollywood itself.

So today, we’ll examine Hollywood’s great production migration, explore how these logistical shifts have reshaped the filmmaking process, and investigate whether outsourcing production has any measurable impact on the quality of the movies themselves.

The American film industry began concentrating in Los Angeles in the 1910s, drawn to the city’s year-round sunshine, varied landscapes, inexpensive land, and distance from Thomas Edison’s patent enforcement on the East Coast. By the 1920s, Hollywood had become the global center of filmmaking, with studios, skilled workers, and supporting businesses clustered together in a self-renewing ecosystem.

For decades, most American films were produced on Los Angeles backlots, where studios provided filmmakers access to turnkey sets and skilled crews. This mechanized approach kept costs low and enabled directors to crank out four to six movies a year. During this era, Hollywood operated much like Henry Ford’s Model T assembly line; studios were maniacally focused on speed and frugality.

LA’s stranglehold over movie production would ultimately be tested by two filmmaking trends:

The rise of the blockbuster: In the 1970s, box-office smashes like The Godfather and Jaws demonstrated the commercial potential of event cinema. By the 1980s, corporatized studios like Paramount-Gulf-Western were actively manufacturing blockbusters, pouring ever-growing budgets into spectacle-driven stories. Films like Predator, First Blood, and Raiders of the Lost Ark were shot on location in jungles, deserts, and other far-flung settings, as exotic locales amplified their sense of scale.

The rise of IP and tax credits: The 2000s and 2010s brought a surge in big-budget filmmaking built around familiar IP. Marvel’s vaunted Cinematic Universe and other franchises required considerable financial investment, leading studios to offset costs by relocating production to incentive-rich cities such as Vancouver and Atlanta.

The result of these production strategies was a slow-building migration out of Los Angeles and California altogether.

So where did all the movies go? Hollywood’s production exodus has benefited a small group of filmmaking hubs offering some combination of established infrastructure and financial incentives. London, for example, boasts world-class facilities such as Pinewood Studios, while cities like Atlanta and Vancouver provide generous tax credits and rebates that reimburse studios for their local spending.

The savings these destinations offer are substantial, making them an obvious choice for a superhero movie whose story could unfold almost anywhere—be it a generic cityscape or somewhere in outer space. For a major blockbuster, tax incentives equate to tens of millions of dollars, freeing up money for name-brand actors, elaborate set pieces, and unremarkable CGI effects.

As such, the larger a film’s production budget, the more likely it is to be filmed entirely outside the United States.

In some cases, this globe-trotting appears directly on screen, like when Mission: Impossible stages an elaborate car chase through Rome. In other cases, location choice is driven entirely by financial considerations.

The latter trend has created a widening gap between where stories are set and where they are filmed, as productions increasingly follow tax incentives and lower costs rather than narrative necessity.

Look closely, and you’ll spot Toronto’s skyline standing in for New York, or Prague’s streets masquerading as nearly every other European city. With each passing year, filming locations have become untethered from the places depicted on screen.

This disconnect has become a persistent grievance among film critics, particularly when it comes to streaming movies shot far from their narrative setting. Nearly every week, the hosts of my favorite movie podcast complain about some disposable Netflix rom-com ostensibly set in New York but unmistakably filmed in New Orleans. After hearing this criticism ad nauseam, I began to wonder whether shooting on location actually has a discernible impact on a film’s quality—at least in the eyes of viewers.

As a cinema purist, I believe movies should be filmed where they are set, even when that setting is outer space. Most audiences, however, either cannot tell the difference or simply do not care.

Perhaps I have gone to great lengths to prove something studio executives already know: the average viewer is not scrutinizing every frame for telltale glimpses of the Toronto skyline. More likely, they are glancing at Instagram while the film’s protagonists laboriously explain the plot for the narrative comprehension of multitasking viewership—at which point the authenticity of the location becomes irrelevant.
Guardians of the Galaxy Vol. 3. Credit: Marvel.

My junior year of college, I scored an internship at Conan O’Brien’s late-night talk show. So, like Miley Cyrus circa 2009, I hopped off the plane at LAX with a dream and an unpaid internship.

Within a week, I’d discovered three things:

Entertainment internships are often glorified daycare for the children of industry executives: I could be classified as many things, but “nepo baby” is not one of them—which made me an exception among my intern class.

There was no work to do: The show had far more interns than meaningful tasks. I never even earned the privilege of fetching coffee.

The Warner Bros. backlot was eerily empty: I had grown up on movies like The Player and Singin’ in the Rain, where Hollywood appeared as a bustling factory of overlapping productions squeezed onto compact studio lots. Instead, I found emptiness.

This combination of things led to a bizarre summer where me and a posse of underutilized unpaid interns wandered a near-vacant Warner Bros. studio as if it were the Backrooms. This meant hanging out in the Central Perk set from Friends or cart-racing other interns from The Ellen DeGeneres Show on the street where they filmed Gilmore Girls.

My lasting impression was that Hollywood had become a collection of offices where white-collar workers decided how the sausage got made, while remarkably little sausage was actually being made there.

It was also during this summer that I learned of the hazards of cost disease.

Cost disease is an economic phenomenon in which labor-intensive industries with limited productivity gains—healthcare, education, live theater, filmmaking—become steadily more expensive over time. The quintessential example of this is Broadway, where the cost of living in New York City increases, leading wages to rise, but there remains a fixed set of theaters for Broadway shows to be staged, thereby limiting revenue growth. The end result is economic unsustainability, as these productions either curtail spending by employing fewer people or pass higher costs along to consumers through ticket pricing, often both.

My summer in LA was cost disease in miniature. I was paid exactly $0 to relocate to Los Angeles, where I then paid thousands of dollars to live in America’s third most expensive city. And this was the very bottom rung of entertainment’s corporate ladder.

Higher up the corporate hierarchy, cost disease takes different forms. For entry-level assistants, it means accepting low wages and paying high rent for the possibility—however remote—of eventually joining the executive class. For camera crews and VFX artists, it means becoming part of a traveling circus that chases tax incentives to Atlanta, Prague, and Vancouver. For studio executives, it means making do with smaller crews, outsourcing production overseas, and, eventually, using AI to replace some human labor.

If this has all drifted into bummertown, it’s because many of Hollywood’s problems can be traced back to a single economic theory of everything: the rent is too damn high. From there, everything else starts to unravel.

The end result is a peculiar version of Hollywood: a place increasingly devoid of physical production, populated instead by executives, AI art, and unpaid interns drag-racing golf carts through empty studio streets.

Become a paying subscriber to get bonus graphics, interactive dashboards, downloadable datasets, and to support independent journalism.

Bonus Data Stories: Full access to the Monday Roundup, a bonus edition with extra culture data stories, curated datasets, and recommended reads.

The Public Dataset Directory (Updated Weekly): A curated directory of public datasets from around the web.

Interactive Data Hubs: Interactive dashboards across Streaming TV, Movies, Music, Search Trends, Wikipedia, and more.

Upgrade to Paid

*Note: For best results, open this link in a web browser while logged in to your Substack account.

This post is public, so feel free to share it.

Share

Want to promote your data tool or media publication to Stat Significant’s 26,200 readers? Email daniel@statsignificant.com

Need help with a data problem? Book a free data consultation

Connect with me on LinkedIn if you want to chat about a data project.

Like movies? Follow me on Letterboxd

No posts

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

24. 200 Milliseconds

Source: https://200ms.thenodebook.com
Site: The Nodebook
Author: The Nodebook
Published: 2026-07-06
HN activity: 271 points · 80 comments
Language: en

No extractable content.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

25. Bonsai: Janestreet's UI Library

Source: https://github.com/janestreet/bonsai
Site: GitHub
Submitter: KolmogorovComp (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-08-03 08:29 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 348 points · 145 comments
Length: 929 words (~5 min read)
Language: en

Bonsai

Bonsai is a UI library for building performant, reactive web applications in OCaml, partly inspired by Elm. It is used to build almost all web applications inside Jane Street, everything from the corporate directory to tools that monitor and interact with our trading systems. A simple Bonsai component with a little interactivity looks like this:

module Dice = struct
  let faces =
    [ "⚀"; "⚁"; "⚂"; "⚃"; "⚄"; "⚅" ]
  ;;

  let component (graph @ local) =
    (* Components are implemented as purely functional state machines. *)
    let face, set_face = Bonsai.state (List.hd_exn faces) graph in
    (* Components are incrementally rendered, only when the relevant parts of the state change. *)
    let%arr face and set_face in
    {%html|
      <div>
        You rolled a #{face}
        <button
          style="" on_click=%{fun _ ->
            let index = Random.int (List.length faces) in
            set_face (List.nth_exn faces index)}
        >
          Roll the dice
        </button>
      </div>
    |}
  ;;
end

Most internal Jane Street web applications are built with Bonsai

Components are implemented as purely functional state machines, and are easily composable. Incrementalization inside the framework means that values don’t get recomputed until necessary. This applies to every value, not just the view.

Why Bonsai?

Other web frameworks tend to lump together state, incrementality, and rendering into a single abstraction, the UI component. By contrast, Bonsai allows you to compose state and incrementality primitives a la carte. The same primitives that prevent re-rendering the entire page during user interaction can also be used to incrementalize an expensive business logic computation on a live-updating dataset. (If you're used to React, imagine if everything used something very similar to hooks, and state was managed outside of the component hierarchy.)

Since state is not associated with explicit components, there is an extensive API for managing the lifecycle and scoping of state as users interact with the page. For instance, if you wanted to embed a collection of stateful UI components inside another UI component (in a tabbed interface, say), Bonsai will handle the state management for you instead of requiring that you manually hoist every internal component's state to the app's top-level model. For more examples of how state is composed, see this composition comparison written by the creator of Bonsai.

And because Bonsai is written in OCaml, it becomes possible to use the same language and types on both the backend and frontend. It's hard to overstate the impact this has on legibility and keeping a large web app's codebase manageable, especially when you make pervasive use of OCaml's type system to reduce errors. At Jane Street, many internal systems previously only had terminal UIs, and the framework has made it easy to port the existing types and business logic to the web.

Bonsai also comes with a powerful templating language, support for component-specific stylesheets, and a system for whole-app automated tests.

Expressive tests that save you from manually clicking through your app

One of Bonsai’s most powerful features is its ability to let you easily write realistic tests, in which you programatically manipulate UI elements and watch your DOM evolve.

In the following example, we’re testing the behavior of a user-selector. Whatever you type in the text box gets appended to a little “hello” message:

let%expect_test "shows hello to a specified user" =
  let handle = Handle.create (Result_spec.vdom Fn.id) hello_textbox in
  Handle.show handle;
  [%expect
    {|
    <div>
      <input oninput> </input>
      <span> hello  </span>
    </div> |}];
  Handle.input_text handle ~get_vdom:Fn.id ~selector:"input" ~text:"Bob";
  Handle.show_diff handle;
  [%expect
    {|
      <div>
        <input oninput> </input>
-      <span> hello  </span>
+      <span> hello Bob </span>
      </div> |}];

Notice that there are two expect blocks. (This allows you to make multiple assertions within a given scenario and to scope setup/helper code to just that scenario.)

The first makes our UI visible, and the second---which contains a diff---shows some behavior after you programatically input some text. Bonsai will even show you how html attributes or class names change in response to user input. Tests can include mock server calls, and can involve changes not just to the UI but to the state that drives it. With tests like these you can write an entire component without opening your browser.

Documentation

The Bonsai Quick Start and Thinking in Bonsai provide a hands on introduction to Bonsai and are the best places to start learning about it. There's also:

A series of how-to articles.
A short series of posts about Bonsai's history.
An episode of our Signals & Threads podcast about "Building a UI Framework." Another episode on "Building Tools for Traders" discussed some of the benefits of using Bonsai.
A library filled with example websites built with Bonsai.
API documentation can be found in the cont.mli file.

Bonsai is really a collection of libraries

Er, one wrinkle: Bonsai itself -- this library -- is actually more generic than the above makes it sound. It allows you to build general-purpose incremental, composable state machines. Bonsai_web builds on top of that core library, specializing it for interactive browser-based UIs, but we also have Bonsai_term for building interactive terminal-based UIs. There was even a prototype for April Fools' Day of Bonsai_vr for reactive virtual-reality UIs.

The full suite of Bonsai libraries:

General-purpose libraries

Bonsai is a library for building incremental, composable state machines.

Testing

Browser-based UI Libraries

Bonsai_web is a library for building interactive browser-based UI using bonsai.

Examples
Components
Testing
Benchmarking

Terminal-based UI Libraries

Bonsai_term is a library for building interactive terminal-based UIs using bonsai.

Examples
Components
Testing

Pre-processors

Bonsai web applications often use the following preprocessors:

ppx_html is a preprocessor for writing HTML that is similar to JSX.
ppx_css is a preprocessor for writing CSS.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

26. RosaicLabs, Atom RTL, and 32-Tile AMX: Trying to Piece Together a x86 Puzzle

Source: https://chipsandcheese.com/p/rosaiclabs-atom-rtl-and-32-tile-amx
Site: Chips and Cheese
Author: George Cozma
Published: 2026-07-31
HN activity: 8 points · 0 comments
Length: 2.2K words (~10 min read)
Language: en

Hello you fine Internet folks,

Today we are talking about one of the stranger x86 stories I have seen in a while. According to both SemiAccurate and Reuters, Intel is giving a new startup called RosaicLabs access to the register transfer language code for its Atom CPU technology. That is already a massive departure for a company that has historically guarded both its x86 license and CPU-core RTL very closely.

Two days before Reuters published its story, however, Phoronix spotted a very weird post on the Linux kernel mailing list. The post describes working x86 implementations with 16 and 32 Advanced Matrix Extension (AMX) tile registers, compared with eight tiles on Intel’s shipping AMX implementations. It was written by the same developer who said in October 2025 that a “corporate entity other than Intel/AMD” were already using its own x86 opcodes, CPUID range, and model-specific register range.

There are no public sources connecting Rosaic to that mystery x86 implementation. I want to be very clear about that from the start.

Still, an Atom-derived x86 core attached to a much larger matrix engine would make an awful lot of architectural sense for a startup staffed by Rivos veterans. Intel’s involvement would also answer the rather important question of how a new American company could legally build a custom x86 processor in the first place. So let’s dig into what we know, what the Linux posts actually say, and where the speculation begins.

Both Reuters and SemiAccurate report that Intel has started providing Atom technology to RosaicLabs Inc., a startup incorporated in Delaware in May 2026. Rosaic is led by Amarjit Gill, a longtime semiconductor executive and investor who worked with current Intel CEO Lip-Bu Tan to assemble the founding team at Rivos. Reuters also says Rosaic’s team includes other Rivos veterans, including former Rivos finance chief Amit Parikh.

The reported arrangement goes well beyond an architectural license, with Intel reportedly supplying register transfer language, or RTL, code. RTL describes the logic and data movement inside a digital design in a form that can be simulated, verified, modified, and eventually synthesized into physical gates for a selected manufacturing process. In less technical terms, Intel is not merely giving Rosaic permission to execute x86 instructions. It is reportedly handing over the source-level description of an Atom CPU design.

That does not necessarily mean Rosaic gets every piece of an Intel processor. Reuters does not identify the Atom generation, the included cache and interconnect logic, the manufacturing process, or the contractual limits on modifying and shipping the design. Access to CPU-core RTL is also not the same as receiving a complete, tapeout-ready system-on-chip.

Even with those caveats, this is highly unusual. Intel has licensed x86 technology in limited circumstances before, but it has not operated like Arm, SiFive, or another merchant CPU-IP supplier. If this arrangement becomes a repeatable business model instead of a one-off deal, it would represent a fundamental change in how Intel monetizes its CPU designs. Intel has previously signaled that it wants to make more IP available through Intel Foundry, so this deal may be part of that broader strategy.

Rosaic itself remains almost completely in stealth. Reuters found no company website or LinkedIn page with any useful information, while an amended July filing reportedly gives the company room to raise a $10 million seed round. That is enough money to assemble a small early-stage team, but it is nowhere near enough to take a large, leading-edge processor from a blank sheet of paper to mass production.

Receiving an existing CPU core changes that equation by letting Rosaic spend its engineering budget on the parts that differentiate the product instead of rebuilding an x86 frontend, execution engine, memory-ordering machinery, privilege model, and software ecosystem from scratch.

The first useful clue appeared in October 2025. Longtime x86 researcher Christian Ludloff posted a message to the Linux kernel and GNU Binutils mailing lists saying he had been asked to relay information about opcode allocations already “in active use by a corporate entity other than Intel/AMD.”

The original Binutils post lists several reclaimed or otherwise unused opcode regions, an E000_xxxx CPUID range, and a matching E000_xxxx MSR range. Ludloff said these ranges were already in active use, implying that this was more than an academic proposal.

As Phoronix noted at the time, that raises two questions: Who was building the processor, and what legal right did it have to implement x86? Existing x86 companies such as VIA, Zhaoxin, or Hygon would be obvious candidates, but they already have public toolchain and kernel histories. Routing the notice through an independent expert while refusing to name the company would be an odd way for one of them to reserve instruction space.

Then on July 27, 2026 Ludloff posted again, this time the subject was an x86 implementation with more than the normal eight AMX tiles. The full mailing-list post documents implementations with 16 and 32 tile registers and explains how they can be fitted into mechanisms that already exist in the AMX architecture.

Intel’s current AMX programming model provides eight tile registers. Each register can hold up to 16 rows of 64 bytes, giving each tile 1 KB of capacity and the complete tile file 8 KB of architectural state. A separate Tile Matrix Multiply unit operates on those registers. Intel’s own AMX documentation describes this as palette 1.

Interestingly enough, the 64-byte TILECFG structure used to configure AMX already contains row and column fields for 16 tiles. Shipping implementations simply use the first eight. Ludloff says a 16-tile implementation can therefore use existing VEX instruction encodings, which can address TMM0 through TMM15, along with fields already present in the configuration structure.

Moving AMX to 32 tiles requires more work. The proposed AMX implementation uses EVEX encodings to address TMM0 through TMM31 and doubles TILECFG from 64 to 128 bytes so it can describe the extra registers. The post says existing CPUID mechanisms can already report more than eight tiles, the total tile-state size, and the width of TILECFG, so the implementation does not require a new feature flag.

In other words, the original AMX framework was more extensible than Intel’s shipping hardware. However, compatibility could become a problem because existing software often assumes that TILECFG is always 64 bytes and that the tile-data state is always 8 KB. Software with those assumptions would have to run in a degraded eight-tile mode. The post even proposes MSR controls to disable the additional registers when necessary.

For a 16-tile implementation, the tile file grows to as much as 16 KB per hardware thread. At 32 tiles, it reaches 32 KB, which is a large chunk of state for an operating system or hypervisor to save and restore, especially on a many-core processor. This points to the device containing the 16- or 32-tile AMX unit being much more focused on matrix multiplication than on general-purpose server tasks.

The mailing-list post refers to both AMX and its cross-vendor successor, AI Compute Extensions (ACE). AMD and Intel developed ACE through the x86 Ecosystem Advisory Group as a common matrix-acceleration target for future x86 CPUs.

The ACE whitepaper defines eight 512-bit-by-16-row tile registers plus a block-scale register. It also places ACE inside the existing AMX palette framework, allowing operating systems to reuse much of AMX’s state-management machinery. The mysterious design’s 16- and 32-tile modes therefore go beyond the baseline state defined by both AMX and ACE. They look like a vendor-specific scaling of the same programming model rather than merely a straightforward implementation of the new common standard.

Again, this points to a matrix-accelerator chip rather than a conventional general-purpose CPU.

Now we get to the fun part, because the circumstantial evidence is fairly compelling with both Reuters and SemiAccurate saying a previously unknown startup staffed by Rivos veterans is receiving Atom RTL from Intel. Days earlier, an unnamed corporate entity asked Ludloff to disclose details of a heavily extended x86 matrix implementation. Ludloff had previously relayed private x86 instruction, CPUID, and MSR allocations on behalf of an unknown corporation. An appropriately broad Intel agreement could explain how such a company gained both a functional x86 core and the legal right to ship it, although neither report discloses the actual licensing terms.

Atom also makes sense as a starting point. Intel’s Atom-derived cores are designed for better area and power efficiency than its large performance cores. Rosaic could use a relatively compact x86 core as the host and control processor, then spend most of its transistor and power budget on matrix execution, cache, memory bandwidth, and interconnect.

That would look less like a conventional Xeon competitor and more like an AI accelerator that happens to execute x86 natively. Instead of pairing a RISC-V control core with a giant data-parallel engine, as many accelerator startups do, Rosaic could pair an Atom-derived core with a giant AMX- or ACE-like engine. Ordinary x86 software would handle orchestration, while long-running kernels would use the expanded tile-register file.

However, there is a fly in the ointment. Rosaic was only incorporated in May 2026. The October 2025 opcode notice predates the company’s first filing by about seven months. That does not mean Rosaic could not have been working on a chip before those filings. However, in the July mailing-list post, Ludloff says that an implementation supporting 16 and 32 tiles “has been running at large scale for some time.” It is very unlikely that a startup receiving Atom RTL could have quietly designed, taped out, and deployed a new x86 core with an AMX implementation that is not directly compatible with current AMX code at “large scale” in that time.

There are ways to make the timeline fit, but each requires another assumption on top of the assumption that Rosaic is the company Ludloff is working with. The design could have started as an internal Intel project that was later handed off to Rosaic. “Running at large scale” could refer to simulation, emulation, or FPGA instances rather than production silicon. The unnamed corporation in 2025 could also have been a predecessor entity whose work is now being commercialized through Rosaic.

It is also entirely possible that the timing is a coincidence. The mailing-list posts never name Rosaic, and Reuters never mentions AMX, ACE, custom opcodes, or a matrix accelerator. Access to Atom RTL does not imply that Intel included AMX, because Intel’s shipping Atom-derived cores do not provide the per-core AMX engines found in its large Xeon cores. Rosaic would still need to design or obtain the accelerator, integrate it with the core, and make the enlarged architectural state work across the operating system and hypervisor.

The hard evidence leaves us with two separate stories. Intel is taking the extraordinary step of providing Atom RTL to Rosaic, while an unnamed company has an x86 AMX implementation with 16 and 32 tile registers that Ludloff says has been running at large scale. Connecting those stories produces a very compelling architecture, but it does not yet produce a confirmed product.

If “running at large scale” means deployed production silicon, Rosaic is difficult to reconcile with the timeline unless it inherited a mature design. If the phrase instead covers simulation, emulation, FPGA prototypes, or work performed by a predecessor organization, Rosaic becomes much more plausible. That single ambiguity is doing an awful lot of work.

Rosaic is not the only possible name. Zhaoxin is the obvious conventional candidate because it has a legal path to x86 through VIA and is actively building modern x86 processors, while Hygon has an AMD-derived x86 lineage, a growing data-center CPU business, and public ambitions around AI acceleration. A large tile file would fit either company’s server ambitions, but both already submit compiler and kernel support under their own names, making the anonymous relay difficult to explain; neither company’s public software support exposes anything resembling 16- or 32-tile AMX.

A hyperscaler’s internal chip program may fit the “large scale” wording better: Google, Meta, Microsoft, and Amazon have the money, deployment volume, and custom-silicon teams needed to build such a device. Google is tempting because Ludloff previously worked there, while Meta has the Rivos connection, but that is extremely thin circumstantial evidence and none has publicly disclosed the x86 license or Intel-core agreement such a design would appear to require. The fun wildcard is the old Centaur/VIA lineage, because Centaur already built an x86 server SoC with a large integrated NCORE AI coprocessor. Most of that team moved to Intel years ago, and there is no evidence NCORE evolved into this mysterious AMX implementation, but it shows that pairing a third-party x86 core with a giant matrix engine is not an entirely new idea.

My best guess is that the mystery design belongs to either an Intel-backed spinout or a confidential custom-silicon customer, with Rosaic remaining the most interesting named candidate. Zhaoxin and Hygon have clearer routes to implementing AMX, while a hyperscaler better fits the claim of large-scale operation. Every option solves one part of the puzzle and creates another.

For now, the most important detail is not whether the mystery company is Rosaic. It is that Intel appears willing to let outside companies build around its CPU RTL at the same time that someone outside Intel and AMD is publicly reserving substantial new x86 architectural space for matrix compute. Even if the two stories are unrelated, both point toward a much stranger and more open x86 ecosystem than the one we are used to.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

27. Decades-old fish sauce at abandoned factory in Canada finally being removed

Source: https://defector.com/abandoned-fish-sauce-canada-interview
Site: Defector
Author: Giri Nathan
Published: 2026-07-30
HN activity: 242 points · 248 comments
Length: 2.4K words (~11 min read)
Language: en

Take capelin, a small silvery fish in the smelt family. Now add salt. Then throw those two ingredients in 110 vats, each of them about 10 feet tall, and let them sit in a defunct factory for over two decades. The resulting stench might haunt an entire community, as it has the people of St. Mary's, a coastal town of about 300 people in the Canadian province of Newfoundland and Labrador. In 2019, one resident described the ritual of abandoning her home every summer, boarding up the windows and doors so the smell doesn't permeate her belongings. The people of St. Mary's have long fought for the fish sludge to be cleaned up; after an aborted attempt in 2016, that work finally began in earnest this week.

There are 900,000 liters of fish sauce to remove—some of it just liquid, some of it with fish solids. The province of Newfoundland and Labrador budgeted $2 million for the job, which was taken up by a local engineering firm and is expected to be completed in October. As workers cut open the vats, viscous brown fish goo shot out onto the factory floor. It will be mixed with peat moss, hauled out in about 200 truckloads, and thrown in a landfill lined with polyethylene, after which it will be sealed up "like a Ziploc," according to the lead engineer on the project. St. Mary's Mayor Steve Ryan reportedly teared up while describing new hope. "To be known as the 'sauce plant mayor' … it's time for that to be over," he said.

Even in ideal circumstances, the creation of good fish sauce is a stinky process, but the resulting umami bomb is well worth it. The Atlantic Seafood Sauce Company began in 1990 with the (sound!) idea to make use of someone else's waste product. A processing plant in St. Mary's was sending female capelin to Japan so their eggs could be used for masago; the male capelin were of no use to them. Vietnamese immigrant Sahn Ngo saw in these castoff fish an opportunity to brew one of the signature sauces of his cuisine. But after his company was blocked by regulators—check out this Eater feature for nuance—it closed up shop in 2001, leaving behind the vats of sauce in progress. I can't be the only person out there staring at these torrents of fish mud and wondering about the tasting notes. In fact, I know I'm not, having spoken to food scientist Bryan Quoc Le earlier this week. Given his background in chemistry and Vietnamese cuisine, he was the ideal expert to unpack this horrifying and possibly delicious situation.

Our conversation has been edited and condensed for clarity.

I wanted to start off and take a more normal scenario and understand the chemistry in a more traditional fish sauce, where we start with the fish and the salt. My understanding is that enzymes from the gut of the fish do the work of digesting the proteins, and breaking them down into amino acids, which have tasty properties, and that's why we like the fish sauce. And the high salt content helps keep this process safe and makes sure that the right kinds of bacteria are able to outcompete the harmful kinds.

That's exactly right. Basically what's happening is in the intestines of the fish, the enzymes are being released, and the enzymes start to break down the proteins. First, they chop them up into fairly large chunks, but then over time they start to liquefy as you get down to the amino acid content. And most proteins are about 30 percent or 40 percent glutamic acid, and so a lot of the initial flavor profile is from that glutamic acid content that gives you the umami flavor.

The salt helps protect the fish. It protects it from the presence of pathogens. That's the really important part of that process. But it also protects it from bacteria and yeast that might cause some kind of rancidification that is undesirable, right? Then it serves as a sort of amplifier of the flavor, too. In order to have glutamic acid be experienced as umami, you also need sodium ions. Together, it's necessary—pure glutamic acid actually tastes like soap.

Fish sauce is typically made on something like a yearlong time frame. This is a very, very different situation, and I doubt there's any literature on long-term fish fermentation.

I would want to fly there and just see what happens.

That's how I feel.

There are studies to be done.

Definitely. This is an incredible resource. Based on your knowledge of the underlying chemistry, what else do you think is happening once the process extends for this long?

Within that one- to two-year time frame, generally speaking, a lot of the process is the enzymatic breakdown [that produces amino acids].

Now, there are certain yeasts and bacteria that are super slow, but they tend to work their magic on the same timescales as something like a wine or a whiskey. There are these 100-year-old soy sauces that are made in Korea, these monasteries that just have this continuous soy-sauce broth going on and on. Apparently it's supposed to be really good. I haven't tried it myself, but I would imagine something similar is happening, where you have these 20-year-long timeframes, and the initial strong fermentation action, because there is going to be some bacteria or yeast that lives on the skin of the fish, these are not necessarily sterile conditions.

This bacteria or yeast that exists can tolerate really high levels of salt. But because what salt really does, and why it prevents the growth of pathogens, is it inhibits the breakdown of a lot of enzymes. With these long timescales, the yeast is able to not only grow, but they'll die and then release the contents of their enzymes. So there's this ongoing forever process that's happening, as well as the more conventional chemistry that would occur.

An example: There's the reaction between amino acids and very minute amounts of sugars. That's why soy sauce is black, right? It's a chemical reaction that occurs called the Maillard reaction, and is accelerated when you heat or roast something. The baking of bread or roasting of coffee gives you those dark compounds. But if you give something a year or two, or 10, the darkening occurs so long as there's some kind of sugar in the vat. So that would be an interesting thing to see: What are the flavor profiles that form because of this Maillard reaction? Again, you can also see that in wine. The chemical reaction that changes the profile of the really rich, strong flavors that you see in 10-year-old or 20-year-old wines is because of this Maillard reaction that takes forever to occur at room temperature.

That's a good detail to point out, because this abandoned factory isn't climate-controlled in any way. It's just been exposed to the elements, and I imagine it's basically refrigerated for a huge chunk of the year, based on where it is. So this is probably very unusual fermentation playing out: every few months, going back in the fridge, and then getting warmed up again.

Exactly. You have that seasonality to it.

The locals in the town have reported scents so strong that they board up their house in the summer, they can't hang their laundry out. Do you know what compounds might be produced by fermentation of this time length?

It's primarily amines, a class of compounds that basically come from the breakdown of amino acids. So the amino acids—there's some kind of biological reaction with the bacteria. They sort of split off a carbon dioxide, that breaks off that acid portion of the amino acid. The amines themselves, generally speaking, humans are extremely sensitive to them because they're indications of death, right? A corpse, a dead animal or a dead fish, it's giving off amines, and a lot of them tend to be toxic to humans. Even if it's minuscule concentrations that are going into the air, people are going to sense it a lot more, especially if you're not used to it. The people who live in this island Phu Quoc in Vietnam, the fish sauce capital, I'm sure they can tolerate quite a high heavy dose versus, you know, if your cuisine doesn't really have it.

People are describing rancid odors, too. Is there something about the fat content of the fish?

Yeah, definitely. That's the same sort of process with the enzymes, but with the added bonus of oxygen. [The fat is] oxidizing, and then as it's breaking down, which is still a slow process, those molecules are really, really volatile. Aldehydes and ketones that form from the breakdown of fatty acids, that's gonna give you that smell. Again, humans are very sensitive to that. We don't tolerate it very well.

I've seen footage of the workers cutting open these vats, and it's not a pretty sight. It's this gray-brownish sludge hitting the factory floor, but obviously real fish sauce is processed and strained. Would you be a little bit tempted to taste this forbidden fish sauce if it was processed?

I would 100 percent taste the forbidden fish sauce. I would do it for science. My wife would kill me if I'm not already dead. I will. If there was a way, if I would be able to fly out there, I would do it, and write a whole report about it because I think that would be a pinnacle achievement for me.

For the record, I agree, and I don't even have the scientific pedigree. I just want to taste it. With the prospect of dying, what kind of pathogens would you be worried about specifically?

Honestly, I don't think there would be any pathogens, because the salt content is so high. There's really nothing that lives in that. There are a lot of products that are shelf stable as long as they have a high concentration of salt, decently acidified, or high concentration of sugar. Basically, the only thing that can live is a handful of bacteria and yeast. It's one of the principles of food safety.

So this is speculative, but given your knowledge of fish sauce, and just extending some of these chemical processes out more and more years, what would be your tasting notes, if you had to guess, for this fish sauce?

Oh my gosh, that rancidity. Unfortunately I think the rancidity and amines are going to be forward, in a way that is probably going to be overwhelming. That said, there's so many complexities with that. You have not only the reactions forming those molecules, but also the molecules are interacting with each other. So amines and aldehydes really like to form bonds, and in doing so, they might create a level of complexity that we've never seen before, right?

There could be an undercurrent of sweetness, even. That would be very bizarre, right? But if you think about the chemistry of sweeteners, artificial sweeteners, some of them have that kind of structure. So that would be interesting. It could be like where you're hit with a horrible bitterness, a rancidity, a horrible fishy overwhelming—but maybe there's something underneath, right? Or maybe we just need to acidify it a little bit. Add a little lemon juice. This is common in Vietnamese cuisine, when you have the fish sauce dressing that's used for a lot of noodle dishes. Maybe we could cut it.

[Both laughing, with hunger]

Maybe we can cut those amines and just not even taste them. That could be really cool. Then you would know: What level of savoriness could we actually achieve out of it? Because this is the fun part. Worcestershire sauce is fish sauce. Basically, what happened was a bunch of chemists accidentally abandoned it for a couple years, they put a barrel of anchovies or mackerel or something like that, and then just threw in some vinegar.

What could happen is, oh, actually this is kind of flavorful in a way that we wouldn't expect—something that's 20 years old, especially the umami flavor, the intensity of the glutamic acid. Maybe the glutamic acid from the amino acid breakdown is reacting to other components like these amines and these aldehydes, and now we have all sorts of new molecules. It's actually a black box. We don't really know.

Oh man, that's so interesting. We've got to get a hold of this somehow. They've got a million liters of it.

Right? If it turns out to be some kind of goldmine ...

I reached out to you because I love the piece you wrote about fish sauce, and I was wondering what you like most about it in its ordinary form.

Being Vietnamese, it's such a quintessential part of my cuisine. My mom would always cook with it. It was always incorporated in some way, but it was also kind of the situation where my friends would come over and be like, "What? What is that horrible smell?" You know you're in a Vietnamese household because you can smell the fish sauce, because it's always in the air. It has a childhood element of warmth; it helps me think about Mom a lot.

Then, as an adult, I use it, and now that I understand the chemistry, it makes a lot of sense. It's a very versatile ingredient because what you're doing is just dumping a lot of glutamic acid, but it's from a very specific flavor profile. It's not soy sauce, which tends to be have a caramelized element to it because of that long-term processing, and has more sugar because it requires rice to jump-start that fermentation process. Whereas fish sauce is pure, right? It's just fish, guts and everything. There's an element of authenticity to it. Not that, of course, soy sauce isn't really authentic, but I just like the idea of that.

There's that piece, and then one of the reasons why my wife and I started dating is because she's Israeli and Romanian, totally removed from my culture, and one time we went out on a date, and she took me to a Vietnamese restaurant, and I'm like, "How does this person even know anything about Vietnamese food?" I kind of wrote it off, like, She's not gonna understand. Of course, they bring out the food, and she's like, "Could I get more fish sauce?" My friends would stay away from my house. But this person who ended up becoming my wife, she's like, "I love fish sauce. I need more of it in my life."

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

28. Apple is getting this wrong

Source: https://openai.com/index/apple-is-getting-this-wrong/
Site: OpenAI
Submitter: meetpateltech (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-08-04 05:32 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 184 points · 168 comments
Length: 1.8K words (~8 min read)
Language: en-US

Apple is one of the greatest companies of all time, and built a reputation for obsessing over the smallest details. This careless, aggressive and oddly personal lawsuit sadly doesn’t live up to that reputation.

Apple had claimed that they contacted OpenAI in February and that we didn’t respond. They now admit that their outside lawyers emailed the wrong person after confusing two Asian last names—only after we brought this to their attention. Apple also claimed they had a discussion with our General Counsel, which they now concede never happened. But they again hide the fact that they never raised the specific allegations in this lawsuit at that time, and that they in fact told us that they were “resolving any issues”. We then heard nothing for five months until they sued. In their latest filing, Apple tries hard to spin this sequence of events, but you can just read the emails for yourself here⁠.

Apple accuses Chang Liu of accessing Apple confidential information after leaving the company, but only now admits that Apple employees reached out to him and asked for his help to locate this information (you can read the messages here⁠). Apple now tries to shift the blame to “residual access”, but they also don’t disclose that this is a common issue with Apple which is caused by them failing to properly manage system access when people leave. What that means in practice is that former employees who are trying to do the right thing when they leave still have access to Apple files—despite not wanting them or even being aware of them.

Apple also accuses Tang Tan of trying to get and use their trade secrets. However, Tang has always been clear with the team that we do not want, and must not use, any confidential information from other companies. Tang served Apple for more than 24 years and was widely known as one of the most innovative leaders at the company.

We wish Apple had raised these issues with us before they filed their lawsuit and would have been happy to clarify all of this with them. We have taken the allegations in the lawsuit seriously and offered to work with Apple to resolve this. Instead, they’re trying to change their narrative, including by making vague accusations about other former employees, and will likely keep repeating this tactic.

Apple’s request for a preliminary injunction is both based on false information and completely unnecessary because we do not have, nor want, any of their trade secrets. We’re much more interested in building innovative products and technologies that push the frontier.

iMessages between Chang Liu (in blue) and Apple employees, where Chang—whose last day with Apple was January 22, 2026—is being asked by his former colleagues to help them locate files and information to assist them with their Apple work (all times UTC). Note: other individual names and Apple confidential information have been redacted.

1/22/2026 4:43:19 PM

Hey [Apple Employee #1], i had something we need to discuss when you get to office.

1/22/2026 4:43:41 PM

OK. I can talk on the phone now if you like.

1/22/2026 5:48:02 PM

I am here at the office.

1/22/2026 9:39:14 PM

Around your desk

1/22/2026 9:39:34 PM

Be there in 4.

1/22/2026 9:44:34 PM

Do you wanna meet me at the coffee machine?

1/22/2026 11:25:45 PM

I found a 64GB drive. Do you think that will work>

1/22/2026 11:26:59 PM

I think 200 ish. We start from 64. Better than nothing

1/23/2026 12:41:56 AM

Still copying

1/23/2026 5:13:02 PM

Good morning. I hope you slept well. Maybe you are still sleeping 😊 I’m back in the office and restarting the airdrop as it didn’t work. My plan is to complete the airdrop and then click the sad button in workday.

1/23/2026 5:38:25 PM

Liked “Good morning. I hope you slept well. Maybe you are still sleeping 😊 I’m back in the office and restarting the airdrop as it didn’t work. My plan is to complete the airdrop and then click the sad button in workday.”

1/23/2026 5:39:51 PM

Thanks a lot [Apple Employee #1]. Was a very hard night last night. I really appreciate all the help and work together with you.

1/23/2026 5:41:09 PM

If you have time you can also try to airdrop all other file in my apple iCloud folder.

1/23/2026 5:42:22 PM

Those are mainly shared files from other people. I found important detail notes from time to time.

1/23/2026 5:42:59 PM

All the file folders [Redacted - Apple Information] are the file I generated as my personal note.

1/23/2026 7:32:19 PM

Your file transfer is a challenge.

1/23/2026 7:33:24 PM

Carlos Org Travel Summary Chang joined the spreadsheet. I think I’m going to have to hit the workday button before I’m complete. I just got a weird message that is making me nervous (see below), so I am going to go hit the workday button now.

1/23/2026 7:34:53 PM

I don’t even think I have that file

1/23/2026 7:35:03 PM

Maybe the new Chang

1/23/2026 7:35:20 PM

Yeah. . . it could be. No need for you to worry. 😊

1/23/2026 7:35:37 PM

That new Chang has big shoes to fill.

1/23/2026 7:36:18 PM

😟 for the transfer. I think the archive and [Redacted - Apple Information] has most of file for you to dig. Otherwise team can always start from something brand new

1/27/2026 1:45:26 AM

Hey [Apple Employee #1] hope everything is fine for copy pasting. You can keep my icloud connected if you still need more time. But might want to sign off my iMessage. As there might be my new company stuff showing up in that laptop.

1/27/2026 3:06:56 AM

Oh shoot. Sorry. Let me finish up tomorrow and log everything out. I won’t look at anything else.

1/27/2026 3:08:26 AM

Hey [Apple Employee #1], that’s totally ok. I am fine with you keep my icloud signed in for files. Just imessages might get you in trouble.

1/27/2026 4:35:30 AM

Do you recall any discussions on shipping [Redacted - Apple Information]? I thought the plan was to go for [Redacted - Apple Information] because [Redacted - Apple Information] is still not proven, but I don’t remember specific details. Of course, I could ask several folks, but you are the best. Even if you don’t work here anymore 😟

1/27/2026 4:35:46 AM

. . . of course [Redacted - Apple Information] is the plan for [Redacted - Apple Information]

1/27/2026 4:39:27 AM

Hahahah no prob

1/27/2026 4:39:47 AM

The decision is for all the product shipped in [Redacted - Apple Information] from a schedule standpoint.

1/27/2026 4:39:59 AM

Hence [Redacted - Apple Information]. And [Redacted - Apple Information] for [Redacted - Apple Information]

1/27/2026 4:40:30 AM

[Redacted - Apple Information] make a [Redacted - Apple Information] because of that [Redacted - Apple Information] ramp time.

1/27/2026 4:41:06 AM

[Redacted - Apple Information] (es in March) will [Redacted - Apple Information] prototype build but too late for [Redacted - Apple Information].

1/27/2026 4:42:29 AM

Awesome: I was thinking [Redacted - Apple Information] for [Redacted - Apple Information] and [Redacted - Apple Information] for [Redacted - Apple Information]. But since [Redacted - Apple Information] was pushed back then it should get [Redacted - Apple Information] also.

1/27/2026 4:42:41 AM

I think we are aligned 😊

1/27/2026 4:46:06 AM

Actually yes also [Redacted - Apple Information]

1/27/2026 4:46:27 AM

Sorry I missed that. [Apple Employee #8 name] from Austin team is already working on that

1/27/2026 4:47:07 AM

Liked “Actually yes also [Redacted - Apple Information]”

1/27/2026 4:47:10 AM

Liked “Sorry I missed that. [Apple Employee #8 name] from Austin team is already working on that ”

1/30/2026 5:54:31 PM

Hey [Apple Employee #1]! Hope you got all the material you need. Otherwise you might need to reach out to IST for some backup if they ever has

1/30/2026 5:54:41 PM

I rrealize the folder is gone from my iCloud

1/31/2026 1:34:07 AM

I just signed out of your iCloud account. When it asked me if I wanted to keep a copy of your stuff, I said NO.

1/31/2026 2:28:08 AM

Loved “I just signed out of your iCloud account. When it asked me if I wanted to keep a copy of your stuff, I said NO.”

1/31/2026 2:28:18 AM

Thank you sir!

1/31/2026 2:29:23 AM

This startup style company is a funny and will be very hard in a couple months😁😁

2/14/2026 1:38:13 AM

How is it going over there? Did they let you off work early on a Friday so you can go bowling and drink beer?

2/14/2026 1:38:25 AM

. . . . or are they going to work you until 10pm?

2/14/2026 1:39:47 AM

Just in case you don’t have enough work, I need some help. I have a vague recollection of you talking about a [Redacted - Apple Information]. Can you give me a brief refresh of this and point me to an EE who may have some knowledge?

2/14/2026 1:41:25 AM

大笑「Just in case you don’t have enough work, I need some help. I have a vague recollection of you talking about a [Redacted - Apple Information]. Can you give me a brief refresh of this and point me to an EE who may have some knowledge?」

2/14/2026 1:41:51 AM

This place is crazy… hahahah we use Ai all over the place

2/14/2026 1:42:21 AM

I can always give you some fun side projects

2/14/2026 1:44:17 AM

I think what you referred to is [Redacted - Apple Information]. And the small [Redacted - Apple Information].

2/14/2026 1:44:41 AM

The problem is the people is also in my court now 😁😁

2/14/2026 1:45:00 AM

Plus if [Apple Employee #9] might still remember anything

2/14/2026 1:47:39 AM

Liked “I can always give you some fun side projects”

2/14/2026 1:52:30 AM

[Redacted - Apple schematic] Bummer. . . you should have filed a [Redacted - Apple Information] with the details and put that next to the [Redacted - Apple Information] on the schematic. Now you owe me a beer.

2/14/2026 1:53:43 AM

oops now it can only become a [Redacted - Apple Information] saying now we never know why 😁😁

2/14/2026 3:12:57 AM

Now when I think about it. The other smart people also just left that team. The one that might still in apple is [Apple Employee #10]

2/14/2026 3:13:12 AM

Or if you have a more specific question

The following emails are between Apple’s outside counsel, Gabriel Gross; OpenAI’s General Counsel Che Chang; and Apple’s in-house legal counsel. They show that Gross emailed Che by mistake and inaccurately claimed the two had spoken. Both Gross and Apple’s in-house legal counsel subsequently confirmed that this was an error, with Gross noting they were “resolving any issues.” The specific claims in Apple’s lawsuit were never raised, and there was no further follow up prior to the lawsuit being filed five months later.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

29. IPC-7351B Electronic Component Zero Orientation [pdf] (2010)

Source: https://scancad.net/wp-content/uploads/2019/02/zero-orientation-cad-libaray.pdf
Site: scancad.net
Submitter: gregsadetsky (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-07-31 17:54 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 12 points · 4 comments

binary file (.pdf); not scraped

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

30. More German than many Germans

Source: https://mertbulan.com/more-german-than-many-germans/
Site: Mert Bulan - Blog & Portfolio
Author: Mert Bulan
Published: 2026-08-02
HN activity: 526 points · 374 comments
Length: 2.9K words (~13 min read)
Language: en

In 2017, after I finished the third year of my Computer Science studies, I decided to do an internship in Europe. So while I was applying for the Erasmus Scholarship, I also started looking for internships. In the end I got the scholarship, which helped a lot with the visa process, and I also found an internship at a company in Hamburg.

I had never been outside of Turkey before. So I had also never really talked to people from other countries. What I knew about Germans came mostly from the Turkish people who moved to Germany in the 60s for work. Those people came back to Turkey almost every summer and told us about their life there. Most of what they said was the same as what you can read on the internet, the stereotypical German.

People who don't laugh, who are cold and unfriendly, who always follow the rules, who speak a language that sounds too harsh, and so on. And of course, someone always brings up the Nazis.

Apart from the people I talked to in the interviews, my first real contact was my German flatmate. Before I arrived he showed me the room on Skype and we agreed on it. When I landed in Hamburg, he picked me up from the airport. That was a great start, and during my three months there we chatted in the kitchen almost every evening for half an hour.

I had a lot of questions for him and he always answered them properly. On the weekends he picked up his girlfriend and they either stayed home or went rowing. Their relationship looked very healthy to me. She was studying medicine, so sometimes she was working at her desk on a Saturday while my flatmate played Witcher 3 right next to her. I never heard them argue about anything.

Near the end of my internship he told me that he and his girlfriend were going to Africa, so I would be alone in the flat for a week. When I asked him what I should do with the keys, he just said to drop them in the mailbox. That much trust after such a short time really surprised me.

We had a last dinner together and I told him things were going well at the company and there was a chance I could come back to Hamburg.

I was lucky with my flatmate and I was also lucky at work. I had a great team. They taught me new things, gave me responsibilities the other summer interns didn't get, and included me in all the team events. The offsite we had outside the city is something I still remember today. And I was getting all of this while earning minimum wage.
My first offsite event

I was really surprised by how friendly everyone was. We weren't just working, we were having fun. Everything I had heard about Germans until that point was gone. It was the best summer of my life.

My lead was happy with my work and offered me a job right away. I could work as a freelancer from Turkey while finishing my studies, and if they were happy with my performance I would get a full-time contract. That is what happened.

Coming back

In April 2018 I got my contract, even before I finished my studies. The next month something nice happened. My German flatmate emailed me and asked when I was coming back, because he already had a room for me for the summer. The company was going to give me a place to stay, but I couldn't say no to him. Right after my last exam, before I even had my diploma, I moved to Hamburg at the end of June and started working full time with the same team, living with the same flatmate.

On my first day there were candies and balloons on my desk. Everybody was happy to see me again. One colleague who knew my interest in Apple gave me a German flag pin he got at WWDC18. He said he tried to swap it for a Turkish flag but couldn't manage it. I was already happy with the gift, because it meant he was thinking about me while he was in California.
My desk

When you start living in Germany you have to register your address. When I went to the public office, the clerk told me I had already lived in Hamburg before. I said I had done a summer internship a year earlier. He just said: Welcome back!

That was the moment I felt like I was coming home, not moving to a new country.

The first years

My first months were mostly about finding a flat and figuring out how things work here. Since my German wasn't good enough, my colleagues came with me to flat viewings after work. When I had a problem with my electricity provider, a colleague came along and did all the talking. When I moved to a different place a year later, a German colleague rented a van and helped me carry everything.

At the time, the company was one of the biggest internet companies here, with around 2.000 people. Sometimes I saw the C-level in the kitchen getting their own coffee or even washing their own glasses. They had assistants, but the assistants helped with work instead of acting like servants. We also had a CFO who rode a very old bike to the office.

Whenever we had a team event or an offsite, the organisers made sure they knew everyone's dietary needs. Vegan, vegetarian, halal, no alcohol, allergies. So everyone would have something to eat and drink.

When I was doing a good job, my lead kept telling me to take vacation instead of working more. When I was sick, he told me to stay home until I felt better. I didn't even need a doctor's note. It took me a while to notice this was not only a work thing. You get on a bus or a train here and nobody checks your ticket. I wasn't used to this level of trust.
My second offsite

Across from our office there was an Italian restaurant where we went for pizza sometimes. The pizzas were very tasty and huge, and it was the only place that sold half a pizza. At lunch I saw people in suits eating there, and right at the next table people from the construction site nearby in their work clothes eating the same pizza. Nobody looked at the other table and nobody thought it was worth noticing except me. That is the part that stayed with me. It was completely normal, and it was normal because a man who spent his morning on a building site can afford an Italian lunch and eat it like everyone else.

I noticed the same thing in the rich districts of Hamburg. You can walk into one and not feel like you don't belong, and the prices in the shops are not that different from anywhere else in the city. Sometimes they are exactly the same. The more I saw of that, the more I wanted to stay. I believe in social democracy, and this is a country that calls itself one and mostly behaves like it.

It didn't take long for me to move up at work. I didn't feel any discrimination, even though people say Germans prefer Germans when it comes to promotions. There were already a lot of people with a migration background at the top. When I ran as a candidate in the works council election, I got the most votes of anyone, even though there were many Germans running and only around 25% of the company were immigrants like me.

You see the same thing outside of companies. Cem Özdemir, whose parents came from Turkey, has been the prime minister of Baden-Württemberg since May. Sinan Selen, who was born in Istanbul, runs the office for the protection of the constitution.

Being in the works council gave me more contact with the C-level. Sometimes I found myself arguing with the CTO or the CEO, and later at a company party we would have a beer together and talk about something else. That is when I understood how flat the management is here. I saw the difference later when I worked for an American company, where they made sure you knew you were lower on the ladder.

I met hundreds of Germans at that company and they were always super friendly. I say this because years later I still see many of my old colleagues at different events, and most of my friends today are people I used to work with. A lot of immigrants complain that it is hard to become friends with Germans, but that wasn't my experience.

My landing was soft

I should be honest about one thing here. I landed softly. I came into a big international company where everyone spoke English, in a city like Hamburg, with a salary that let me pick where I live. I have worked with other German companies since then, mostly smaller ones, so what I write here is not only about that one place. But the start was much easier for me than it is for most people. A lot of them arrive with none of that, and the country they meet is not the same one I met. Everything I write here is my experience, not a report on how it works for everyone.

The language is part of that. Every story I told above happened in English. The team, the flatmate, the works council, the arguments with the CEO, all of it. Once I decided I was going to stay here for a long time, I started taking German classes, and after the citizenship law changed I put much more effort into it. So the German came from the decision to stay. It was not the thing that made me stay.

I never really tried to integrate. It just happened that the way I think about life turned out to be similar to how people here think.

Why I like the rules

Most people complain about the rules in Germany, but I like them. It means someone, or a group of people, sat down and thought about that specific thing and decided on a standard for everyone. When you have to do something, you don't feel lost, because you can just look it up. You don't have to find someone who knows.

Rules also make normal days easier. Something simple like waiting at a red light even when there are no cars takes away the work of deciding whether to cross. And if everyone does it, you don't have to worry about someone suddenly stepping into the street. Or the fire safety rule that makes exit doors in public buildings open outwards. You never have to think about pull or push.

There are also unwritten rules, like being on time. For me the logical thing has always been to aim for 15 minutes before the agreed time, so if something happens on the way I'm still fine. After going on dates with a lot of Germans, I realised they do the same thing. So instead of me arriving early and waiting 15 minutes, we just meet 15 minutes earlier.

My favourite one is Ruhezeit, the quiet time between 10PM and 6AM, plus Sundays and public holidays. My sleep is very important to me and I'm a light sleeper, so this rule really helps me. Sometimes I had neighbours who had parties during those hours, and I didn't hesitate to complain (with Lärmprotokoll) to my landlord. Many Germans have told me I'm more German than many Germans. It is probably because of examples like this one.

The one time a rule was pointed at me instead of working for me was my first application for permanent residence. I had just left my first company and I was between jobs, and that was enough to get it rejected. That was when I learned what a sustainable livelihood means to the German authorities. It doesn't mean the money you have in your account. It means a permanent contract with the probation time already behind you. I had savings and it didn't count for anything.

It was an emotional day. But after I calmed down I could see their logic. A bank balance can be gone in a year and a signed contract that already survived six months says something a number can't. It was the same system I like for every other reason, just this time I was on the wrong side of it.

Understanding the country

The longer I lived here, the more I saw myself spending the rest of my life here. That made me want to read about the country. I'm a heavy reader and I track every book, so here are the ones I read about Germany:

German Men Sit Down To Pee & Other Insights Into German Culture
Germany: Memories of a Nation
The German Genius
Kaput: The End of the German Miracle
Man's Search for Meaning
Blood and Iron: The Rise and Fall of the German Empire 1871 to 1918
Why the Germans Do it Better: Notes from a Grown-Up Country

Apart from the books, I also watched a lot of documentaries, especially about the Nazi era.

Like most people, I didn't know that Germany wasn't one country until the 19th century. It was made of small kingdoms, city states and so on. That is why there are so many kinds of bread, beer and sausage, why some parts have different public holidays, different accents and even a different way of living.

The German Genius surprised me the most. It is about 1.000 pages about Germans who contributed to humanity in different fields, and I didn't know how many things in our daily life exist thanks to them. Some of them had to escape the country because of the Nazis and reached their full potential somewhere else, in countries like the US and the UK. The books also helped me understand how Germany built an educated middle class, how workers' rights and social reforms happened, and where the rule about no shopping on Sundays comes from.

What stayed with me is that this is probably the only country in the western world that faced its own history properly, admitted the worst things it did, and built a lot of its identity around not repeating them. You feel that here in small ways, not only in museums. In January 2024, after it came out that far right politicians had talked about deporting people who already hold a German passport, 50.000 to 80.000 people filled the streets of my city in one afternoon.
"Hamburg steht auf!" demonstration

In eight years I have not had a single case of racism. I know that isn't true for everyone, and I know the far right keeps growing.

I don't think most of those votes are about hating foreigners. Some people believe the story they get every day, that the country is broken and that immigrants are the problem. You find that story almost everywhere. The rest are angry that certain problems here have not been solved for years by the existing parties, so they look for an alternative.

For me, Germans are people who give trust before it is earned. People who are friendly without being fake about it. People who make sure everyone is included, down to what is on the table. People who care about someone they will never meet. People who know exactly what happened here and don't look away from it.

Making it official

That is why I decided to become one of them.

The chance came when the traffic light coalition, which I think was the most progressive government this country has had in decades, changed the citizenship rules and brought the waiting time down to five years. I was eligible, so I applied.

People seem to think a German passport is handed out easily now. It isn't. You have to prove you paid into the social system for at least five years. You have to pass the citizenship test. You need German at B1 level. You need a sustainable livelihood while your application is running. And most importantly, you have to accept the democratic values of this country.

For me the process itself was smooth. I applied online by uploading a pile of PDFs. A week later I got a letter saying my application had arrived, with a few papers to sign, scan and upload back. Then the waiting started. In total it took around 14 months to get the email saying my application was successful and that I could come and collect my Einbürgerungsurkunde.

I picked it up this week, at an appointment that only took 15 minutes. I am German now.

I believe I have contributed something to this society in these eight years and I will keep doing it. And I will keep complaining about everything that needs to be better. Because that is what real Germans do.

Subscribe to my newsletter

No spam, no sharing to third party. Only you and me.

