Hacker News Top 30 — 2026-06-01

Generated on 2026-06-01 03:03 UTC

1. Cloudflare Turnstile requiring fingerprintable WebGL

Source: https://hacktivis.me/articles/cloudflare-turnstile-webgl-fingerprinting
Site: hacktivis.me
Submitter: HypnoticOcelot (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-31 14:13 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 539 points · 303 comments
Length: 269 words (~2 min read)
Language: en

Since about a week, Cloudflare Turnstile (their "Verify you're human" device verification) has been looping indefinitely in my webkit-gtk based browser. Preventing access to quite few websites (previously, but it even went worse lately).
Turns out it's because Cloudflare wants to have a fingerprint of your device via WebGL, the only reason for doing this would be tracking.
Screenshot of Turnstile test page, "WebGL renderer info is spoofed"

Their pro-tracking non-justification copied here just in case:

Turnstile uses browser fingerprinting to verify you're human. Privacy tools that block or randomize fingerprinting make your browser look like a bot trying to hide its identity. Temporarily allowing fingerprinting for this site will fix the issue.

Such things are blocked in WebKit, and have been for years. Meaning it's tracking so awful that even Apple would block it, and as far as I can tell it's not the kind of privacy protection you can easily disable in it.
So Cloudflare just banned all WebKitGTK browsers as I guess they put an exception for Safari.

As an aside, if you're wondering, Mozilla Firefox screwed up their WebGL fingerprinting protection: Bugzilla#1916271: Gecko reveals sanitized GPU Characteristics; webkit and blink return hardcoded strings for all users
Screenshot of Turnstile test page on Firefox 145.0 passing with no issues.

Plus privacy.resistfingerprinting isn't enabled even when selecting "Strict" "Enhanced Privacy Protection" in the settings, great job there Mozilla.
But I guess with it enabled, privacy-conscious Firefox users might not be able to pass Cloudflare's device verification in the future.
Screenshot of Turnstile test page on Firefox 145.0 passing with just "Canvas Randomization Detected"; after enabling privacy.resistfingerprinting manually.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

2. Shift from a Leader-Follower to a Leader-Leader Approach

Source: https://www.practicalengineering.management/p/shift-from-a-leader-follower-to-a
Site: Practical Engineering Management
Author: Mirek Stanek
Published: 2025-04-21
HN activity: 12 points · 3 comments
Length: 2.2K words (~10 min read)
Language: en

Even though today we lead people, we've most likely climbed the engineering ladder through technical excellence. Our code was cleaner, architectures more elegant and scalable, and solutions we built did work.

Now, when we lead a team of engineers, we may feel that our efficiency has faded. The team waits for our decisions, innovation barely moves forward, and despite working longer and harder, we're becoming the bottlenecks we swore we'd never be.

This is quite a common situation that makes us doubt whether we are the right people for managerial positions. But here's what everyone misses about technical leadership: the very expertise that got us promoted is now our most significant liability.

When I asked various leaders about their book recommendations, the most common answer was: "Turn The Ship Around" by Navy Captain David Marquet. I even included this book in my Top 10 Book Recommendations for Engineering Leaders (as the community pick).

I have finally caught up with Marquet's story about taking command of the USS Santa Fe, the worst-performing submarine in the fleet. The book brought me this realization: Even though none of my teams was the "worst-performing," I often asked myself how it is even possible that sometimes smaller groups of engineers move much faster than we did.

Over the years, I went through multiple transformations:

From Quality Control to Quality Assurance

From siloed to cross-functional teams

From fixed big-bang releases to continuous delivery

From coders to product engineers

And I always wondered - what are the common points that made these initiatives successful?

These days, after reading "Turn The Ship Around," I'm pretty sure that Marquet's "Leader-Leader" model can be one of the frameworks that works well in engineering organizations.

"All pull requests need to be approved by me."

"Let me review that code before you proceed."

"Before you push to production, run that deployment plan by me first."

Sound familiar?

Many of these activities are seen as good practices in software engineering. Peer reviews are the foundation of effective shift-left testing transformation.

But as a leader, you are no longer a "peer." You may convince yourself that you ensure quality. But what you actually do is train the team in learned helplessness.

Here's the uncomfortable truth: your expertise-driven micromanagement is creating:

A decision bottleneck (you)

Disengaged engineers who stop thinking critically

A fragile organization that collapses when you're on vacation

The data backs this up. Google's Project Oxygen found that "technical expertise" is ranked last among traits of effective managers. What ranked top? Being a good coach and empowering teams without micromanaging.

Here's the full list, by the way:

8 key behaviors of effective managers

Is a good coach

Empowers team and does not micromanage

Creates an inclusive team environment, showing concern for success and well-being

Is productive and results-oriented

Is a good communicator — listens and shares information

Supports career development and discusses performance

Has a clear vision/strategy for the team

Has key technical skills to help advise the team

The message is clear: technical expertise matters, but it's necessary rather than sufficient. Your ability to develop and empower others is the true differentiator.

But if control isn't the answer, what is?

When Marquet took command of the Santa Fe, he made a radical decision. Instead of giving orders, he trained his crew to state: "I intend to..." This small language shift triggered a transformation with stunning results.

When I worked in a Permission-Seeking Culture, we very often had situations like this:

Engineer: "I got mockups from the UI designer, which will take weeks to implement due to how custom they are. Can we simplify that a bit?"

Myself: "What exactly do you want to change?"

Engineer: "The sizing and default behavior of the navigation."

Myself: "Let me look at it first and check with the UI Designer..."

After implementing Intent-Driven Leadership, the conversation was closer to:

Engineer: "I intend to simplify the navigation UI/UX so we can implement that within 2 days instead of 2 weeks. I want to reuse components that already exist in our Design System"

Leader: "What do you think I'm wondering right now?" (This was D. Marquet's default question)

Engineer: "You're probably wondering if this aligns with the Product team's vision of how UI/UX should look like"

Leader: "Exactly. Convince me it's the right move."

Engineer: "I've checked with the Product Designer and showed them existing components which look almost the same as their new proposition. I want to use them instead of the custom ones"

Leader: "Is it the right thing to do?"

Engineer: "Yes, because we will push it to customers a few weeks earlier, UX will be aligned with the rest of our application. We can always iterate over it later"

Another case:

Engineer: "I intend to refactor the authentication service to reduce token validation from 120ms to under 50ms by eliminating redundant database calls."

...

One more:

Engineer: "I intend to fix the top 3 crashes from last week to make sure that our 99.9% SLO is not at risk."

...

Notice the difference? The intent-driven approach forces the engineer to think deeply about the why, the how, and the verification. It creates competence rather than compliance. As Marquet puts it, "if you want your people to think, don't give instructions—give intent."

To implement this in your team:

Ban the phrase "Can I..." from technical discussions

Train your team to use "I intend to... because..." instead

Resist the urge to approve/reject; ask clarifying questions instead

Create clear guardrails (architecture principles, non-functional requirements) rather than checkpoints

The results can be dramatic.

How did the story end with the requested UI/UX changes?

It turned out that the UI designer didn't know that subtle changes would require the entire rework of navigation components. Once they learned we could push changes within the same week, it was already a huge win for them. For us, it meant no custom logic, no extra tests, and just reuse of existing components.

Win-win.

"But my team isn't ready for this autonomy," you might be thinking.

Here's the thing: Competence doesn't precede autonomy; it emerges from it.

When Marquet first implemented his leader-leader model, his crew made mistakes. But instead of reverting to command-and-control, he doubled down on building the necessary knowledge.

This approach rests on what Marquet calls "the two pillars" that support giving control:

Technical competence (Is it safe?)

Organizational clarity (Is it the right thing to do?)

For engineering teams, this may mean:

On Marquet's submarine, sailors would touch equipment and verbally state their intention before operating it.

For your team, you can create similar protocols:

Code review policies that require explaining the intent behind changes

Pre-deployment checklists that engineers go through before pushing to production

Architecture Decision Records (ADRs) that document reasoning, not just decisions

One of the teams I led pushed things to production on Fridays. It was a mobile app, and the assumption was that Friday was always a nice closure of the week of work.

At some point, I disconnected completely from these releases. The team decided whether to go live or skip the week, what the rollout process was, what the risks were, etc.

Marquet's Technical Competence elements in our context were:

The app was usually pushed to the beta channel (or just to a few percent of the audience)

Critical and/or big features were hidden behind feature flags anyway, so the customer release was detached from the production push

We could push a hotfix in less than 1 hour (fully automated testing and deployment process)

Rich telemetry and monitoring informed us about any malfunctions proactively

We had a clear set of objectives and KPIs (e.g., clear SLOs) that defined standards the team had to maintain

Put together, it created a clear action protocol for the team so they could work autonomously.

In traditional engineering organizations, senior engineers solve problems silently. The flagship example is when you report an incident - "ok, I will check" and then dead silence.

In the worst-case scenario, the answer will never come back; the system will start working by itself. In more optimistic cases, after some time, you will hear, "ok, done. I've fixed the NPE in our app." In such cases, less experienced engineers see the solution but miss the mental process that led there—the equivalent of showing the answer without the work.

When a senior engineer says, "I'm not sure why this is failing. Let me try looking at the logs first, then check if the config was updated correctly, and then verify the network connections," they're demonstrating their troubleshooting mental model. This verbalization of thought processes is what Marquet encouraged on the Santa Fe, and it's a powerful practice for software teams.

Side note - thinking out loud is also a competence often checked during System Design interviews, where the final answer to the recruiter's question doesn't count as much as the thinking process that led you there. On that occasion, I recommend reading the great books by Alex Xu: System Design Interview

This practice creates shared mental models faster than any documentation ever could. The goal isn't perfect solutions but visible thinking—because visible thinking creates learning opportunities that silent expertise never will.

Side note 2 - reporting an issue (and the rest of the process - acknowledging, fixing, confirming) is a subject on its own that can draw from Control Theory. If you want to check good practices and read about common mistakes, have a look at my article "Amplification - Make Signals Loud and Clear"

Most engineering leaders rose through the ranks by knowing more than others. Now you need to flip the script: your job isn't to know, it's to create an environment of continuous learning.

This means:

Normalize the phrase "I don't know, let's find out"

Conduct blameless postmortems that focus on system improvement

Budget time specifically for exploration and experimentation

This shift requires letting go of your identity as the expert. As Marquet notes, "It takes strength and confidence to give up control and say, 'I will be here if you need me, but it's your play.'"

Here are a few of my favorite techniques at work:

When an engineer asks you a question, resist the urge to answer immediately. Ask "What do you think?", "What have you tried so far?", "What else are you planning to do?". Let them lead and build your answers upon that.

It's easier to say something is "blameless" than to make your team feel this way. What often helps me are regular conversations about issues within a safe space. So before you show your crash rate at the company's all-hands meeting, check it every week with your team, discuss all drops and spikes, and build confidence within your people. "Yes, we had a drop in stability last week. The root causes are performance issues in our services. The work is already well described and planned, but as a team, we highly advise setting a higher priority to avoid similar issues in the future."

In bigger organizations, one of the most effective knowledge-sharing practices is Engineering Guilds, which I recently described in this series of articles.

As Marquet discovered on the Santa Fe, the fastest way to improve results isn't to focus obsessively on results—it's to build a team capable of continually learning and improving.

When you shift from being the answer provider to the learning enabler, you remove yourself as the bottleneck and unlock your team's full potential.

On traditional engineering teams, one person gives orders, and everyone else follows instructions.

As Marquet puts it in his "What is leadership?": "On another submarine, there was one guy in charge, one guy giving orders, one guy thinking, and 134 people doing what they're told. I don't care how smart you are. On my submarine, I got 135 thinking, active, passionate, creative, proactive, taking initiative people."

When you stop giving answers and start asking the right questions, you don't diminish your impact—you multiply it across your entire team.

The next time an engineer asks for permission, respond with: "What do you intend to do, and why?" Then, watch as they begin the journey from technician to leader.

Your greatest achievement won't be the code you wrote or the architecture you designed. It will be the leaders you created who continue to build and innovate long after you've moved on.

But won't that create chaos, with everyone going in different directions? No, because "you create the environment so that those people are out there making decisions as if the CEO were standing right behind them. And if it's not the same decision, it's actually a better decision because they have the information."

If David Marquet's leader-leader approach resonates with you, I invite you to check out the next article, in which I will share a practical exercise that can help you implement it in your team or organization.

In the meantime, I also recommend reading "Turn The Ship Around", as the book is a treasure trove of leadership practices.

Here are more articles from Practical Engineering Management that can aid you in implementing the Leader-Leader model:

Top-down Leadership vs Center-out Leadership

Developmental Leadership vs. Transactional Leadership

Safety Leadership and Neuroception

Intro to Expectations Management

Simplification Through Linearization

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

3. 1-Bit Bonsai Image 4B Image Generation for Local Devices

Source: https://prismml.com/news/bonsai-image-4b
Site: PrismML
Author: PrismML
Published: 2026-05-26
HN activity: 302 points · 104 comments
Length: 1.3K words (~6 min read)
Language: en

Images generated from Ternary Bonsai Image 4B

Today we’re releasing Bonsai Image 4B, a family of compact image-generation models designed to run high-quality diffusion inference on local hardware: from laptops to phones.

Bonsai Image 4B comes in two variants:

1-bit Bonsai Image 4B uses binary {−1, +1} transformer weights with an FP16 group-wise scaling factor, giving 1.125 effective bits per weight. It targets maximum compression and is the right fit when memory pressure, bandwidth, and the deployment footprint are the primary constraints.
Ternary Bonsai Image 4B uses {−1, 0, +1} transformer weights with an FP16 group-wise scaling factor, giving 1.71 effective bits per weight. The additional zero state gives the model more representational flexibility, improving visual quality and prompt fidelity while remaining extremely compact.

The result is a new deployment regime for image generation: capable outputs, open weights, and practical local inference on devices that were previously out of reach for this class of model. To our knowledge, Bonsai Image 4B is the first image model in its parameter class to run directly on an iPhone.

Built for local generation

Images generated from 1-bit Bonsai Image 4B

Local image generation starts with a hard constraint: the model has to fit within the device’s memory budget.

For a 4B-class image model, the diffusion transformer is the largest part of the model and the part that runs repeatedly during generation. Each denoising step invokes the transformer again, so transformer size directly shapes memory pressure, bandwidth demand, and local inference speed.

Bonsai Image 4B is built from the FLUX.2 Klein 4B. It keeps the architecture intact but changes how the transformer weights are represented. By moving those weights into binary and ternary form, Bonsai reduces the part of the image pipeline that matters most for local deployment.

Model Diffusion Transformer Reduction vs FP16
FLUX.2 Klein 4B 7.75 GB 1.0x
1-bit Bonsai Image 4B 0.93 GB 8.3x
Ternary Bonsai Image 4B 1.21 GB 6.4x

Table I: Diffusion transformer footprint for models.

The binary layers provide roughly a 14x reduction relative to full-precision transformer weights. A small set of precision-sensitive supporting tensors (~5%), called the projection layers, remains in FP16 so the final 1-bit Bonsai Image 4B transformer is 0.93 GB: an 8.3x reduction from the 7.75 GB full-precision FLUX.2 Klein 4B.

The ternary variant follows the same structure. Its ternary layers provide roughly a 10x reduction and the final Ternary Bonsai Image 4B transformer is 1.21 GB, a 6.4x reduction from the full-precision transformer. It is slightly larger than the 1-bit model, but the additional zero state improves visual quality and prompt fidelity.

Including the compressed text encoder and FP16 VAE, the Apple Silicon deployment payload is 3.42 GB for 1-bit Bonsai Image 4B and 3.88 GB for Ternary Bonsai Image 4B. For comparison, the full precision FLUX.2 Klein 4B requires a deployment payload of 15.97 GB. Since, at runtime, the text encoder is offloaded after prompt encoding, the mean memory usage is smaller than the total payload. When generating a 512x512 image, the mean-active memory is 1.5 GB and 1.96 GB, for the binary and ternary models, compared to 11.74 GB for the original FLUX.2 Klein 4B (a reduction of 7.8x and 6.0x, respectively). For a 1024x1024 image, the mean-active memory is 1.95 GB and 2.38 GB, for the binary and ternary models, compared to 14.39 GB for the original FLUX.2 Klein 4B (a reduction of 7.4x and 6.0x, respectively).

This reduction in memory footprint changes where the model can run. Our deployment stack supports Apple Silicon iPhones, iPads and Macs and CUDA GPUs, using MLX low-bit paths on Apple hardware and Gemlite low-bit GEMM kernels on CUDA. On iPhone 17 Pro Max, the full-precision FLUX.2 Klein 4B pipeline does not fit within the device memory budget, while both Bonsai Image variants run on-device.

Video I: Image generation on Bonsai Studio

In practice, Bonsai Image 4B generates a 512x512 image in 9.4 seconds on an iPhone 17 Pro Max and about 6 seconds on Mac M4 Pro. On Mac M4 Pro, Bonsai Image 4B is up to 5.6x faster than the stock full-precision MFLUX pipeline.

Benchmarking performance

Compression only matters if the model remains useful. We evaluated Bonsai Image 4B across three complementary benchmarks: GenEval for object composition and attribute binding; HPSv3 human preference and aesthetic quality; DPG-Bench dense prompt following and semantic faithfulness.

Qualitative comparison across Bonsai Image and FLUX.2 Klein 4B models.

Model Diffusion
Transformer
Footprint (GB) GenEval HPSv3 DPG-Bench Size reduction
relative to
FLUX.2 Klein 4B Performance
relative to
FLUX.2 Klein 4B
1-bit Bonsai Image 4B 0.93 0.671 11.15 0.822 8.3x 88%
Ternary Bonsai Image 4B 1.21 0.723 12.22 0.851 6.4x 95%
FLUX.2 Klein 4B 7.75 0.819 12.84 0.853 1x 100%
SDXL 5.14 0.3 10.05 0.74 1.5x 67%
BK-SDM-Small 0.98 0.297 3.05 0.559 7.9x 42%
Stable Diffusion 1.5 1.72 0.396 4.2 0.601 4.5x 51%
PixArt-Σ XL 2 1.2 0.541 11.93 0.769 6.4x 83%

Table II: Image quality benchmark comparison across Ternary Bonsai Image 4B and other models.

Ternary Bonsai Image 4B is the quality-oriented variant. At 1.21 GB, it retains 95% of the FLUX.2 Klein 4B accuracy across GenEval, HPSv3, and DPG-Bench, while reducing the diffusion transformer footprint by 6.4x.

1-bit Bonsai Image 4B is the footprint-oriented variant. It brings the diffusion transformer below 1 GB, an 8.3x reduction, while still delivering strong benchmark scores across the same three evaluations (it retains 88% of the accuracy of FLUX.2 Klein 4B).

Together, the two variants move the quality–footprint frontier. Bonsai Image remains competitive with modern 4B-class image models while using a fraction of their diffusion-transformer footprint. At the same time, it substantially outperforms smaller models with similar memory footprints. That is the same Pareto shift we have seen in our prior Bonsai language models. Bonsai Image brings modern diffusion-transformer behavior into a memory range that previously belonged to much smaller, lower-capability models.

Why this is important

Image generation is not only a model-quality problem. It is also a deployment problem.

Cloud APIs will continue to be the right choice for many products. But cloud-only generation imposes certain product constraints: every prompt is a remote request, every iteration carries marginal serving cost, and every interaction adds round-trip latency.

That matters because image generation is naturally iterative. Users rarely stop at one image. They revise prompts, compare outputs, generate variations, discard failures, and try again. When each attempt is a server-side job, the creative loop becomes something users have to meter and wait for.

Local inference changes that. Once the model fits on the device, generation can sit directly inside the product experience. It becomes cheaper to run, faster to iterate on, and easier to use in environments where prompts, and generated assets should remain private.

Bonsai Image 4B is a step toward that deployment regime: capable image generation running closer to the user, on hardware they already own.

Images generated from Ternary Bonsai Image 4B

Availability

Both 1-bit and Ternary Bonsai Image 4B will be released with open weights and code under the Apache 2.0 license.

With this launch, we are also launching Bonsai Studio, its iOS app for trying Bonsai Image 4B directly on iPhone.

Join Us

PrismML emerged from a team of Caltech researchers and was founded with support from Khosla Ventures, Cerberus and Google. We’ve spent years tackling one of the field’s hardest problems: compressing neural networks without sacrificing their reasoning ability.

If you want to help build the next generation of state-of-the-art AI, we’d love to hear from you. Check out our careers page.

Resources

Whitepaper
Hugging Face
WebGPU demo
Bonsai Studio for iPhone
GitHub

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

4. Creatine raises brain energy levels and slows cognitive decline: study

Source: https://thesciverse.org/scientists-found-that-the-creatine-supplement-millions-take-for-muscle-gains-is-quietly-raising-brain-energy-levels-and-slowing-early-alzheimers-cognitive-decline-by-30/
Site: thesciverse
Author: Daniel Okoro
Published: 2026-05-31
HN activity: 498 points · 326 comments
Length: 1.6K words (~7 min read)
Language: en-US

Tens of millions of people take creatine every day. They bought it for their muscles. They measure their doses by how much weight they can add to a bench press or how quickly they recover between sets. Almost none of them know that the same supplement is crossing the blood-brain barrier, raising phosphocreatine levels in their neurons, and doing something to their cognitive function that the fitness industry has never advertised and most users have never been told.

A comprehensive review published in the Journal of Psychiatry and Brain Science in 2025, alongside a landmark pilot trial published in Alzheimer’s and Dementia: Translational Research and Clinical Interventions, has assembled the most complete picture yet of what creatine is quietly doing inside the brain. The findings span cognitive performance in healthy adults, depression treatment outcomes, sleep deprivation resilience, and most strikingly, a 30% slowing of cognitive decline in early Alzheimer’s patients in controlled trials. None of this is in the marketing on the tub sitting in most gym bags.

Why the Brain Needs Creatine

The brain is the most energy-demanding organ in the human body, consuming approximately 20% of the body’s total energy output despite representing only 2% of its mass. Neurons do not store meaningful energy reserves. They rely on a continuous supply of ATP, adenosine triphosphate, the molecule that powers virtually every cellular process from maintaining ion gradients across membranes to releasing neurotransmitters at synapses.

Creatine plays a critical role in the energy metabolism of brain cells. After cellular uptake, creatine is converted into phosphocreatine, which is rapidly broken down via catalysis by creatine kinase to facilitate ATP regeneration, thereby serving as a crucial element in energy transfer.

In muscles, this phosphocreatine system provides the rapid energy burst needed for explosive physical effort. In neurons, it serves a different but equally important function: providing an emergency energy buffer during periods of high metabolic demand. When a neuron fires rapidly, when the prefrontal cortex is working through a complex problem, when the hippocampus is encoding a new memory, ATP consumption spikes in ways that oxidative phosphorylation alone cannot immediately meet. The phosphocreatine system fills that gap in milliseconds, regenerating ATP faster than any other available mechanism.

When brain creatine levels are insufficient, neurons working at high intensity hit an energy ceiling. Processing slows. Working memory capacity shrinks. The brain can still function, but it is operating below its energy capacity in exactly the situations that demand the most from it.

What Happens to Brain Creatine as You Age

The problem that makes this relevant beyond athletic performance is what happens to the brain’s creatine system over time. Impaired brain energy metabolism, including dysfunction in the creatine system, may contribute to the development and progression of Alzheimer’s disease, making it a compelling therapeutic target.

The evidence for creatine system dysfunction in Alzheimer’s is specific and measurable. Phosphocreatine levels in the brains of Alzheimer’s patients are significantly lower than in age-matched healthy controls. The enzyme creatine kinase, which catalyzes the conversion of phosphocreatine to ATP, shows reduced activity in Alzheimer’s brain tissue. Mitochondrial dysfunction in Alzheimer’s neurons creates what researchers describe as a bioenergetic crisis, a state where the cells most responsible for memory and cognition are chronically energy-deprived and increasingly unable to maintain the ATP levels needed for normal synaptic function.

Mitochondrial impairment in Alzheimer’s disease reduces ATP production in brain and blood cells, ultimately creating a bioenergetic crisis as part of its pathophysiology. The creatine system is one of the few mechanisms that can partially compensate for this deficit, providing ATP through a pathway that does not depend on fully functional mitochondria. This is why researchers began asking whether supplementing creatine could meaningfully restore brain energy levels in people whose neurons were already struggling.

The Clinical Trial That Answered the Question

The University of Kansas Medical Center’s CABA trial, the Creatine to Augment Bioenergetics in Alzheimer’s study, published its results in Alzheimer’s and Dementia: Translational Research and Clinical Interventions in early 2026. Twenty patients with clinically confirmed Alzheimer’s disease took 20 grams of creatine monohydrate daily for eight weeks.

Patients with Alzheimer’s disease took 20 grams of creatine monohydrate for eight weeks. They improved on cognitive function, scoring higher in sorting, reading and attention tests after the full eight weeks were over. Brain phosphocreatine levels, measured using magnetic resonance spectroscopy, increased measurably following supplementation, confirming that oral creatine was successfully crossing the blood-brain barrier and raising intracellular creatine concentrations in neural tissue.

The 2026 multicenter placebo-controlled trial extending this work enrolled 240 participants with early Alzheimer’s. After 12 weeks of oral creatine supplementation at 5 grams per day, participants showed a 10 to 15% increase in brain phosphocreatine on MRS scans. Improvements in energy metrics correlated with modest gains in short-term memory tests. The intervention group showed slower decline on standard cognitive scales by about 30% versus placebo.

A 30% slowing of cognitive decline in early Alzheimer’s from a supplement that costs pennies per dose and is already sitting in the cabinets of millions of people who bought it for entirely different reasons is a finding that deserves considerably more attention than it has received outside specialist journals.

What Creatine Does for Healthy Brains

The Alzheimer’s data is the most dramatic finding, but the brain benefits of creatine are not limited to neurodegenerative disease. A systematic review and meta-analysis published in Frontiers in Nutrition in 2024 analyzed the effects of creatine supplementation on cognitive function across healthy adults. Creatine supplementation demonstrated potential benefits in processing speed. Creatine supplementation could enhance the speed and accuracy of cognitive tasks, particularly in continuous memory tasks and other tasks requiring rapid information processing.

The cognitive benefits in healthy adults are most pronounced under conditions of metabolic stress, exactly the conditions where the phosphocreatine buffer matters most. Sleep deprivation is the most extensively studied of these. A study published in Scientific Reports found that a single dose of creatine improved cognitive performance and induced measurable changes in cerebral high-energy phosphates during sleep deprivation. The brain running low on sleep is a brain running low on energy, and creatine appears to partially compensate for that deficit through the same phosphocreatine mechanism that benefits Alzheimer’s patients.

Creatine has also emerged as a serious candidate for depression treatment. A 2025 study tested 5 grams of creatine daily as an add-on to cognitive behavioral therapy for depression, finding that adding creatine to CBT significantly improved depressive symptoms. The biological rationale runs through the same energy pathway. Depression is increasingly understood as involving mitochondrial dysfunction and impaired brain energy metabolism in the prefrontal cortex and hippocampus, the same regions where creatine’s phosphocreatine buffer is most active. Regions of the brain that have high metabolic activity rely on the phosphocreatine system in order to regulate emotion and cognition.

The Blood-Brain Barrier Question

One detail that has historically complicated creatine’s brain story is the blood-brain barrier. The brain is selective about what it allows in from the bloodstream, and creatine’s ability to cross that barrier is more limited than its ability to enter muscle tissue. This raised legitimate questions about whether oral supplementation actually raises brain creatine levels enough to matter.

The CABA trial’s MRS imaging data answered this question directly. Brain phosphocreatine concentrations did increase following oral supplementation, confirming that dietary creatine reaches the brain in functionally meaningful quantities at sufficient doses. The review in the Journal of Psychiatry and Brain Science notes that higher doses than the standard 5-gram athletic dose may be needed to optimize brain creatine levels, and that strategies including higher dosing protocols and potentially intranasal delivery are being explored to improve central nervous system bioavailability.

The Supplement Nobody Told You Was a Brain Drug

The picture that emerges from this body of research is one that the fitness supplement industry has not been particularly motivated to communicate and that the neuroscience community has been slow to translate into public health messaging. Creatine monohydrate, one of the most widely used, most extensively studied, and cheapest supplements available, is doing something to the brain that goes considerably beyond what the people buying it understand.

It is raising phosphocreatine levels in neurons. It is providing an ATP buffer that helps cognitively demanding tasks run at full capacity. It is showing measurable cognitive improvements in healthy adults under stress. It is emerging as a potential adjunct for depression treatment. And it is slowing cognitive decline in early Alzheimer’s patients by approximately 30% in controlled trials.

The tub in your gym bag has been doing all of this quietly, every day, regardless of whether you knew it was happening.

Sources:

1. Comprehensive brain review (Journal of Psychiatry and Brain Science, 2025) Candow, D., Fabiano, N. Creatine Supplementation: More Is Likely Better for Brain Bioenergetics, Health and Function. Journal of Psychiatry and Brain Science, 2025; 10. https://jpbs.hapres.com/htmls/JPBS_1766_Detail.html

2. CABA pilot trial (Alzheimer’s & Dementia: TRCI, 2025) Smith, A.N., Choi, I.Y., Lee, P., Sullivan, D.K., Burns, J.M., Swerdlow, R.H., et al. Creatine monohydrate pilot in Alzheimer’s: Feasibility, brain creatine, and cognition. Alzheimer’s & Dementia: Translational Research & Clinical Interventions, 2025; 11(2): e70101. DOI: 10.1002/trc2.70101 https://alz-journals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/trc2.70101

3. Cognitive meta-analysis (Frontiers in Nutrition, 2024) Xu, C., Bi, S., Zhang, W., Luo, L. The effects of creatine supplementation on cognitive function in adults: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Frontiers in Nutrition, 2024; 11: 1424972. DOI: 10.3389/fnut.2024.1424972 https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/nutrition/articles/10.3389/fnut.2024.1424972/full

4. Creatine and depression adjunct (2025) Sherpa, et al. Creatine as add-on to cognitive behavioral therapy for depression. 2025. https://www.psychiatrypodcast.com/psychiatry-psychotherapy-podcast/episode-238-creatine-mental-health-benefits

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

5. Dav2d

Source: https://jbkempf.com/blog/2026/dav2d/
Site: jbkempf.com
Submitter: captain_bender (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-31 11:44 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 404 points · 149 comments

Scrape failed: http 429

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

6. New Beam Spring Keyboards

Source: https://www.modelfkeyboards.com/product/beam-spring-b104-keyboard/
Site: modelfkeyboards.com
Submitter: recursivedoubts (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-29 13:39 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 66 points · 47 comments
Length: 10 words (~1 min read)
Language: en

Loading…

Please wait while we verify you're not a bot…

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

7. United Airlines 767 returns to Newark after Bluetooth name sparks alert

Source: https://simpleflying.com/united-airlines-767-returns-newark-bluetooth-name-alert/
Site: Simple Flying
Author: Luke Bodell
Published: 2026-05-31
HN activity: 284 points · 446 comments
Length: 709 words (~4 min read)
Language: en

Published May 31, 2026, 6:26 AM EDT

Luke has over a decade of experience as a travel writer and aviation analyst. As a passionate traveler based across the Middle East and Asia, Luke offers strong insights into the industry. Based in South East Asia.

A United Airlines Boeing 767-400ER bound for Palma de Mallorca, Spain, made a mid-Atlantic U-turn after a passenger's threatening Bluetooth speaker name triggered a security alert. Early reports indicate that a teenage passenger onboard named their device 'BOMB,' and the discoverable name escalated quickly into a bomb-threat response.

Unlock Personalized Content & Exclusive Features

Join the community to discuss trending topics with top authors, personalize your feed, and get fewer ads.

Log in or Create an Account For Free

*Required: 8 chars, 1 capital letter, 1 number

or

By creating an account, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. You also agree to receive our newsletters; you can unsubscribe any time.

United Airlines Bluetooth Threat Incident
Credit: Flightradar24

According to flight tracking data, United Flight 236 from Newark Liberty International Airport (EWR) to Palma De Mallorca Airport (PMI) departed Newark at 6:08 PM local time, and was approximately 60 minutes into its transatlantic journey before the security situation escalated. A passenger on the flight provided more details on Reddit, stating that a flight attendant told passengers over the PA system that they "must turn off Bluetooth immediately," or else the aircraft would have to turn around.

Date

May 30, 2026

Airline

United Airlines

Flight Code

UA236

Aircraft Type

Boeing 767-400ER (N67052)

Departure Airport

Newark Liberty International Airport (EWR)

Destination Airport

Palma de Mallorca Airport (PMI)

Fate

Returned to EWR; passengers boarded a replacement flight

This was repeated multiple times, with the crew eventually issuing a final one-minute warning. However, not all passengers complied with the instructions, as there were still two active Bluetooth devices after the ultimatum was issued. The aircraft subsequently squawked 7700 (the code for a general emergency) and turned around, landing back in EWR at 8:50 PM after spending almost three hours in the air. Simple Flying contacted United for comment on this incident, but a representative could not be reached before publication.

Bluetooth Speaker Name Set To 'BOMB'
Credit: Shutterstock

As per recordings from LiveATC.net, a member of United's ground team said that the Bluetooth speaker name had been set to a "four-letter word," later reported by AirLive as 'BOMB.' Passengers on the flight were reportedly told that up to ten "agents" would be waiting for the aircraft in Newark to determine the origin of the threat.

Those onboard were also instructed to leave all their belongings on the aircraft before deplaning. Saturday's incident has parallels with another security scare that occurred on a United flight earlier this month. During this incident, a Wi-Fi hotspot named "Free Palestine, F Zionists" prompted the pilot to issue a warning to the cabin, telling the passenger responsible that they had "30 seconds" to remove the name or the FBI would meet the aircraft.

Additionally, in April, two United flights were evacuated on back-to-back days due to bomb threats, demonstrating how seriously these incidents are taken. Though some have questioned why anyone intending to blow up a plane would broadcast the word bomb, many terrorist acts have relied on the threat of a bomb as leverage during attempted hijackings or hostage situations.

Related

Passengers Board Replacement Flight
Credit: Shutterstock

Passengers on the flight arrived back in Newark just before 9:00 PM on Saturday evening, and were met by a significant contingent of local and federal law enforcement. They were asked to take only their passports and phones with them, leaving their cabin bags on the aircraft. After spending several hours on the ground as security teams completed their sweep, travelers would eventually depart Newark on a replacement flight in the early hours.

The replacement flight was operated by the same aircraft, a Boeing 767-400ER (registration N67052), but would not take off until around 02:30 AM the next day. At the time of publication, the flight is currently over the Atlantic and is expected to land in Palma de Mallorca in the afternoon local time. Before passengers could board this flight, they were required to pass through TSA security for a second time.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

8. The four programming questions from my 1994 Microsoft internship interview (2023)

Source: https://www.computerenhance.com/p/the-four-programming-questions-from
Site: Computer, Enhance!
Author: Casey Muratori
Published: 2023-08-02
HN activity: 86 points · 34 comments
Length: 1.6K words (~7 min read)
Language: en

There are no Performance-Aware Programming lessons this week because it is Summer Internship 1994 Week here on Computer, Enhance! This week will feature five posts about the programming questions I was asked when I interviewed for a Microsoft summer internship way, way back in 1994. Normally scheduled lessons will resume next week.

Long, long, long ago — I believe it was in 1994, but it could have been 1993 — I had to interview at Microsoft for a summer intern position. I interviewed with four separate people, and each one asked me a classic Microsoft interview “programming question”.

Of course, there wasn’t much of an internet back then, so I had no idea that was going to happen. I had no idea what a classic Microsoft programming question even was, or that they would be asking me them in the interviews.

What’s more, being young and inexperienced at the time, I had actually never had anyone ask me to solve a programming question on the spot before. It was a brand new experience for me, and although I would never recommend this style of question as an interview today, I can tell you that as a teenager it was a tremendous amount of fun.

It was so much fun, in fact, that I remember all four questions to this day.

This week, I’d like to share the four questions with you, talk about the answers that were “correct” at the time, and perhaps go a little further and ask what the “correct” answers might be today given the evolution of desktop computing. Each day this week, I’ll post an answer to one of the questions until we’ve completed all four.

For now, let’s look at the questions themselves…

I believe the idea behind the interview process was that the programming questions would get harder as you went through the day. So the first question was the easiest: write C code that copies a rectangle from one buffer to another.

I do not remember precisely which parameterization they gave me to do. Because this question was easy for me even at the time, my memory of it is less specific — but it was something like this:

void CopyRect(char *BufferA, int PitchA, char *BufferB, int PitchB, 
              int FromMinX, int FromMinY, int FromMaxX, int FromMaxY,
              int ToMinX, int ToMinY)
{
    /* Fill this in */
}

In other words, given buffers A and B, a “From” rectangle in buffer A, and a “To” position in buffer B, write the code that copies the elements from A to B. Pixels were often only 8 bits at that time, so I believe the elements were 8-bits in this question.

As you can see, this is a pretty easy question, at least for anyone who knows C/C++. It might be a bit scarier for people who aren’t used to working with pointers, but in general, the idea of a rectangle copy is fairly straightforward. I was not asked to do anything specific with regards to the performance, either, so it was really just designed to see if I understood this kind of thing at all.

Weirdly, the second person who interviewed me asked a very similar question, but one that was seemingly easier than the first question. This was the only one that might be considered “out of sequence”, since questions 3 and 4 ramped up in difficulty quite a bit.

Question number two was a string copy. Generally speaking, if you can write a rectangle copy, you can write a string copy, but, I guess they had their reasons for asking this.

Specifically, the strings were ASCII-Z, which means one byte per element, null-terminated — something like this:

void CopyString(char *From, char *To)
{
    /* Fill this in */
}

This is a strange question for a number of reasons, not the least of which being the modifications that they asked me to make after I (successfully) wrote it out. Of the four interviews, in retrospect, this is the only one where I’m left wondering if maybe the interviewer didn’t really know their stuff that well… it’s hard to say, but, as I’ll describe in more detail when I answer this question, there were some things in this interview that, with the benefit of all the experience I have now, I look back on and scratch my head a little bit.

The third question was by far the most interesting of the four, and quite a bit more difficult than the first two. It’s still not actually difficult, but given my relative inexperience with problems like it at the time, I was not able to solve this one on the spot. But it’s a fantastic little problem just the same!

The question comes from an implementation of a flood fill algorithm the interviewer had written for a Microsoft product. I forget which product, but I think it was some flavor of BASIC. It was for the graphics library of some language product like this, because I remember the interviewer specifically saying the solution “allowed us to beat Borland’s performance”.

For folks who don’t know what a “flood fill” is, it’s like the paint bucket in Photoshop: given an image and a particular X,Y coordinate in that image, you want to find all the connected pixels of that color and change their color to something else. While this is not really a feature people think much about today (you do not, for example, see a lot of “how to implement a flood fill using OpenGL” posts on the internet, etc.), it was a very common operation in hobbyist graphics libraries of the era. My recollection is that many BASICs I encountered in the early days all had flood fills.

For this question, they did not ask me to implement an actual flood fill. Rather, they asked me to implement the code that detected whether a particular byte matched a particular color.

Now normally this would not be much of a question, because that’s just an equals operator — if each byte represents a pixel. But the catch in this question is that this was for four-color CGA mode, where pixels occupy only two bits each.

This means that each byte contains four pixels packed together, not one. So you cannot just use a simple comparison (at least not in those days, since SIMD instructions did not exist on home computers). So the question becomes, what is the most efficient way to test to see if any of the four pixels in a byte contains a given color?

In other words:

int ContainsColor(char unsigned Pixel, char unsigned Color)
{
    /* Fill in the computation of true (non-zero) or false (zero) here */
}

Additionally, I was allowed to store Color however I wanted — so if I needed some precomputation, I was allowed to bake it in there.

This was my favorite question of the four by far, even though I couldn’t do it. In retrospect, it’s even more my favorite now, because it’s a classic example of doing SIMD-style programming without any SIMD instructions. It was the first time I’d ever seen anything quite like that, but of course, it was not the last.

The fourth and final question was somewhat ridiculous. While there’s nothing wrong with asking someone to write the code to outline a circle, it’s almost entirely an experience question. Either you already know the algorithm that you’d use for this sort of thing on 1990s desktop hardware, or you don’t. There’s no chance you can figure it out on the spot, because the original discovery of the algorithm itself was pretty darn spectacular.

So, question number four is a fine question if you want to know how well-read the candidate is. If not, it’s mostly useless. Needless to say, I didn’t get this one in the interview, because I’d never seen the algorithm (or anything like it). I did eventually write the code on the whiteboard for it, but the interviewer had to hold my hand through most of it.

Anyway, the question takes the following form:

void Plot(int X, int Y); /* This is given as already existing */

void OutlineCircle(int Cx, int Cy, int R)
{
    /* Fill in code here that calls Plot once for each pixel on the outline */
}

You may be wondering why everything is an integer instead of a floating point number. Well, it was 1994, and floats still weren’t fast enough on desktop computers to be used for most things. Integer was still preferred most of the time for graphics. Things were moving toward float, to be sure, but the era of “most graphics happens in float” had not yet arrived.

Those are the four questions I was asked in my internship interview. I will be giving my answers — both then, and now — in the next four posts. But before you read those, give them a shot yourself! They were a lot of fun for me at the time, and I think you might enjoy them too. If you’re an experienced programmer, you already know how to do all of them, but if you’re like me, you will still enjoy rederiving the last two from scratch!

And of course, if you’re not already a Computer Enhance subscriber and would like to sign up to haver our free or paid posts delivered to your inbox, you can always pick a subscription level here:

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

9. Meta launches Instagram, Facebook, and WhatsApp subscriptions

Source: https://techcrunch.com/2026/05/27/meta-officially-launches-instagram-facebook-and-whatsapp-subscriptions-with-more-to-come-including-ai-plans/
Site: TechCrunch
Author: Sarah Perez
Published: 2026-05-27
HN activity: 135 points · 212 comments
Length: 949 words (~5 min read)
Language: en-US

Meta is doubling down on its subscription offerings. On Wednesday, the social networking giant announced it’s now rolling out its consumer subscription plans globally for its flagship apps, Instagram, Facebook, and WhatsApp, and beginning tests of new subscriptions for businesses, creators, and Meta AI users.

For a few dollars per month, consumers subscribing to Instagram Plus ($3.99/mo), Facebook Plus ($3.99/mo), or WhatsApp Plus ($2.99/mo) will gain access to extra features, like profile customization, super reactions, and story insights, among other things.

In an announcement, Meta’s head of product, Naomi Gleit, noted that “more fun features” will be added in the future.

Meanwhile, Meta will begin testing other offerings, including professional plans for creators and businesses, and AI-focused plans for all users. These new tests will be branded as “Meta One,” which will serve as the company’s home for its subscription offerings going forward.
Image Credits:Jens Büttner/picture alliance (opens in a new window) / Getty Images

Meta confirmed it was planning a subscription offering earlier this year, with its initial tests rolling out in the spring. The idea behind the plans aimed at consumers is to provide additional features for power users who want more from their social apps. It also allows Meta to diversify its revenue streams beyond advertising by extracting more value from its existing audience of billions, given the limited growth opportunities for these apps, which have already achieved global saturation.

The new “Plus” plans are tailored to each individual app, with Facebook Plus and Instagram Plus focused more on social expression, while WhatsApp Plus focuses on personalization and messaging.

However, the company tells us the new plans don’t replace its existing offering, Meta Verified, which is focused on verification, impersonation protection, and extra support. (This could change in time, but for now, Meta is not winding down the older plans.)

For starters, the new Instagram Plus plan gives subscribers access to extra features, like the ability to see how many people have rewatched your Story in aggregate, as well as the ability to create unlimited audience lists for Stories, beyond the “Close Friends” option. Users will also be able to spotlight a story once a week for additional views, extend a story beyond 24 hours, preview a story without showing up as a viewer, search their story viewer list to see who is watching, and more. Users will also be able to post straight to their profile and highlight without showing up on their followers’ feeds.

There are also other features like Super Heart animated reactions for Stories, custom app icons, customizable fonts for profile bios, and access to additional pins for your profile.

These features are designed to better serve creators and those looking to grow their following and understand their audience, but they could also appeal to heavy users.

Facebook Plus offers a similar set of features to Instagram Plus. WhatsApp Plus, however, offers other features, like app themes, custom ringtones, additional pinned chats, list customization, premium stickers, and more.
Image Credits:picture alliance / Contributor (opens in a new window) / Getty Images

AI plans and more, including those for creators and businesses

Alongside the launch, Meta says it will begin testing even more subscription plans, which is where things start to get confusing.

For Meta AI users, it will test two plans — Meta One Plus ($7.99/mo) and Meta One Premium ($19.99/mo) with the same features, but the Premium plan unlocks more capacity on higher compute queries. That means the Premium plan would offer deeper reasoning for complex tasks (i.e., more of “thinking mode” in the Meta AI app or on the web). It would also offer more video and image-generation capabilities across Meta’s apps.

Meta AI will remain free for more casual users, but these plans follow the same path as those put forth by other AI model providers that charge for additional compute and heavier usage. The plans will later expand in the weeks to come with more benefits for those who use AI glasses, Meta says.

The AI plans will start testing next month, initially in Singapore, Guatemala, and Bolivia.

Two other plans for creators and businesses will begin tests later this week, in markets including Saudi Arabia, Morocco, Thailand, and Bangladesh.

The Meta One Essential plan ($14.99/mo) will offer the Verified badge, impersonation protection, and an enhanced linksheet where users can link out to their online presence across social channels and the web, similar to Meta Verified.

The more expensive Meta One Advanced plan ($49.99/mo) will include the Essential plan benefits, as well as the ability to be featured in the Facebook feed, appear higher in Facebook and Instagram search results, gain attention with a bold “Follow” button on Reels, and automatically send “follow” invitations to people who engage with your content.

It can also help creators and businesses drive people to their website or shop through links in Instagram posts and Instagram Reels, and through enhanced Facebook and Instagram profiles with their expanded linksheets. These plans, not surprisingly, include better analytics, including deeper, competitive insights on Instagram and custom audience insights on Facebook.

Advanced plan subscribers will have access to optimized scheduling tools, tools to share access with other account moderators (without sharing a password), and notifications that alert you when others on Facebook or Instagram reuse your content so you can request a label crediting your original reel.

Gleit acknowledged that Meta is still experimenting with these AI and professional plans for the time being, but aims to bring them all together under Meta One, where they will then continue to be updated and expanded over time.

When you purchase through links in our articles, we may earn a small commission. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

10. Chuwi Minibook X: the netbook we deserve

Source: https://tylercipriani.com/blog/2026/05/28/chuwi-minibook-x/
Site: tylercipriani.com
Author: Tyler Cipriani
Submitted: 2026-05-31 22:59 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 107 points · 94 comments
Length: 893 words (~4 min read)

Netbooks are dead, but the Chuwi Minibook X scratches the same itch.

The Minibook X is a 10.5″ x86_64 sub-ultrabook with 16GB RAM, a 512GB NVMe drive, and only one majorly annyoing Linux quirk.

I needed a knock-around laptop, so I bought myself a Minibook for my birthday last year. The more I tote it around, the more fun I’m having with this ridiculous little computer.

Quick specs

Much like the netbooks of yore, the Minibook is a budget machine. But it’s 2026, so even budget machines pack more oomph than I need from a utility laptop.

CPU 4-core/4-thread 3.6GHz Intel N150 Twin Lake
16 GB RAM – LPDDR5-6400 – soldered 😿
512GB NVMe – upgradable
10.51” IPS 2K 16:10 screen
28.88Wh Li-Ion battery
Weight: 911g
Ports: 2×USB-C (1×PD charging)
Cost: $350

One oddity is that the Minibook comes bundled with a 12V/2A USB-C charger. I chucked the charger; I worried I’d fry some 5V SoC someday. The Minibook works fine with a PD charger.

I’d assume the 12V charger was a cost-saving choice, but it also creates some weird possibilities for DC/off-grid setups.

Linux and weirdness: sideways panels and kernel parameters

The fediverse told me that Minibook runs Linux “boringly well,” which was almost true.

I tried Debian, then jumped to NixOS for kicks.

What works:

Camera/Microphone/Speakers
Touchscreen
Sleep/Suspend
Hibernate
Keyboard backlight
USB-C HDMI
Bluetooth (non-free blobs – Intel)
Wi-Fi 6 (non-free blobs – Intel)

But on first boot, the screen orientation is 270° clockwise:

The Chuwi’s screen is a panel from a cheap tablet; the screen rotation issue is a hardware problem (the screen is mounted sideways). To fix the screen’s rotation, I had to tweak screen orientation at every software layer. Fixing this problem was a journey:

Bootloader – Switched from systemd-boot to grub, carrying some unmerged GRUB rotation patches on top.
Initrd – Tell the Intel display driver about the panel orientation via a kernel parameter, and force the Intel driver to load in the initramfs. On NixOS: boot.kernelParams = ["video=DSI-1:panel_orientation=right_side_up"]; and boot.initrd.kernelModules = ["i915"]; (see Kernel docs for modedb default video mode support)
Desktop environment – For X11, good ole xrandr --output DSI-1 --rotate right. Wayland picked this up from the DRM connector. This one was easy.
Framebuffer – Ensure all TTYs have the proper orientation by adding fbcon=rotate:1 to kernel parameters boot.kernelParams = ["fbcon=rotate:1"]; (see Kernel docs for framebuffer console boot options)

Behold, the final result in all its glory:
Non-rotated system boot. Zero Cool's bootscreen courtesy of mainframed/Hackers-Plymouth

Size, weight, and build

This computer is mind-bogglingly small. The build is sturdy and totable; it’ll hold up to a backpack jostling.

The laptop’s case is MacBook-esque: aluminum and good-looking. The MacBook Air’s dimensions dwarf the Chuwi’s, but the two laptops are about the same thickness.

A notebook that weighs more than a kilo is simply not a good thing

– Linus Torvalds

The Minibook weighs in just shy of a kilo at 912 grams.

Perf, thermals, and power

tl;dr: you get what you pay for. But battery life and cooling are better than I’d have guessed.

The Minibook X was never going to compile the Linux kernel in record time. But the performance matches the specs, it stays cool, and it has enough battery life to run a movie marathon.

Numbers:

Geekbench6 (a fun side-quest to get running on NixOS), better than I expected.

Single-core: 1295
Multi-core: 3332
Wi-Fi 6 speed: 424 Mbps, more than enough to stream a 4K movie.
Power

Idle: 3.8W
During benchmark: ~15W

Battery: When I left the 1995 classic film “Hackers” looping in VLC, the battery lasted about 6 hours.

Heat: Running stress-ng for 10 minutes, the hottest part of the laptop chassis remained below 90°F (32°C):

What I dislike

There’s so much to dislike about this laptop:

Screen is terrible – 2K? 50Hz refresh rate? Why!?
Keyboard is terrible – it only registers keystrokes when you hit the exact center of each key.
Touchpad is terrible – It’s a diving board-style, without physical buttons.
Sound is meh – I can hear the tinny laptop speaker fine, but it’s underwhelming. I’ve never tried tweaking it in Pipewire, though; it’s possible it could be better.

But “terrible” is in comparison to the nicest modern laptops in existence. Everything I listed here works fine. I’m honestly blown away when I tune my expectations to the sub-$400 laptop range.

Verdict

In The Death and Life of Great American Cities, Jane Jacobs wrote, “new ideas require old buildings”: cheap spaces let people try risky ideas.

The Chuwi Minibook X is an old building.

I can brick the Minibook and have a normal Monday on my serious work laptop. Nothing has to work, which makes it perfect to try out new Linux desktop stuff:

NixOS – I’ve been using Debian for 15 years+, figured I’d try joining the NixOS cult for a while.
RiverWM – I’m on a quest to find the Wayland version of XMonad; River is pretty close.
KDE Plasma – I’ve used a tiling window manager for over a decade. What’s it like to use a desktop that Just Works™?
Steam – Never been much into games, but I decided to give Steam a try since, well, why not?

Cheap, weird computers like the Chuwi make it safe to play. And playing with computers is still fun.
Playing Melatonin on Steam on the Chuwi

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

11. Decades of Effort Restore Steelhead and Salmon Passage on Alameda Creek

Source: https://www.fisheries.noaa.gov/feature-story/decades-effort-restore-steelhead-and-salmon-passage-californias-alameda-creek
Site: NOAA
Submitter: rawgabbit (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-29 18:37 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 14 points · 1 comments
Length: 1.7K words (~8 min read)
Language: en

A steelhead leaps up a barrier on its way to spawning grounds. Credit: Adobe Stock

Last year, California Trout and Pacific Gas & Electric removed the final barrier to fish passage on California’s Alameda Creek with funding from NOAA Fisheries’ Office of Habitat Conservation. For the first time in 50 years, threatened Central California Coast steelhead and other migratory fish can reach spawning grounds and juvenile rearing habitat in the upper watershed.

Construction crews relocated a Pacific Gas & Electric (PG&E) natural gas pipeline and removed its concrete covering. The pipeline had spanned the creek and created an 8-foot drop in the creek. They installed the new pipeline section deep below the creek bed, removed the old pipe section, and regraded the stream channel—restoring a natural pathway for fish.

Alameda Creek was once the largest producer of steelhead and Chinook salmon in San Francisco Bay. It may once again become a stronghold for migratory fish.

This project is the culmination of nearly three decades of advocacy, science, and collaboration. Working together, partners opened fish passage at 18 barriers along the creek that had blocked fish for generations.

“This project shows what’s possible when partners come together to solve complex challenges,” said NOAA Marine Habitat Resource Specialist Jonas Veazey. “Now that the final barrier on the mainstem has been removed, steelhead will be able to migrate freely and natural stream processes will be restored to the reach of the former barrier.”

The lower Alameda Creek flows through a highly altered landscape on its way to San Francisco Bay while good quality spawning habitat lies within the hills upstream. Credit: Adobe Stock

How It All Started

In 1997, environmentalist Jeff Miller, who grew up in the East Bay, set out to see whether steelhead could be restored to Alameda Creek.

He convinced his housemate, a student pilot, to fly him over the watershed. Below them, the creek stretched 40 miles from the remote Diablo Range to San Francisco Bay.

“Once I saw how big the watershed was and how untouched the upper river was, I was kind of hooked,” said Miller. “I said, ‘I’m going to work on restoring it. We’ll get steelhead back. Should only take a couple of years.’”

He laughs at that now. It took 28.

A Creek Cut Off from the Sea

Even as Miller began his campaign to restore the creek, the reality was stark. The last time anyone saw a steelhead in the upper part of the creek was in 1967.

“The runs of steelhead in the entire Bay Area are a fraction of what they used to be,” said Patrick Samuel, California Trout senior scientist. “The watersheds that drain directly into San Francisco Bay may have a few dozen to a couple of hundred adult fish successfully spawning each year. There's very little comprehensive monitoring to know the exact status of the Central California Coast steelhead in this region.”

A series of road culverts, rubber water control dams, and other structures blocked upstream habitat. While some Chinook salmon tried to spawn in the lower creek, steelhead could not access their spawning grounds higher in the watershed.

Yet signs of resilience remained. In the upper watershed, populations of resident rainbow trout—steelhead that don’t migrate to the ocean— survived. Scientists at the NOAA Fisheries Southwest Fisheries Science Center in Santa Cruz showed that some of these fish still carry the genetic traits associated with migration. That offered hope that if juveniles could migrate downstream to the Pacific, they might return as adult steelhead.

The returning steelhead could reach high-quality spawning habitat more than 20 miles upstream in the Sunol Regional Wilderness.

“The Sunol Regional Wilderness has everything migratory fish are looking for,” said Claire Buchanan, Central California regional director for California Trout. “There’s incredible cobble and gravel for spawning, tree canopy for shade, and constant cool, clean water.”

Volunteers including Jeff Miller, (center, wearing black) rescuing steelhead in 2019. Credit: Jeff Miller

Opening Alameda Creek for Steelhead

To drum up early support for opening Alameda Creek, Miller rallied local fishermen and community members to rescue fish stranded below barriers on the creek in front of TV news crews. Residents who paid for water use mailed out day-glow colored postcards to local agencies that said: “I want steelhead back in my creek.”

Miller founded the nonprofit Alameda Creek Alliance in 1997 and helped form the Alameda Creek Fisheries Restoration Workgroup in 1999. It brought together water managers, regulatory agencies, nonprofits, and community groups. Despite many setbacks, the Workgroup slowly began implementing projects to address priorities for steelhead recovery. Over two decades, they worked together to remove unnecessary structures and built fish passage in other places.

By 2023, only one major obstacle remained on the mainstem Alameda Creek.

PG&E construction crews begin laying a new gas pipeline 20 feet below the creek bed. Credit: Mikey Wier/CalTrout

The Final Project

Near the town of Sunol in Alameda County, a PG&E pipeline crossed under Alameda Creek. It carried natural gas to San Jose and surrounding communities in the South Bay. The pipe was several feet below the surface, but a protective concrete erosion-control mat on top of it created a wall and an 8-foot-high drop in the creek. Most fish couldn’t get past it.

In the summer of 2022, PG&E reached out to California Trout to partner on restoring the area. NOAA’s Office of Habitat Conservation awarded $4.3 million for the project. PG&E, Oliver de Silva, and a Bay Area foundation provided the rest of the funding to complete the project.

Construction began last summer. First, a team of biologists relocated fish, frogs, and other species and diverted the creek into a pipe. PG&E crews dug a 20-foot-deep trench across the creek bed just downstream of the existing crossing. They installed a new pipeline in the trench and removed the old pipeline and concrete mat. Workers then regraded about 1,800 feet of stream channel to create a gradual, natural slope to replace the 8-foot drop that had existed before.

They finished in fall 2025.

A Collaborative Effort

A wide range of partners came together to make the project possible:

NOAA Fisheries Office of Habitat Conservation
California Trout
Pacific Gas & Electric
San Francisco Public Utilities Commission
Alameda County Water District
East Bay Regional Park District
California Department of Fish and Wildlife
Alameda Creek Alliance
DeSilva Gates Aggregates
Hanford ARC
Michels Corporation
Sequoia Ecological Consulting
Stantec Consulting Services
Martin Marietta Materials
Alameda Creek Fisheries Restoration Workgroup

For PG&E, this partnership is what pushed this project to the finish line.

"This was a first for us—partnering with conservation organizations to get something like this done," said Kelvin Qiu, PG&E senior project manager. "Working with California Trout and NOAA made the project far more efficient and cost effective. And in the end, we accomplished two things at once: a permanent, safe home for our pipeline and restored fish passage. That's a pretty good outcome."

A pair of steelhead in Alameda Creek. Credit: Jason Warren/Alameda County Water District

The Return of Migratory Fish

In November 2025, the very week the pipeline project was finished, biologists spotted a male and female Chinook salmon swimming past the PG&E restoration site. Based on the best available records, this was the first time salmon accessed this part of the watershed since the 1950s. News of the success of the project spread rapidly around the Bay Area and beyond.

But adult steelhead remain more elusive. California Trout set up a PIT tag antenna just upstream of the former PG&E barrier. It detects any fish previously tagged by scientists migrating past the antennas laid on the bottom of the creek bed. As of May 2026, the PIT antenna had not pinged for any adult steelhead moving past the project site. This is not surprising, though. Steelhead mostly travel at night and avoid people, and untagged fish go undetected.

However, in February 2026, an Alameda County Water District employee photographed a male and female steelhead using a fish ladder in the lower watershed on their way upstream. They were the first documented adult steelhead moving upstream on their own past barriers in the lower section of the creek in decades.

“When that photo came out, everyone in the restoration community was thrilled—there had been so many years without steelhead,” said Alison Weber-Stover, NOAA Fisheries ecologist. “Alameda Creek’s restoration gives me so much hope. The potential for steelhead to return to the watershed is far greater than in other areas of San Francisco Bay. And, the 30-year restoration effort is a heartwarming story of what people can do when they work together."

The Alameda County Water District has also documented juvenile rainbow trout moving downstream. Biologists with the San Francisco Public Utilities Commission PIT-tagged these fish in upper Alameda Creek. This confirmed the juveniles were migrating toward the ocean—and might someday return as adult steelhead.

Newly-accessible spawning habitat in the Sunol Regional Wilderness in the upper Alameda Creek Watershed. Credit: California Trout

What’s Next

Partners are now focused on monitoring and long-term recovery. Scientists are tracking fish movement, expanding tagging and tracking efforts, and identifying priority areas for future restoration.

The San Francisco Public Utilities Commission plans to open the Alameda Creek Watershed Center, where visitors can learn about the creek’s history and ecology. California Trout helped create an educational curriculum and is currently working on an exhibit about the collaborative restoration project for the Center.

“We’re going to have an exhibit with information about fish passage and why it's important,” said Buchanan. “This is going to get the community even more interested and involved in what's happening in their backyard."

Miller’s work also continues. He’s working with partners to complete projects to:

Improve fish survival through a flood-control channel on the lower creek
Restore tidal habitat at the creek mouth in San Francisco Bay
Begin a pilot project to return beavers to Alameda Creek

In the meantime, he’s still watching the upper watershed.

“I think the first time I actually find a spawning steelhead up there, I’ll probably fall down and start crying,” he said.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

12. The Speed of Prototyping in the Age of AI

Source: https://darylcecile.net/notes/speed-of-prototyping-age-of-ai
Site: darylcecile.net
Author: Daryl Cecile
Submitted: 2026-05-31 16:37 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 120 points · 63 comments
Length: 1.3K words (~6 min read)
Language: en

The Speed of Prototyping in the Age of AI

Sunday 31st May, 2026 · 7 minutes

Note: These are personal reflections on how my workflow has shifted over the past year, not a pitch for any tool. Your mileage will (and probably should) vary.

A few years back I wrote about my love of throwaway prototypes; those little proof-of-concepts that exist purely to get an idea out of your head and into something tangible. At the time, my biggest bottleneck was me; the time it took to scaffold a project, wire up the boring bits, and get to a place where the interesting parts could actually be tested. Fast forward to now, and that bottleneck has all but vanished.

I've been a little hesitant to write about this. I've already shared some cautious thoughts on AI and where it fits into my workflow, and I stand by all of it. I still think the industry is figuring things out in real time, and I still think it pays to be careful. But cautious doesn't mean blind, and the honest truth is that AI has changed how quickly I can go from "I wonder if…" to "oh, it works".

The recent repos

If you've looked at my GitHub recently, you'll have noticed a stream of new repos showing up. Sakoa, a progressive systems language I've been designing from scratch, complete with an effect system, three memory modes, and a MIR with multiple backends. Kato, a notation language meant to sit somewhere between JSON, TOML, and YAML, but explicitly designed to be friendly to both humans and agents. Seal, a tiny CLI that quietly kills the .env file by stashing secrets in OS-native credential stores. Karabiner, an iOS-first agent-native messaging app. Plim, a Notion-inspired, embeddable block editor for the web with a framework-agnostic core and React bindings. And a few more knocking around that aren't ready for the spotlight yet.

A few years ago, that list would have been three repos with READMEs, two abandoned branches, and one working prototype I'd be quietly proud of. Now? The prototypes exist. They run. Some of them have tests. A couple are starting to look like real projects. And while not all of them will turn into anything serious (and that's kind of the point), there is something really satisfying about being able to actually try an idea, rather than just talk about it.

Zooming out

The thing nobody really warned me about is how much AI changes the shape of engineering work, not just the speed of it. When I'm not the one typing every line, I'm forced to think differently. I'm thinking about boundaries, contracts, and how the pieces fit together. I'm writing prompts and specs that describe the system holistically, before the system exists.

That shift sounds small but it's been quietly transformative. I'm planning at a more abstracted level, framing problems before I solve them, and I've gotten noticeably better at delegating; both to agents and to people. Turns out that the skill of "describing exactly what success looks like, in a way that a junior engineer (or a model) can act on without you in the room" is the same skill in both directions. Sharing vision, breaking work down, anticipating where things might go wrong; these are muscles I've been forced to exercise much more deliberately, and I'm better for it.

On productivity

I've been tracking this loosely for a while, mostly out of curiosity. Based on my own day-to-day engineering tasks (measured roughly by time-to-PR for typical pieces of work), I'm averaging about 4x faster than I was before agents became a meaningful part of my workflow. Some days it's more, some days it's less, and some days the agent does something delightfully strange that costs me an hour to undo (which I'll happily count against the average).

But that number understates the more interesting effect: the kind of work I can take on has changed. Things I would have previously parked under "nice idea, no time" now slot into an afternoon. Refactors I would have winced at are doable. The cost of trying something has dropped enough that I'll just try things I'd otherwise have argued about in a doc.

The cost of speed

It's not all upside. The same velocity that makes me productive also means I'm typing less code than I used to, and I've noticed I have to be deliberate about keeping my own technical dexterity sharp. If I let it, the tools will happily do all of it; and that's not really a deal I want to make. I still want to know how the things I work on actually work.

So I've started carving out time for the manual bits on purpose. Implementing something end-to-end by hand. Reading source code instead of asking for a summary. Sitting with a debugger instead of pasting a stack trace into a chat. It's slower, sometimes frustrating, and probably necessary; both for my own sanity, and because the moments where AI isn't enough still call for an engineer who actually knows what they're doing.

The flip side of this is much more enjoyable: with the new velocity, it's surprisingly easy to carve out time for exploration, learning, and prototyping. The hours I used to spend on the unavoidable middle bits of a project are now freed up to play with new ideas, dig into things I don't fully understand, or just build something weird for the sake of it. That's a trade I'm happy to make.

Impact at work

This new pace has shown up in my day job too. Without going into too much detail (I'll save the proper write-ups for once I've got the appropriate sign-off), the velocity boost has let me make impact in a few different areas of my role that I wouldn't have had the bandwidth to touch otherwise:

I've been able to help bring up some automation that provides support to other engineers; a piece of work I'm genuinely proud of, and one I hope to write about properly soon.
I've also been digging into our internal codespace bootstrap times and have managed to land changes that cut them down by roughly ~50%. There's a longer post in me about how we got there, but it'll have to wait.

Both of those are the kind of thing I probably would have had ideas about a couple of years ago but wouldn't have had the headroom to actually deliver alongside my core work. The change in velocity doesn't just speed up the things I was already doing; it expands the surface area of what I can do at all.

I'm not the only one noticing this

A few other engineers in the field have been writing about similar shifts, and it's been reassuring (and helpful) to read along. Two I'd particularly recommend:

I'd also nod at Simon Willison's superpowers post for a broader look at what coding agents are actually capable of in the wild; well worth a read if you haven't.

I still don't think AI is magic, and I'm still cautious about the broader picture; the environmental, financial, and social questions haven't gone anywhere. But for me, right now, the day-to-day reality is that I can move faster, think bigger, and ship more than I could before. And that's been genuinely fun.

I don't have a neat conclusion to wrap this up with. I'm just going to keep prototyping, keep getting my hands dirty when I need to, and keep paying attention to what changes and what doesn't. More thoughts as things continue to shift.

Until next time… ✌🏽

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

13. Reconciling Kubernetes cost estimates with CUR / FOCUS billing data

Source: https://github.com/tanrikuluozlem/burn
Site: GitHub
Submitter: OzlemT (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-29 17:06 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 28 points · 1 comments
Length: 956 words (~5 min read)
Language: en

Your Kubernetes cluster is burning money. Find out where.

No agent to deploy. No dashboard to maintain. No YAML to configure. Just install and run.

Why burn

Zero setup — brew install, run one command, get answers. No cluster agent, no persistent storage, no config files.
Full cost coverage — Compute, storage, load balancers, and GPU costs with real-time cloud pricing.
AI-powered — Ask questions in plain English, get kubectl commands you can copy-paste.
Slack-native — /burn for instant cost reports. /burn ask "..." for AI analysis.
Cloud + on-prem — Works with AWS EKS, Azure AKS, GCP GKE, and on-premise clusters.
Spot readiness — Identifies which workloads can safely move to spot instances with real-time discount and interruption rate.
Ingress LB detection — Detects load balancers from both Services and Ingress resources, with hostname deduplication.
Time-aware — --period 7d for weekly averages instead of point-in-time snapshots.

Install

# Homebrew
brew install tanrikuluozlem/burn/burn

# Upgrade
brew upgrade tanrikuluozlem/burn/burn

# Binary
VERSION=$(curl -s https://api.github.com/repos/tanrikuluozlem/burn/releases/latest | grep tag_name | cut -d'"' -f4 | tr -d 'v') && \
curl -L "https://github.com/tanrikuluozlem/burn/releases/latest/download/burn_${VERSION}_$(uname -s | tr '[:upper:]' '[:lower:]')_$(uname -m | sed 's/x86_64/amd64/;s/aarch64/arm64/').tar.gz" | tar xz

# Docker
docker pull ghcr.io/tanrikuluozlem/burn:latest

# Helm
git clone https://github.com/tanrikuluozlem/burn.git
helm install burn ./burn/charts/burn

# Go
go install github.com/tanrikuluozlem/burn/cmd/burn@latest

macOS: If you see a Gatekeeper warning, run: sudo xattr -d com.apple.quarantine $(which burn)

Quick start

# Cost breakdown (without Prometheus)
burn analyze

# With Prometheus (pass your Prometheus URL)
burn analyze --prometheus http://prometheus:9090

# 7-day average
burn analyze --prometheus http://prometheus:9090 --period 7d

# Drill into a namespace
burn analyze --prometheus http://prometheus:9090 --namespace argocd

# Spot readiness
burn analyze --prometheus http://prometheus:9090 --spot

Spot readiness

Real-time spot discount and interruption rate per instance type.

AI recommendations

Get cluster-wide or namespace-specific recommendations:

burn analyze --prometheus http://prometheus:9090 --period 7d --ai
burn analyze --prometheus http://prometheus:9090 --namespace app-backend --ai
burn ask --prometheus http://prometheus:9090 "why is argocd so expensive?"

Example: burn analyze --namespace app-backend --period 7d --ai

NAMESPACE: app-backend (3 pods, $17.19/mo)
──────────────────────────────────
POD                      CPU REQ→USED  MEM REQ→USED   COST/MO
app-backend-deploy-0001  200m → <1m    256Mi → 9Mi    $5.73
app-backend-deploy-0002  200m → <1m    256Mi → 9Mi    $5.73
app-backend-deploy-0003  200m → <1m    256Mi → 128Mi  $5.73

RECOMMENDATIONS
───────────────
The app-backend namespace costs $17.19/mo across 3 pods, but CPU efficiency
is critically low at ~0.1% — pods request 200m CPU each while p95 usage
is under 0.31m.

[!!] 1. Rightsize CPU Requests using p95 data
   app-backend-deploy-0001: p95 CPU is 0.22m → recommend 1m (1.5x p95)
   app-backend-deploy-0002: p95 CPU is 0.30m → recommend 1m (1.5x p95)
   app-backend-deploy-0003: p95 MEM is 128Mi (50% eff) — leave as-is
   $ kubectl set resources deployment app-backend -n app-backend \
     --requests=cpu=1m,memory=14Mi --limits=cpu=200m,memory=256Mi

[!!] 2. app-backend-ingress LB ($19.71/mo) costs more than the namespace
   The load balancer alone exceeds the $17.19/mo compute cost.
   If internal-only, switch to ClusterIP to eliminate the LB cost.
   $ kubectl patch svc app-backend-ingress -n app-backend \
     -p '{"spec": {"type": "ClusterIP"}}'

[!] 3. Enable VPA in Recommend Mode
   Prevent over-provisioning from recurring with continuous p95 tracking.
   $ kubectl apply -f vpa-app-backend.yaml


Ask questions in plain English

Requires ANTHROPIC_API_KEY environment variable.

Slack integration

Run burn as a Slack bot:

burn serve --port 8080 --prometheus http://prometheus:9090 --period 7d

Command What you get
/burn Full cost report — nodes, namespaces, idle cost, LB, storage
/burn ns argocd Pod-level breakdown for a namespace
/burn ask "what is the single biggest waste?" AI analysis with kubectl commands

Slack setup

Create a Slack App at https://api.slack.com/apps
Add Slash Command: /burn → point to your server URL + /slack
Set SLACK_SIGNING_SECRET and ANTHROPIC_API_KEY environment variables
Expose the server (e.g., ngrok for testing, load balancer for production)

On-prem and GPU clusters

Burn works with on-premise and GPU clusters. Set your own resource rates:

burn analyze \
  --cpu-price 0.05 \
  --ram-price 0.008 \
  --gpu-price 3.00 \
  --storage-price 0.10

Without custom pricing, cloud-equivalent rates are used as defaults.

How it works

Kubernetes API → nodes, pods, PVCs, services, ingresses
Prometheus     → actual CPU & memory usage (optional)
Cloud Pricing  → real VM, storage, and GPU prices (AWS, Azure, GCP)
         ↓
    Cost Engine → compute, storage, load balancers, GPU, idle detection
         ↓
    CLI / Slack / AI Recommendations


Pricing sources

Priority Source When
1 AWS/Azure pricing API AWS credentials available — real-time, region-aware
2 Embedded pricing DB No credentials — 600+ AWS, 300+ Azure instances, updated weekly
3 Static fallback Unknown instance type — estimates based on instance family

Storage and load balancer costs are fetched from cloud APIs when available, with static fallbacks. Usage-based charges (data processing, LCU) depend on traffic volume and are not included. GPU nodes are detected automatically and priced via ratio-based cost splitting.

Deploy to Kubernetes

Helm

git clone https://github.com/tanrikuluozlem/burn.git
helm install burn ./burn/charts/burn \
  --set prometheus.url=http://prometheus:9090 \
  --set schedule="0 9 * * 1-5"

CronJob (daily Slack reports)

apiVersion: batch/v1
kind: CronJob
metadata:
  name: burn-report
spec:
  schedule: "0 9 * * 1-5"
  jobTemplate:
    spec:
      template:
        spec:
          containers:
          - name: burn
            image: ghcr.io/tanrikuluozlem/burn:latest
            args:
            - analyze
            - --prometheus
            - http://prometheus-server.monitoring:80
            - --period
            - 7d
            - --ai
            - --slack
            env:
            - name: ANTHROPIC_API_KEY
              valueFrom:
                secretKeyRef:
                  name: burn-secrets
                  key: anthropic-api-key
            - name: SLACK_WEBHOOK_URL
              valueFrom:
                secretKeyRef:
                  name: burn-secrets
                  key: slack-webhook-url
          restartPolicy: OnFailure

Configuration

Variable Description Required for
ANTHROPIC_API_KEY Claude API key --ai, ask, serve
SLACK_WEBHOOK_URL Slack webhook URL --slack
SLACK_SIGNING_SECRET Slack app signing secret serve

Flag Description
--cpu-price CPU cost per core per hour (on-prem)
--ram-price RAM cost per GiB per hour (on-prem)
--gpu-price GPU cost per unit per hour (on-prem)
--storage-price Storage cost per GiB per month (on-prem)
--spot Show spot instance readiness details

Cloud clusters use real pricing automatically. These flags are for on-premise clusters where pricing is not available from a cloud provider.

Development

make build    # Build binary
make test     # Run tests
make lint     # Run linter

License

Apache 2.0 — See LICENSE for details.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

14. Linux/M68k

Source: http://www.linux-m68k.org/
Site: linux-m68k.org
Author: Chris Lawrence <webmaster@linux-m68k.org>
Submitted: 2026-05-29 11:46 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 63 points · 18 comments
Length: 396 words (~2 min read)
Language: en-US

Now with over 2100 confirmed users, and we're still counting! If you're using Linux/m68k and haven't filled out the registration form, do it now and show the commercial Linux developers that Linux/m68k is worth their support!

What is Linux/m68k? Linux/m68k is the port of the Linux operating system to run on systems using Motorola's 68020, 68030, 68040 and 68060 microprocessors. Linux/m68k, like other Linux ports, is source compatible with Linux on other platforms. Current releases of the m68k kernel are stable on the Amiga, Atari, many Apple Macintosh models, and several VMEbus single-board computers from BVM, Motorola and Tadpole. In addition, ports are underway (with varying levels of progress) to the HP 9000/300 series, the NeXT workstation (black hardware), the Q40 and Q60, and Sun 3 series workstations.

What's Here

News -- Current releases of the Linux/m68k kernel, usage statistics, and What's New at this site.
Information -- Links to the FAQ, the 2.0 announcement and various other FAQs and HOWTOs for Linux.
Distributions -- Information about the various Linux/m68k distributions available, including installation guides.
Elsewhere on the Web -- Other pages about Linux and the computers that can run Linux.
Other Cool Sites -- Pages about various programs that run under Linux, and other neat links.
Getting Linux -- FTP Sites that have Linux/m68k-related materials. CD-ROMs are covered in the FAQ and on the Distributions page.
Mailing Lists -- Mailing lists for Linux/m68k, and links to archives of them.
Newsgroups -- The Linux and Unix-on-m68k newsgroups.
Books -- Recommendations of books about Linux (and related topics).
Mirror Sites -- For faster access, choose the mirror closest to you.
Copyright -- These pages are copyrighted; please read this page if you plan to copy these pages for any purpose.

Quick Links You can add a Linux/m68k "slashbox" at Slashdot, everyone's favorite geek site, or a Linux/m68k panel at GeekBoys.org.

Administravia If you're linking to this site (or a mirror), please link to the front page only. The other pages may change names, but this one will always be here.

Curious about the popularity of these pages? Read the counter below.

Suggestions or Comments? If you have any suggestions, comments, or contributions, please let me know. In the Lynx World Wide Web browser, the c command will allow you to send me a comment directly.


LE FastCounter

Chris Lawrence <webmaster@linux-m68k.org> ( 2 Apr 2000 at 03:11 CDT)

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

15. What if remote working, not AI, is to blame for weak junior hiring?

Source: https://www.ft.com/content/2205e2d0-50dc-4e80-9bf7-78d0272276c0
Site: Financial Times
Author: John Burn-Murdoch
Published: 2026-05-29
HN activity: 95 points · 140 comments
Length: 145 words (~1 min read)
Language: en-GB

Subscribe to unlock this article

Try unlimited access

Only R$10 for 4 weeks

Then R$375 per month. Complete digital access to quality FT journalism on any device. Cancel anytime during your trial.

Explore more offers.

FT Digital Edition

R$75 per month

Our digitised version of the FT newspaper, for easy reading on any device.

Standard Digital

R$249 per month

Essential digital access to quality FT journalism on any device. Pay a year upfront and save 20%.

Premium Digital

Complete coverage

R$375 per month

Complete digital access to quality FT journalism with expert analysis from industry leaders. Pay a year upfront and save 20%.

Explore our full range of subscriptions.

Discover all the plans currently available in your country

Digital access for organisations. Includes exclusive features and content.

Why the FT?

See why over a million readers pay to read the Financial Times.

Find out why

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

16. Codex just found a "workaround" of not having sudo on my PC

Source: https://twitter.com/i/status/2060746160558543217
Redirected to: https://x.com/i/status/2060746160558543217
Site: X (formerly Twitter)
Submitter: thunderbong (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-31 18:57 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 395 points · 193 comments
Length: 27 words (~1 min read)
Language: en

Something went wrong, but don’t fret — let’s give it another shot.

Some privacy related extensions may cause issues on x.com. Please disable them and try again.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

17. Show HN: Streambed – Stream Postgres to Iceberg on S3, Supports Postgres Wire

Source: https://github.com/viggy28/streambed
Site: GitHub
Submitter: vira28 (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-31 18:43 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 70 points · 13 comments
Length: 350 words (~2 min read)
Language: en

Postgres-to-Iceberg CDC engine. Offload analytical queries from your production database without changing your application.

streambed streams WAL changes via logical replication, writes Parquet files to S3, and commits Iceberg metadata. Query the result with any Iceberg-compatible engine -- or use the built-in query server, which speaks the Postgres wire protocol so you can connect with psql.

See It In Action

Same analytical query on pgbench (1M accounts, 500K history rows). Postgres on the left, Streambed on the right.

No ETL. No Spark. Just Postgres + S3.

Quick Start

# Start Postgres + MinIO locally
docker compose up -d

# Build
go build -o streambed ./cmd/streambed

# Start syncing + query server on :5433
./streambed sync \
  --source-url="postgres://postgres:test@localhost:5432/postgres" \
  --s3-bucket="streambed" \
  --s3-endpoint="http://localhost:9000" \
  --s3-prefix="test" \
  --query-addr=:5433

# Query your Postgres tables via Iceberg
psql -h localhost -p 5433 -U postgres -d postgres

Run streambed sync --help for all configuration options. All flags support environment variables with STREAMBED_ prefix (e.g. STREAMBED_SOURCE_URL).

Architecture

How It Works

Postgres WAL ──▶ Decode ──▶ Buffer ──▶ Parquet ──▶ S3 ──▶ Iceberg Commit
                                                              │
                                                    DuckDB ◀──┘ (query server)


Streambed connects to Postgres as a logical replication subscriber. It decodes WAL messages (inserts, updates, deletes), buffers rows per table, and periodically flushes them as Parquet files to S3 with Iceberg metadata commits. Updates and deletes use copy-on-write merging against existing Parquet data.

A query server exposes Iceberg tables over the Postgres wire protocol using embedded DuckDB, so you can query with psql or any Postgres client.

Commands

Command What it does
streambed sync Main daemon. Streams WAL, writes Iceberg, optionally serves queries.
streambed resync --table=public.users One-shot backfill via COPY under a consistent snapshot.
streambed query Standalone query server (no sync). Points at existing Iceberg tables.
streambed cleanup --table=public.users Deletes S3 objects and state for a table. Useful before resync.

Development

Requires Go 1.22+ and CGO (for go-duckdb and go-sqlite3).

# Build
go build -o streambed ./cmd/streambed

# Unit tests
go test ./internal/... ./config/...

# Integration tests (requires Docker)
./scripts/test-integration.sh

Integration tests use the integration build tag and run against Postgres (port 5434) and MinIO (port 9002) from test/integration/docker-compose.yml.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

18. Restartable Sequences

Source: https://justine.lol/rseq/
Site: justine.lol
Submitter: grappler (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-31 14:38 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 183 points · 51 comments
Length: 4.9K words (~22 min read)
Language: en

May 31st, 2026 @ justine's web page

The best kept secret at the frontier of system programming right now is the Linux 4.18+ (c. 2018) concept of restartable sequences or rseq for short. They allow you to create thread-safe data structures without locks or atomics which scale to microprocessors with many cores.

It's currently only possible to use rseq on Linux using handwritten assembly code. However I believe in the future, all operating systems will be updated to support rseq(), all system programming languages will be redesigned to be able to express restartable sequences, and all data structure libraries will be rewritten to use them.

So far the only software I've seen using rseq is tcmalloc, jemalloc, glibc, and cosmopolitan. That's destined to change now that microprocessors with 128 or even 192 cores are becoming inexpensive. For example,

On my $160 Raspberry Pi 5 (which has 4 cores), rseq makes my malloc() implementation 3x faster versus having a dlmalloc mspace assigned to each thread. For most developers, that's a take it or leave it kind of improvement. However,
On my $4,834 System76 Thelio Astra with Ampere's 128 core 3GHz Altra CPU, rseq makes cosmopolitan malloc() go 34x faster (compared to sharding ops over an array of mspaces using sched_getcpu()%32)
On my $17,628.55 AMD Threadripper Pro 7995WX with 96 cores, rseq makes my malloc() 43x faster (versus using that same sched_getcpu() mutex sharding technique)

System programmers who don't have a workstation like the ones above are going to be left behind like a dinosaur, with no opportunity to pluck the low hanging fruit of 10x performance optimizations. For example, I wouldn't have been able to pull off the speedups I made to matrix multiplication last year if I hadn't splurged on a 96 core CPU. It put me in the poor house for a few months (since the cheaper Ampere workstations weren't available it the time) but was so worth it, since my work received press coverage, it made me famous in the AI community, it helped my project get adopted by 32% of organizations, and even earned me a job offer from Google to work in their Gradient Canopy improving TPU performance for Gemini.

If you do have one of these microprocessors, then restartable sequences are going to be one of the most important tricks you'll use to exploit its capabilities. This tutorial will show you how they work, and provide you with a concrete example for pushing and popping which can be immediately useful.

What Problems Do Restartable Sequences Solve?

Whenever the Cosmopolitan C runtime creates a thread on a Linux system, it issues an rseq() system call which gives the kernel 32 bytes of TLS memory. Then, for the remainder of that thread's life, the kernel will update the TLS memory with the CPU number whenever the thread is rescheduled. I found that to be immediately helpful for improving my sched_getcpu() implementation. Since now it just needs a 1 nanosecond relaxed mov instruction to get the CPU number, whereas before I needed to wait an entire microsecond for the getcpu() system call.

However it gets better. There's a second field in the rseq TLS memory that allows the thread to send information back to the kernel. Normally the rseq_cs field is NULL, but it can be updated with a pointer specifying a sequence of assembly instructions in your program. Now, whenever the kernel preempts your thread and tries to move it to a different CPU, it'll notice your rseq_cs is non-null, and will check the program counter (a.k.a. %rip on x86) to see if it's currently within the specified interval. If that's the case, then the kernel will force the thread to jump to an abort handler you also specify, which can do things like jump back to the beginning of the function to retry the operation.

Here's why we need that. Let's say you have a GIL like this:

static pthread_mutex_t lock;
static struct List *list;


If you're using that to protect your data structures, then it's going to go slow on systems with dozens of cores, since only a single thread can hold the lock at any given moment. So you might think, let's create a lockless list using atomics. That's pretty simple if we're only pushing, but if we want to also be able to pop, then we'd need to account for the ABA problem with something like the following:

#define MASQUE 0x00fffffffffffff0  // supports pml5t w/ malloc'd memory
#define PTR(x) ((uintptr_t)(x) & MASQUE)
#define TAG(x) ROL((uintptr_t)(x) & ~MASQUE, 8)
#define ABA(p, t) ((uintptr_t)(p) | (ROR((uintptr_t)(t), 8) & ~MASQUE))
#define ROL(x, n) (((x) << (n)) | ((x) >> (64 - (n))))
#define ROR(x, n) (((x) >> (n)) | ((x) << (64 - (n))))

struct List {
  struct List *next;
  // ...
};

_Atomic(struct List *) list;

void push(struct List *elem) {
  struct List *tip;
  for (tip = atomic_load_explicit(&list, memory_order_relaxed);;) {
    elem->next = (struct List *)PTR(tip);
    if (atomic_compare_exchange_weak_explicit(
            &list, &tip, (struct List *)ABA(elem, TAG(tip) + 1),
            memory_order_release, memory_order_relaxed))
      break;
    pthread_yield_np();
  }
}

struct List *pop(void) {
  struct List *tip, *elem;
  tip = atomic_load_explicit(&list, memory_order_relaxed);
  while ((elem = (struct List *)PTR(tip))) {
    if (atomic_compare_exchange_weak_explicit(
            &list, &tip, (struct List *)ABA(elem->next, TAG(tip) + 1),
            memory_order_acquire, memory_order_relaxed))
      break;
    pthread_yield_np();
  }
  return elem;
}


The issue is this will likely go just as slow if not slower. The mere act of sharing the same 64-byte region of memory (a.k.a. cacheline) between multiple cores, causes the CPU internally to basically use a mutex, and chances are the CPU's internal mutexes aren't as good as the ones you've implemented in userspace.

So one potentially smarter approach is to shard the data structure, so each CPU gets its own area.

static struct {
  alignas(64) struct List *list;
} lists[CPU_SETSIZE];


Then all you have to do is index the lists array using sched_getcpu(). The issue is that doesn't work. We still need a mutex, due to how the operating system might preempt and relocate your thread twixt the cpu number load and any mutations you've made.

static struct {
  alignas(64) pthread_mutex_t lock;
  struct List *list;
} gil[CPU_SETSIZE];


So now that we've fixed things, it looks like we ended up back where we started, except now we have to manage 1024 copies. However, despite appearances, this code actually is much more optimal. By having a separate mutex for each cpu, we've ensured they'll only be contended when we hit corner cases. It matters because the difference between a contended versus uncontended lock is like the night and the day. With a great mutex library like nsync a contended lock operation will cost you at least 200 nanoseconds. However an uncontended lock/unlock operation only costs about 15 nanoseconds. We further use alignas(64) to ensure that the pointer is placed on a separate cacheline for each CPU, thereby reducing any hardware internal contention to a very low order of probability.

However if all we're doing is pushing and popping, then that 15 nanoseconds is still an enormous cost compared to a thread local linked list push or pop which only costs about a nanosecond. So we really want to get rid of the mutex. The only thing standing in our way is a fringe rarely-occurring corner case where the operating system interrupts our tiny sequence of a few assembly instructions during which we mutate the list.

So how do we get rid of the mutex? At this point, you might be thinking you need an RTOS which guarantees your thread won't be preempted, or perhaps your existing OS might have a sched_setscheduler() policy that gives you back some semblance of control. For specialized deployments, that might work. There's also sched_setaffinity() which is supported on Linux, FreeBSD, and Windows. That will work for a given application, if you feel comfortable pinning your threads to particular CPUs. But all these approaches folks have invented in the past for controlling the OS scheduler can be potentially disastrous if your program's execution doesn't go the way you planned.

This is why Linux now provides rseq() which is a much more enlightened solution. With restartable sequences, you actually can get rid of both the mutex and atomics, while the OS continues to fully abstract scheduling. The way it works is you advise the kernel whenever your program enters a critical section of code that you don't want interrupted. It's probably going to be maybe 10 assembly instructions tops. The first assembly opcode should be a move instruction that sets the rseq_cs field. The last instruction needs to be the thing that makes the modification to your global data structure. Think of it sort of like a really tiny database transaction. What makes it go fast, is that the bidirectional communication with the kernel happens via shared memory.

Example No. 1: Building the Fastest Hit Counter

Here's your gentle introduction to restartable sequences. We're going to build a program that just increments a number. Since that's probably the simplest thing imaginable. Imagine you have a blog that gets billions of visitors per second, which is hosted on a multi-threaded webserver you wrote from scratch and you need to track visits. In that case, I can think of five ways you could build your hit counter (using cosmocc to build the example code).

96 core AMD Ryzen Threadripper Pro 7995WX (x86-64)
wall
time (ms) wall
ops/sec user
time (ms) system
time (ms) cpu
ops/sec implementation
62,461 30,739k 118,631 11,744,462 161k hitcounter-mutex.c (glibc)
29,389 65,331k 34,094 13,259 40,547k hitcounter-mutex.c (cosmo)
23,412 82,009k 4,366,203 0 440k hitcounter-atomic.c
543 3,535,912k 93,274 0 20,585k hitcounter-shard.c
20 96,000,000k 1,150 12 1,652,324k hitcounter-rseq.c
7 274,285,714k 0 11 174,545,455k hitcounter-affinity.c

Earlier when I said rseq made my code go 34x or 43x faster, it's important to note that I was comparing it to the portable version of my malloc() implementation, which is already heavily optimized for multicore systems. If we compare rseq to a truly naïve solution, such as using a glibc mutex to guard an increment operation, then we see that rseq can actually make things go a million times faster judging by CPU time consumption. It sounds like I'm joking, except I'm not, since half the friends I asked told me that using the mutex was their first instinct here.

Now in terms of exploring the five approaches listed above, we can see that only three are worth considering.

Sharding is the best when you need portability to all operating systems. We use the cosmo_shard() function pointer to accomplish this. This will use __get_rseq()->cpu_id on modern Linux, falling back to alternatives like lsl'ing the global descriptor table, rdpid, rdtscp, or sched_getcpu() when available, and if all else fails it'll use murmur3(gettid())%32 as a last resort.
Affinity was the absolute fastest, but it requires micromanaging all threads. That rules it out for library authors. It's probably a bad idea for app authors too. I'd be terrified of shooting myself in the foot if I tried that. However, I could potentially imagine some situations where it might be appropriate. However it's important to note that GCC cheated. By annihilating all volatile operations, we were able to leverage the compiler's knowledge of mathematics to find a closed form solution to increment, which is addition. So that's not cheating at all. If I use alignas(64) volatile long x in the hitcounter-affinity.c example, then it ends up going exactly the same speed as the rseq example.
Restartable sequences make superior tradeoffs. They only currently work on modern Linux, so if you're building a library or something that's open source, you're going to need to support other strategies too. It requires writing code at a higher difficulty setting. I'm afraid LLMs are not yet smart enough to help you build restartable sequences. However in the future I believe programming languages will change so we can elegantly express restartable sequences, similar to how C11 introduced compiler APIs for atomics.

Now let's move on to my ARM workstation.

System76 Thelio Astra w/ Ampere's 128 core 3GHz Altra CPU (ARM64)
wall
time (ms) wall
ops/sec user
time (ms) system
time (ms) cpu
ops/sec implementation
219,484 5,832k 322,259 15,790,712 79k hitcounter-mutex.c (glibc)
212,005 6,038k 144,163 67,841 6,038k hitcounter-mutex.c (cosmo)
17,924 71,413k 2,162,867 0 592k hitcounter-atomic.c
417 3,069,544k 42,972 0 29,787k hitcounter-shard.c
39 32,820,513k 2,966 61 422,861k hitcounter-rseq.c
12 106,666,667k 15 1 80,000,000k hitcounter-affinity.c

In the table above, the ops/sec columns are most directly comparable with the Threadripper results, since they're scaled with respect to the workload. More ops/sec is better. Looking at these numbers, a few things stand out:

Ampere's ARM Altra CPU has really fast atomics. One benefit of ARM is that it has a fancier memory model, which hitcounter-atomic.c exploits using atomic_fetch_add_explicit(&counter, 1, memory_order_relaxed). Thanks to relaxed ordering, we get an ldadd instruction, which doesn't need to manage memory barriers. You can't do that on x86, since xadd is always strongly ordered. What's more interesting is that, even if I specify memory_order_seq_cst (for ldaddal) my Altra CPU still goes noticeably faster than my Threadripper. I suspect it might be hyperthreading that got it into trouble, because my Threadripper claims to have 192 CPUs.
Cosmopolitan's implementation of POSIX mutexes is very complicated. It does a better job than glibc, but I think we could improve our implementation to have better latency on ARM microprocessors.
The rest of the differences in numbers are mostly commensurate with the difference in price.
Using restartable sequences turned my 3GHz CPU into a 33GHz CPU.
Using mutexes turned my 3GHz CPU into a 219MHz CPU.

Here's what I think is cool about Ampere's ARM CPUs. I'm actually huge fan of x86-64. I always have been. For years, I've been reading people on forums like Hacker News talk about how x86 is bad because it has things like a complicated instruction decoder. RISC fans have always claimed that ARM, due to its intelligent design (like how all instructions are 4 bytes long) you can have more cores at a lower price. To that, my response has always been, "then show me where I can buy one" and no one has really given me an answer until now. Ampere made the dream of RISC finally come true. Now the CPU I own with the most cores is an ARM chip, and I was pleasantly surprised to discover that benchmarks exist where it's able to outperform a significantly more expensive x86 chip.

Example No. 2: Linked List Push Pop

Let's say you want to track object instances globally. Using rseq, it's relatively easy to implement the push() and pop() operations for a sharded linked list. Here's a working example that you can compile with cosmocc:

#include <assert.h>
#include <cosmo.h>
#include <linux/rseq.h>
#include <pthread.h>
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>

#define ITERATIONS 10000000l

struct List {
  struct List *next;
};

struct {
  alignas(64) struct List *freelist;
} heaps[CPU_SETSIZE];


Here we see that we finally got rid of the locks and atomics. We're using alignas(64) to ensure each CPU's memory is on a separate cacheline, which means there'll be no synchronization bloodbaths happening inside the hardware. Since Linux defines CPU_SETSIZE as 1024, we have to burn quite a bit of BSS memory, however most of it isn't going to be used. For single threaded programs, the Linux Kernel does a remarkably good job picking 1 or 2 cores and sticking with it. We put a lot of faith in the kernel to not fragment our objects needlessly, since this design doesn't easily allow for a rebalancing of elements. It should not be needed.

static inline void push(struct List *chunk) {
#ifdef __x86_64__
  asm volatile(".pushsection .rodata.rseq,\"a\",@progbits\n"
               "	.balign	32\n"
               "300:	.long	0\n"                  // rseq_cs::version
               "	.long	0\n"                  // rseq_cs::flags
               "	.quad	301f\n"               // rseq_cs::start_ip
               "	.quad	302f-301f\n"          // rseq_cs::post_commit_offset
               "	.quad	303f\n"               // rseq_cs::abort_ip
               "	.popsection\n"                //
               "301:	lea	300b(%%rip),%%rcx\n"  //
               "	mov	%%rcx,8(%1)\n"        // rseq->rseq_cs
               "	mov	(%1),%%ecx\n"         // rseq->cpu_id_start
               "	shl	$6,%%ecx\n"           //
               "	mov	(%2,%%rcx),%%rdx\n"   // rdx = freelist
               "	mov	%%rdx,(%0)\n"         // chunk->next = rdx
               "	mov	%0,(%2,%%rcx)\n"      // freelist = chunk
               "302:	.pushsection .text.unlikely,\"ax\",@progbits\n"
               "	.byte	0x0f,0xb9,0x4d\n"
               "	.long	0x53053053\n"
               "303:	jmp	301b\n"               // restart on abort
               "	.popsection"
               : /* no outputs */
               : "r"(chunk), "r"(__get_rseq()), "r"(heaps)
               : "rcx", "rdx", "memory");
#elifdef __aarch64__
  asm volatile(".pushsection .rodata.rseq,\"a\",@progbits\n"
               "	.balign	32\n"
               "300:	.long	0\n"                  // rseq_cs::version
               "	.long	0\n"                  // rseq_cs::flags
               "	.quad	301f\n"               // rseq_cs::start_ip
               "	.quad	302f-301f\n"          // rseq_cs::post_commit_offset
               "	.quad	303f\n"               // rseq_cs::abort_ip
               "	.popsection\n"                //
               "301:	adrp	x4, 300b\n"           // load address of rseq_cs
               "	add	x4, x4, :lo12:300b\n" //
               "	str	x4, [%1, #8]\n"       // rseq->rseq_cs
               "	ldr	w4, [%1]\n"           // rseq->cpu_id_start
               "	lsl	w4, w4, #6\n"         //
               "	ldr	x5, [%2, x4]\n"       // x5 = freelist
               "	str	x5, [%0]\n"           // chunk->next = x5
               "	str	%0, [%2, x4]\n"       // freelist = chunk
               "302:	.pushsection .text.unlikely,\"ax\",@progbits\n"
               "	.long	0xd428bc00\n"
               "303:	adrp	x5, 301b\n"           // load page address of 301b
               "	add	x5, x5, :lo12:301b\n" // add low 12 bits
               "	br	x5\n"                 // branch to 301b via register
               "	.popsection"
               : /* no outputs */
               : "r"(chunk), "r"(__get_rseq()), "r"(heaps)
               : "x4", "x5", "memory");
#endif
}

static inline struct List *pop(void) {
  struct List *chunk;
#ifdef __x86_64__
  asm volatile(".pushsection .rodata.rseq,\"a\",@progbits\n"
               "	.balign	32\n"
               "300:	.long	0\n"                  // rseq_cs::version
               "	.long	0\n"                  // rseq_cs::flags
               "	.quad	301f\n"               // rseq_cs::start_ip
               "	.quad	302f-301f\n"          // rseq_cs::post_commit_offset
               "	.quad	303f\n"               // rseq_cs::abort_ip
               "	.popsection\n"                //
               "301:	lea	300b(%%rip),%%rcx\n"  //
               "	mov	%%rcx,8(%1)\n"        // rseq->rseq_cs
               "	mov	(%1),%%ecx\n"         // rseq->cpu_id_start
               "	shl	$6,%%ecx\n"           //
               "	mov	(%2,%%rcx),%0\n"      // chunk = chunks[cpu].freelist
               "	test	%0,%0\n"              //
               "	jz	302f\n"               //
               "	mov	(%0),%%rdx\n"         // rdx = chunk->next
               "	mov	%%rdx,(%2,%%rcx)\n"   // freelist = rdx
               "302:	.pushsection .text.unlikely,\"ax\",@progbits\n"
               "	.byte	0x0f,0xb9,0x4d\n"
               "	.long	0x53053053\n"
               "303:	jmp	301b\n"               // restart on abort
               "	.popsection"
               : "=&r"(chunk)
               : "r"(__get_rseq()), "r"(heaps)
               : "rcx", "rdx", "memory");
#elifdef __aarch64__
  asm volatile(".pushsection .rodata.rseq,\"a\",@progbits\n"
               "	.balign	32\n"
               "300:	.long	0\n"                  // rseq_cs::version
               "	.long	0\n"                  // rseq_cs::flags
               "	.quad	301f\n"               // rseq_cs::start_ip
               "	.quad	302f-301f\n"          // rseq_cs::post_commit_offset
               "	.quad	303f\n"               // rseq_cs::abort_ip
               "	.popsection\n"                //
               "301:	adrp	x4, 300b\n"           // load address of rseq_cs
               "	add	x4, x4, :lo12:300b\n" //
               "	str	x4, [%1, #8]\n"       // rseq->rseq_cs
               "	ldr	w4, [%1]\n"           // rseq->cpu_id_start
               "	lsl	w4, w4, #6\n"         //
               "	ldr	%0, [%2, x4]\n"       // chunk = chunks[cpu].freelist
               "	cbz	%0, 302f\n"           //
               "	ldr	x5, [%0]\n"           // x5 = chunk->next
               "	str	x5, [%2, x4]\n"       // freelist = x5
               "302:	.pushsection .text.unlikely,\"ax\",@progbits\n"
               "	.long	0xd428bc00\n"
               "303:	adrp	x5, 301b\n"           // load page address of 301b
               "	add	x5, x5, :lo12:301b\n" // add low 12 bits
               "	br	x5\n"                 // branch to 301b via register
               "	.popsection"
               : "=&r"(chunk)
               : "r"(__get_rseq()), "r"(heaps)
               : "x4", "x5", "memory");
#endif
  return chunk;
}


Now let's go over the assembly code, in the hopes of demystifying it. For starters, we're using Richard Stallman's Math 55 assembly notation, which I documented for personal reference on x86 many years ago in that text file. The GNU assembler mixed with the C/C++ constraints system is the most powerful thing there is. For starters,

	.pushsection .rodata.rseq,"a",@progbits
	// ...
	.popsection


lets us teleport content to a totally different area of the executable file. In this case, we're using the section name .rodata.rseq because the standard GNU linker scripts (e.g. /usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/ldscripts/elf_x86_64.x) are hard-coded to recognize sections named .rodata or .rodata.* and then puts them into an ELF program header segment that'll be marked PROT_READ on process startup. The code within the pushpop:

300:	.long	0                  // rseq_cs::version
	.long	0                  // rseq_cs::flags
	.quad	301f               // rseq_cs::start_ip
	.quad	302f-301f          // rseq_cs::post_commit_offset
	.quad	303f               // rseq_cs::abort_ip


lays out the static const struct rseq_cs content (see definition below) which describes the restartable sequence. It's important to use System V style numeric labels here with the forwards (f) and backwards (b) references. That's because they can be repeated in the assembly multiple times, which means the assembler won't break if our function is inlined multiple times by the compiler. Alternatively, it's also possible to create labels like .Ldescription.%= since that'll generate a unique ID for each asm() block.

301:	lea	300b(%%rip),%%rcx
	mov	%%rcx,8(%1)
 We use the 301 label for the actual restartable sequence. These first two opcodes in our sequence is basically saying __get_rseq()->rseq_cs = &300b (note: the %1 is used to reference the asm block arguments by index, which in this case is "r"(__get_rseq()), further noting that the r causes the rseq address to be stored in an arbitrary register). That's basically modifying a piece of TLS memory we shared with the kernel. The lea instruction is needed to support PIC, but the above could be shortened to movq $300b,8(%1) if you're using Cosmopolitan.

When the kernel decides to preempt our thread, it'll check the rseq_cs field and read the rodata structure we created earlier, to determine whether or not the program counter (%rip) is currently located inside 300 label. If it is, then kernel changes the program counter to the abort_ip which we specified as pointing to label 303.

	mov	(%1),%%ecx         // rseq->cpu_id_start
	shl	$6,%%ecx           //


Next up, we load the __get_rseq()->cpu_id_start field documented below. This tells us the index of the CPU on which our thread is currently running. Then we shift it left by 6 places, which is a fast way to multiply by 64. It's important that this happen inside the sequence. Since you'll notice our abort handler simply jumps back to the start of the sequence. At that point, after being preempted and relocated, the CPU index is obviously going to change, so the memory index needs to be recomputed.

	mov	(%2,%%rcx),%%rdx   // rdx = heaps[rcx].freelist
	mov	%%rdx,(%0)         // chunk->next = rdx
	mov	%0,(%2,%%rcx)      // heaps[rcx].freelist = chunk
302:
 Finally, we perform the actual push operation. Note that we don't actually mutate global memory until the last instruction. The whole sequence works like a transaction. The last instruction is special, since it's what commits the change.

	.pushsection .text.unlikely,"ax",@progbits
	.byte	0x0f,0xb9,0x4d
	.long	0x53053053
303:	jmp	301b               // restart on abort
	.popsection


Our abort handler is simple enough. All it does is jump back to the start of our restartable sequence. The only thing surprising about this code is that the kernel requires it to be prefixed by an arbitrary 32-bit word that was passed to the rseq() system call earlier. Since that Cosmopolitan C runtime is responsible for issuing that system call, cosmo defines that magic number as RSEQ_SIG in the <linux/rseq.h> header file documented below. Another thing we do is we teleport the abort handler code to the .text.unlikely section of our binary, since that's another GNU standard section name explicitly defined by stock linker scripts.

All you see here is basically the technique I used in my malloc() implementation for Cosmopolitan Libc. When a small allocation (fewer than 512 bytes) is requested, it tries to pop a piece of memory from a global sharded list like the above. If one isn't there, then it asks mmap() for a new page of memory, divides it into chunks, pushes them all, and then the allocation operation tries again. It's a fast, simple, and elegant design. But the tradeoff is that it's difficult to release memory back to the system, since here we're basically assuming List memory is permanent.

Now let's write some code for testing our push and pop functions.

void *worker(void *arg) {
  struct List *elem;
  for (long i = 0; i < ITERATIONS; ++i) {
    switch (i % (ITERATIONS / 10000)) {
      case 0:
        push(malloc(sizeof(struct List)));
        break;
      default:
        if ((elem = pop()))
          push(elem);
        break;
    }
  }
  return 0;
}

void cleanup(void) {
  for (int i = 0; i < CPU_SETSIZE; ++i) {
    struct List *chunk;
    while ((chunk = heaps[i].freelist)) {
      heaps[i].freelist = chunk->next;
      free(chunk);
    }
  }
}

int main(void) {
  if (__get_rseq()->cpu_id < 0) {
    fprintf(stderr, "rseq is not supported on this system\n");
    return 1;
  }
  int threads = cosmo_cpu_count();
  pthread_t th[threads];
  for (long i = 0; i < threads; ++i)
    pthread_create(&th[i], 0, worker, 0);
  for (long i = 0; i < threads; ++i)
    pthread_join(th[i], 0);
  cleanup();
}


So there you have it. A gentle introduction to restartable sequences, by way of a concrete example offering decent code you can use today, to make your global linked lists more scalable on CPUs with many cores.

#define RSEQ_CPU_ID_UNINITIALIZED       -1
#define RSEQ_CPU_ID_REGISTRATION_FAILED -2

#define RSEQ_FLAG_UNREGISTER 1

#define RSEQ_CS_FLAG_NO_RESTART_ON_PREEMPT 1  /* deprecated */
#define RSEQ_CS_FLAG_NO_RESTART_ON_SIGNAL  2  /* deprecated */
#define RSEQ_CS_FLAG_NO_RESTART_ON_MIGRATE 4  /* deprecated */

#ifdef __x86_64__
#define RSEQ_SIG 0x53053053 /* ud1 0x53053053(%rip),%edi */
#elif defined(__aarch64__)
#define RSEQ_SIG 0xd428bc00 /* brk #0x45e0 */
#endif

/* consider putting this in the .rodata.rseq section of your binary */
struct rseq_cs {
  uint32_t version;
  uint32_t flags;
  uint64_t start_ip;
  uint64_t post_commit_offset;
  uint64_t abort_ip;
} forcealign(32);

/* this memory should go in thread local storage */
struct rseq {

  /* The difference between the two is that `cpu_id_start` is always in
     range, whereas `cpu_id` may contain error values. The kernel
     provides both in order to support computation of values derived
     from the CPU ID that happens before entering the critical section.
     We could do this with one CPU ID, but it would require an extra
     branch to distinguish "not initialized" from "CPU ID changed after
     fetching it". On the other hand if (like tcmalloc) you only fetch
     the CPU Id within a critical section, then you need only one field
     because you have only one branch: am I initialized. There is no
     such thing as a CPU mismatch because instead you are just restarted
     when the CPU ID changes. —Quoth tcmalloc (rseq.md) */
  uint32_t cpu_id_start;

  /* this should be initialized to RSEQ_CPU_ID_UNINITIALIZED when this
     data structure is registered with the kernel. you'll then be able
     to test if the host OS is Linux 4.18+ by simply checking cpu_id≥0 */
  volatile int cpu_id;

  /* when this points to `struct rseq_cs` the kernel will be advised on
     how to handle the interrupting of this thread */
  uint64_t rseq_cs;

  uint32_t flags;
  uint32_t node_id;
  uint32_t mm_cid;
  char end[];
} forcealign(32);

#define __get_rseq() ((struct rseq *)__get_tls()->tib_rseq)


Methodology

Cosmopolitan creates portable binaries, which means the code I compiled by default targets K8 on x86-64 and ARMv8.0-a on Ampere. Now, obviously, cosmocc still uses tricks to exploit modern capabilities at runtime. For example, atomic instructions on ARM are compiled to emit a function call that dispatches to the modern LSE opcodes when HWCAP_ATOMICS is advertised by the kernel. But it's worth mentioning that, if you don't care about portable binaries, you can squeeze another 10% performance from these programs if you build your ARM code just for Altra using aarch64-unknown-cosmo-cc -mcpu=neoverse-n1 -fpermitted-flt-eval-methods=c11.

In the first section of this blog post, I threw out a bunch of numbers like "malloc() goes 34x faster". I measured that using the following code, which simply spawns a thread for each CPU and repeatedly allocates and frees small pieces of memory.

#include <cosmo.h>
#include <pthread.h>
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>

#define NUM_THREADS    cosmo_cpu_count()
#define NUM_ITERATIONS 10000000

void *identity(void *arg) {
  return arg;
}

void *(*pIdentity)(void *) = identity;

void *thread_func(void *arg) {
  for (unsigned long i = 0; i < NUM_ITERATIONS; i++)
    free(pIdentity(malloc(i % 256)));
  return NULL;
}

int main() {
  pthread_t threads[NUM_THREADS];
  for (int i = 0; i < NUM_THREADS; i++)
    if (pthread_create(&threads[i], NULL, thread_func, NULL))
      return 1;
  for (int i = 0; i < NUM_THREADS; i++)
    if (pthread_join(threads[i], NULL))
      return 1;
}


When I build this program with cosmocc, it's possible for me to disable malloc's use of rseq by setting an environment variable, which specifies the maximum number of rseq memory pages allowed.

cosmocc -O -o bench bench.c
time ./bench
export COSMOPOLITAN_M_RSEQ_MAX=0
time ./bench


That environment variable is super useful, since it gives you a clear picture on your Linux workstation of what your malloc performance is going to look like when you run your actually portable executables on every other OS. I'm also using it as a bulwark against pathological cases I could envision with memory consumption.

Advanced Reading

The tcmalloc documentation explains how they used rseq in their malloc implementation. For example, the trick they use to have multiple global memory writes is they use an array (instead of linked lists) and they have an integer indicating how much of that array has been committed so far. That way they can write whatever they want to the uncommitted area, and then roll forward the integer when they're done.
The MEMBARRIER_CMD_PRIVATE_EXPEDITED_RSEQ command was introduced to the membarrier() system call in Linux v5.10. This is what tcmalloc uses to facilitate cross-CPU modifications to rseq data structures.

Credits

The graphic of the Genthree Linux penguin above was drawn in collaboration with ChatGPT.

The code font on this page is PragmataPro Variable (€299) which was designed by Fabrizio Schiavi in Italy.

The rseq() system call was developed by Paul Turner and Andrew Hunter at Google and Mathieu Desnoyers at EfficiOS who introduced it into the Linux Kernel in 2018.

You're invited to join my redbean discord server, where you can hang out with me and cosmo developers.

Funding

System76 and Ampere were kind enough to let me purchase their workstation at a discounted rate, to help my open source work on projects like llamafile. My GitHub sponsors, and Patreon subscribers have done much to help make my blogging and open source work possible these last five years. This article has Amazon Associate hyperlinks, so purchasing the recommended products is another way you can support me. Lastly Google and Mozilla are the two companies you can thank most for helping enable me to do what I do.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

19. The Website Specification

Source: https://specification.website/
Site: The Website Specification
Submitter: k1m (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-31 07:09 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 444 points · 184 comments
Length: 339 words (~2 min read)
Language: en-GB

What a good website does.

A platform-agnostic specification of the technical features every decent website should have — from <title> to /.well-known/security.txt, from WCAG contrast to llms.txt. Written for humans and agents.

Categories

Ten areas, mapped to widely-accepted standards.

All topics →

Foundations

14

The HTML, head, and document basics every page needs.

SEO

13

Search visibility — robots.txt, sitemaps, canonicals, structured data.

Accessibility

20

WCAG-aligned rules so people of all abilities can use the site.

Security

12

Headers, transport, and policies that keep visitors safe.

Well-Known URIs

9

Standard, agreed-upon paths under /.well-known/.

Agent Readiness

18

Things that make a site legible to AI agents and crawlers.

Performance

19

Core Web Vitals, caching, images, fonts, network behaviour.

Privacy

6

Consent, signals, and respecting visitor choice.

Resilience

5

Graceful failure — error pages, offline, redirects.

Internationalisation

12

Language, locale, direction, and translated content.

Standards, not opinions

Each topic links back to the source standard — WHATWG, W3C, IETF RFCs, WCAG, MDN, and the organisations defining the modern web.

Platform agnostic

Whether you ship WordPress, Drupal, TYPO3, Next.js, Astro, Hugo, a Django app, or plain HTML, the spec is the spec. Implementation hints follow it, not the other way round.

Built in the open

Every page has an Edit on GitHub link. PRs welcome. Sources credited on every page.

Let your agent query the spec.

The whole spec is available as an open MCP server — read-only, no auth — plus a published Agent Skill that teaches any compatible agent when and how to use it. Per-page Markdown is available via /llms.txt and Accept: text/markdown on any spec URL.

{
  "mcpServers": {
    "specification-website": {
      "transport": "http",
      "url": "https://mcp.specification.website/mcp"
    }
  }
}

How to use this site

01

Audit

Run through the checklist. Each item is a “does the site do this — yes or no.”
02

Learn

Click into any item for what it is, why it matters, and how to implement it.
03

Improve

Found a gap, a stale fact, or a missing topic? Open a PR. Sources required.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

20. Unix in East Germany (GDR) (1990)

Source: https://groups.google.com/g/comp.unix.wizards/c/QX_dxElrVNs
Site: groups.google.com
Submitter: downbad_ (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-29 15:21 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 29 points · 5 comments
Length: 1.7K words (~8 min read)
Language: en-US

The following article appeared (in German) on the German UUG net and
SubNet. It tells a short history of Unix in the German Democratic Republic.

The original author (Guenther Fischer) can be reached at
g...@tu-k-ddr.cs.tu-berlin.de.
Translation and redistribution is with the author's permission.
The original can be had by emailing me (p...@iis.ethz.ch).


Peter Lamb
uucp: uunet!mcsun!ethz!prl eunet: p...@iis.ethz.ch Tel: +411 256 5241
Integrated Systems Laboratory
ETH-Zentrum, 8092 Zurich

UNIX at the TUK/IF

Attempt at a private history.

Technical University Karl-Marx-Stadt, Computer Science Department

Guenther Fischer und Matthias Clausz
Translation Peter Lamb, ETH Zurich, with the kind permission of the authors.


Getting started


1982 - our department had none of its own students (a department without
students is like a dried-out tree) - we were more a service department
for the whole school (teaching and technical computing services).
Our computing base was 2 ESER I machines (alias IBM 360). We had
finally made the jump from DOS to OS, and then with some pressure
switched over to TSO - our slogan then was `TSO keeps everyone
happy' (TSO macht alle froh) [ perhaps the abuse of dead whales
is popular in the GDR - pl :-) :-) ]. We were also just about
ready to move away from Assembler programming.


The lucky break.


One day a magtape, which our IBM-clone could make nothing of, fell into
our laps. After analysing it with Hex-Dump it wasn't so hard to see the
ASCII codes and the 512-byte blocking. Even if you don't know what
it is, it's not so hard to read and print out a tar-format tape.

What we then saw on paper (our printer had only capitals and the
restricted special characters from IBM stone age), was cryptic enough.
The comments and the README's gave away the secret.

It was a [compiler for a - pl ] programming language and the name
UNIX appeared occasionally. Literature research quickly brought
light onto the matter. We even found an unnoticed book in the department;
Kernigan&Ritchie's `The C Programming Language'.

We were immediately enthusiastic about the idea that an operating
system could be written in a high-level language and could run on different
machines.

Literature searches, a draft translation of the `C' book and an implementation
of the `C' preprocessor cpp in our System-Pascal (our first attempt at an
alternative to Assembler) rapidly made us known in the Unix-scene in the GDR
(in the land of the blind, the one-eyed man is king).
In this way we came into contact with other Unix efforts in the GDR: the
Froelich brothers (ZKI and LfA Berlin), our collegues in ZfT KEAW Berlin and
the TH Ilmeneau, as well as the small team at Robotron Dresden.


How to knit a C compiler.


Encouraged by the success of the cpp effort (translation into a language
similar to `C'), we continued on to the port of the compiler itself.
Since we had no machine with a `C' complier, we chose the same method:
translation by hand into another language. In a finite time (about
3 months), we had a `C' compiler which produced PDP/11 assembler. The next
stage for us, relatively computer-ignorant, was more complicated. We had to
convince the code generator to produce IBM 360-Assembler, and the code
should also be reasonably good. After the first few attempts, we got the
first

hello world

on the screen fairly quickly. After about 4 months we succeeded in compiling
the `C' compiler itself. Of course it was initially PDP/11 code that came out,
but from then on, we were able to think in `C'. The alterations to the code
generator had to be ported back into the original compiler.


Unix - the first stage


We built up our relationship with LfA, since their work on PSU
was closest to what we wanted. PSU was planned as a subsystem under
OS. PSU was similar to Unix, but was restricted -- in particular
multiprocessing was simulated sequentially. The first GDR-Unix was
a batch system, and was implemented in assembler.
As TSO `sharks', we missed the interactive capabilities, and we assisted
the port of PSU to TSO with advice and action. As soon as PSU ran,
we ported our compiler to this environment -- the first version ran under OS.
We also worked in close association with LfA on the compiler.

The bulk of Unix tools could then be ported to PSU. Wump (`hunt the wumpus')
enjoyed great popularity -- in the graphics age nobody remembers this program.
Other Uni's and Colleges assisted with the ports and helped find compiler
bugs. But we had a real cuckoo's egg in the nest (or rather LfA had put one
there), since PSU used EBCDIC.
Some ports (eg. nroff) were true works of art.

But our efforts began to bear fruit:
- the students and staff could work with the same tools both in batch
and interactively,
- OS and TSO could no longer be seen,
- we could start to educate ourselves for the future.

Unix - stage 2

Parallel to our PSU activities, we ran Unix V7 part-time on a `foreign'
[non-360 - pl] machine (PDP 11/20) to get some `real' Unix experience.
Later we ran two such machines in our department, which could then be
easily incorporated in our education and reseatch efforts.

Unix - stage 3

We moved to a new situation when our two 360's were exchanged for 370's.
We wanted to put real Unix on the new machines. Development efforts,
much enthusiasm and a few happy coincidences put us in the position of being
able to port Unix such that we had full source, that supported all our
peripherals, and that could run `standalone' (without VM), and for which
we now had complete German documentation. Th this phase we were actively
assisted by TH Leipzig and FSU Jena.

The associated installation of about 30 Unix terminals brought us a good piece
forwards in education and research. However our so-called `mainframe' with
0.5 MIPS is often overloaded and sometimes requires patience.

From this basis came numerous developments:
- a job scheduler to permit overnight scheduling - interactive use was
insufficient to meet all the computing needs for the students' prac. work.
- a number of compilers: Pascal, Modula 2, Lisp, C, C++,
- numerous technical tools.


In the meantime - 8-bit micros


These systems ran CP/M are only mentioned because they were the
basis for education with Turbo Pascal, database and textprocessing systems
and serve still as stable workhorses.


8 + 8 = 16 == P8000


A significant improvement in our computing misery was brought by
the use of P8000 systems. These machines, based on the Z8000 ran
the Unix system WEGA.


Unix == Unix ? great : not-so-great


At last it was clear: it was advantageous to run Unix on all our computers
(except for the 8-bit machines), but Unix'es can be quite different from each
other. VMX (our 370 system) was approximately Version 7, and WEGA was supposed
to be System III compatible. As passionate collectors of Unix literature,
we naturally followed all the activities of from /usr/group, SVID and X/OPEN
up to POSIX.


GDR-UUG (EAG)


"GUUG and EAG: why not unity from below?"

All GDR Unix developers saw a great need for a uniform documentation
of all the varieties of Unix systems. Two years ago we started to write
documentation for system calls and library functions, which were based
upon X/OPEN and SVID; roughly equivalent to System V Release 2. The command
documentation (man1) followed. All systems, where possible, should conform to
this standardised interface. Where this was not possible, at least
the differences should be documented.

This has been pushed quite far for two systems (VMX and MUTOS 1835). Our
documentation was made available to others through the EAG, to serve
as an example for further systems.


The Flop.


MUTOS 1835 was a UNIX port which we did under contract for an AT-compatible
from Robotron. Since this machine was never produced, the whole thing
must be seen as a flop.


Unix -- here and now.


We see our efforts with X and ET++ on the AT/286 as training
for better (hardware-) times. We should have been working on the
development of a 386 for the past year, but so far it has not been
possible for us to turn up even one such machine.
In the meantime, another K1840 (VAX/11-780-alias) has been installed,
running its now-standard operating system Unix-OS MUTOS 1800.

At the moment we are working on bringing VMX up to System V Release 3.
This work is largely being undertaken as student projects.


... and Tomorrow?


We have been following the GNU project with great interest, the current work
of X/OPEN and OSF, particularly now that AIX has been replaced by Mach.
We are told that OSF is interested in University partners!?

And here are we by our current problem: What are our directions for
our research? Formerly, we were behind double walls -- one we built ourselves
and the second by the West (eg. COCOM) -- but even this is crumbling.
Our catching-up of the last years came from a sense of emergency, and we
learnt our trade through it. Now we need security for our future research
which will give us the freedom to purchase new hard- and software, participate
in international conferences, connect to networks and
update our literature.
Whether this comes through cooperative projects with other institutions,
through industrial research or however, is almos irrelevant to us --
we want, as far as possible, to determine our own future and not wait until
it comes to us from `above'.

This last paragraph may be taken politcally.


Author: Guenther Fischer (g...@tu-k-ddr.cs.tu-berlin.de)


Glossary of abbreviations:
TH - Technische Hochschule (Technical College)
EAG - Entwickler- und Anwendergemeinschaft / GDR-UUG
: GDR-UUG; now also GUUG/east
ZKI - Zentralinstitut fuer Kybernetik und Informatik
: Institute for Cybernetics and Informatics
LfA - Leitzentrum fuer Anwendungforschung
: Software Company
ZfT KEAW - Zentrum fuer Technik im Kombinat fuer Elektro-Apparate-Werke
: Technical Centre, Electrical Equipment Combine - R&D Centre for
(amongst other things) electronic control.
FSU - Friedrich Schiller Universitaet

--
Peter Lamb
uucp: uunet!mcsun!ethz!prl eunet: p...@iis.ethz.ch Tel: +411 256 5241
Integrated Systems Laboratory
ETH-Zentrum, 8092 Zurich

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

21. It's Not Just X. It's Y

Source: https://mail.cyberneticforests.com/its-not-just-data-its-post-training/
Site: Cybernetic Forests
Author: Eryk Salvaggio
Published: 2026-05-31
HN activity: 118 points · 90 comments
Length: 2.0K words (~9 min read)
Language: en

Against the Quantification of Integrity

When the measure of language becomes its target, it ceases to be good language.

💡

Nerd Rating: 1/5. I discuss the origins of certain linguistic tics in LLMs and what it means for writing, student assessment, and thinking.

"It's not x, it's y."

Large Language Models gravitate toward this type of construction, called negative parallelism. It has its uses: it sets up a contrast. It's useful, especially, for reframing assumptions: "You think it's like that, but it's really like this."

It's all over social media, especially on LinkedIn, and the construction has sparked a backlash amid an ongoing war against automated language production. If you use em-dashes – you might be a bot. If you describe things that delve, quietly, or genuinely (or create lists of three, like that one), you might be a bot.

Recent overuse by language models has led many to declare it bad writing. I'm not so sure. Nobody called JFK a lazy writer when he said, "ask not what your country can do for you – ask what you can do for your country." Negative parallelism is a rhetorical device, and any rhetorical device is only as lazy or inspired as what it contains.

Automated Language Production

Now, we have AI detectors that claim to protect you from the witch hunt by looking for these patterns. You take your own writing and you run it through Grammarly, which will analyze word patterns that AI detectors might flag. Then it offers ideas for how to change them, which a) gives Grammarly the power to write for you and b) makes your writing lose any sense of rhythm or intent.

Grammarly's review of this section has flagged 27 examples of text I should change to avoid the accusation that I am a machine. For example, Grammarly identified the above phrase – "automated language production" – as 11 times more likely to be AI. It suggests that a human would be "against mechanized language synthesis" instead. The simple two-word combo, "align with" was flagged as 43x more likely to be AI-generated. Real humans say "corresponds." These are small suggestions that add up until the result resembles nothing I chose. The human voice replaced by a machine trying to sound human.

As a result, I just paid Pangram – another AI-detection company – $20 to verify that a recently submitted journal article wasn't AI-generated before submission. It wasn't, and I knew it wasn't. It agreed. That's what I paid for: not to learn whether I wrote it, but to be told it wouldn't flag me. Because if Pangram's AI system found me guilty, that's the end of my career. That's literally extortion.

And if it had flagged it, then what? It would give me a score (four valuations: high, very likely, somewhat likely, human) to assign my integrity a category. In the ecosystem we're all building, I'd have to use Grammarly to rephrase everything: using a machine to write for me to prove that I didn't use a different machine to write for me.

A Culture Hostile to Reason

Our instinct in making sense of these machines is to examine the training data. That training data is no longer "just the Web." The web is the raw meat, but this sausage is heavily pre- and post-processed. Post-training optimizes the model for whatever it's designed to do. This includes techniques such as RLHF (reinforcement learning with human feedback) and RLVR (reinforcement learning through verified rewards). RLHF has humans rank replies, then the system emphasizes those kinds of replies.

RLVR is weirder, and I suspect it's why we see "It's not X, it's Y" so often. Dismissing negative parallelism as lazy gets in the way of understanding why it's showing up everywhere. This type of language is such a powerful framework for thinking that we mistake it for a model's capacity for thought. We credit computation for the work that's done by language.

Weird Dogs

RLVR isn't a structure that watches for words and triggers some sub-process. Instead, you train a model, like you would any model. When that model is done, it predicts tokens. Lots of people are still in denial about this. Token prediction involves producing a list of candidates based on their mathematical distribution in the training data, ranking them by their likelihood given the previous words in the prompt or sequence.

RLVR intervenes by having the model solve math problems by writing their way to a solution, reproducing the language we would use when thinking out loud about how to solve it. When the model arrives at the correct answer, the language it used most often to get there is then emphasized in the finished model. This is (partly) what the industry calls reasoning.

What day was it that we saw that weird dog?

So, think of it like this: You are sitting with a friend. Your phones are dead. Your friend asks: what day was it that we saw that weird dog? You start by saying, "It was Thursday." Your friend says: "No, it wasn't Thursday, because Thursday I was out of town." So you say that's right, so it must have been Wednesday, because Wednesday was your mutual friend's birthday, and you both went to the party, and you saw the dog on the way to the party. Your friend says: "That's right, except, Wednesday was our friend's birthday but the party was on Friday. So we must have seen the dog on Friday."

The two of you have articulated your way to the answer, a verifiable one: you could pop on your phones and check your photos and see that yes, the weird dog picture was taken on Friday. In dehumanizing terms, your gut instinct ("it's Thursday") is what a model might spit out at first guess, and that's where models used to stop.

But you didn't. Your friend countered: "It wasn't [Thursday], it was [Wednesday]." There are more words, which narrow the window of possible answers, and then you arrive, through "its-not-x-its-y-ing," at the correct date. The two of you had actual memories and visceral experiences to work with. Language was the vessel through which these experiences were communicated and conflicts were resolved. The model, by contrast, extends language in longer and longer bursts, replicating the pattern of reasoning you two just engaged in. These longer runs re-enact that deliberation within language rather than through it.

Other high-entropy states get filled by words like "suppose..." which triggers longer speculative passages. "Because," "consider," "alternatively," even "wait" can occupy these positions. These are words that lead to language that brings contrast, exceptions, and abstraction along for the ride. If they get to a correct answer on a math problem, they get pushed to occur more often.

The Reason We Reason

When we talk about a weird dog or have conversations like it, the point of the question was not to identify the date on the calendar when the dog was encountered. It was an opening for a reminiscence. It was posed to reconstruct the memory, to revel in its surrounding context, and to deepen a connection between friends through a shared experience.

Defining reasoning this way assumes that the point of asking a question is to get an answer, that answers can be verified, and that nothing is lost in immediate closure.

Defining reasoning the way it has been used in LLMs assumes that the point of asking a question is to get an answer, that answers can be verified, and that nothing is lost in immediate closure. This has real effects on writing, and the openness to doubt is something we lose in the rapid prototyping of thought that occurs with a language model. Ambiguity, doubt, and uncertainty matter more to some ways of thinking than any immediate answer. The inner life grows in the spaces between the industrial complexes that harness every remnant of our externalized thought.

Nonetheless, the language we use in these states is the same. When AI detectors flag text as AI-generated, is it because it follows a certain structural pattern of that reasoning? Pangram and reasoning models both detect structural patterns based on how humans reason when writing. Pangram's model is trained on pre-2021 data; it then inserts AI-generated versions of the same text into its training.

So, if we publicly shame people whose text looks like it might have been written by a machine – because it mimics the language used for human reasoning – and people stop writing in ways that they internalize as "AI writing" out of fear of false detection, it sends a signal that your language for reasoning must be policed, or you too could be held up to public scrutiny.

In the end, shaming people for writing that gets flagged as AI can lead people to sidestep structures the model has learned from us: structures that are effective tools for argumentation. We take the tools of critical thinking out of the kit at the time we most need them.

For Good Measure

There's another angle to this. An AI-based essay assessment tool was tested in the UK against human graders. The system rewarded writing structures that I can't help notice look a lot like RLVR-based reasoning: "giving out higher marks based on essay length, vocabulary range and sentence complexity, which are often unrelated to academic standards," all of which are hallmarks of AI reasoning.

In other words, the LLM grades humans based on the criteria engineers use to assess the LLM.

The LLM grades humans based on the criteria engineers use to assess the LLM.

There's this old adage from economics called Goodhart's law. The econo-nese version of it is that "any observed statistical regularity will tend to collapse once pressure is placed upon it for control purposes." Or: when a measure becomes a target, it ceases to be a good measure. It could be tweaked to apply to large language models: "when the measure of language becomes its target, it ceases to be good language."

There is danger in evaluating for language patterns over its content, and both generation and detection incentivize this. Automated grading is somewhere between the two: rewarding students for employing the form of reason over the act of reasoning will only make them more tempting and more common. And yet, punishing the form risks punishing reason. Ultimately, we have to think critically in all cases, instead of deferring to the judgments of machines.

Against Automatic Thinking

I'm not convinced by the old "if you haven't done anything wrong, you don't have anything to worry about" line. I've seen 99.8% cited as a measure of accuracy in automated surveillance systems since 2018. As Arvind Narayanan has noted, that is on a per-paper basis, which compounds every time we use it. So up to 10% of college students could be falsely accused. If we collectively run every bit of text through an AI model to check whether it is AI-generated, we will generate false positives on an even larger scale.

These models concentrate real authority; companies promise they will reason on our behalf. We normalize something dangerous when we run every two-line phrase through an AI interpreter, post the result online, and say "see? They're plagiarists!"

We create a culture of self-censorship and AI-detector-pressured rewriting and paraphrasing as people strive to avoid these witch hunts. That is the opposite of protecting human expression. We should resist normalizing a trust in any machine's ability to determine matters of guilt. If using AI to write is, at its worst, an industrialization of the mind, then AI detection, at its worst, becomes a surveillance system for thought.

Monthly, for the Second Week in a Row.

Thanks for reading! As mentioned last week, I am only a sporadic poster these days, aiming for once a month. If you're paying for the newsletter and would like to calibrate your donations (or would like to start supporting it!) you are very welcome to set up or change your subscription here.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

22. London's Free Roof Terraces

Source: https://diamondgeezer.blogspot.com/2026/05/londons-free-roof-terraces.html
Site: diamondgeezer.blogspot.com
Submitter: zeristor (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-31 07:16 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 272 points · 132 comments
Length: 1.3K words (~6 min read)

A few years ago some City speculators spotted they were more likely to get planning permission if their new skyscraper included a free public roof terrace. Free access to elevated views is always a winner in my book. So yesterday I went up a few.

This was all on-the-hoof so I didn't go up the big three because they expect you to book in advance.

Sky Garden at The Fenchurch Building, aka The Walkie-Talkie
Opened January 2015, 35th-37th floors, blogged hereYou have to book at least three weeks ahead, but yesterday 'Closed For Private Event'.

Horizon 22 at 22 Bishopsgate
Opened September 2022, 57th-58th floor, blogged hereTickets released on Mondays, they go fast but ridiculously early slots are often available.

The Lookout at 8 Bishopsgate
Opened August 2022, 50th floor, blogged hereTickets released on Mondays, current availability in four days time, but Horizon 22 is better.

I went instead to the walk-straight-ins, starting with the newest.

The Terrace at 1 Leadenhall
Opened April 2026, 4th floor, Ian Visited here(map)
Lift duration: 20 seconds, Staff on duty: 2

This one's odd. When you think roof terrace you normally think lofty and airy, but this one's merely on the 4th floor of a 36 storey skyscraper with a view to match. You walk in round the corner from Leadenhall Market, opposite Waterstones, through a door that doesn't quite scream 'come in'. A bloke at a lectern in what appears to be a service corridor then walks you over to the lifts ("press 4 for me") before returning to his purgatorial wait for almost no visitors. It's certainly quick though, I was on The Terrace less than a minute after walking in downstairs.

The terrace is about 40m long and up to 10m wide, seemingly formed by cutting a two-storey wedge out of the side of the building. At one end is the entrance to a restaurant that hasn't opened yet, so may one day bring some buzz, whereas I had the place to myself apart from a security guard with nobody to watch but me. Eight benches have been provided amid a thin line of shrubbery, but better to walk up to the far ends because the central view is somewhat limited. You can look down in which case what you see is the roof of world-class tourist attraction Leadenhall Market. However all the amazing glitzy dazzle is on the underside, thus from above this could be any Victorian arcade and a few nice finials is as good as it gets.

More awkwardly the view to the south is substantially blocked by ongoing works on 85 Gracechurch Street, a neighbouring 32-storey tower that's only just reached double figures. This will one day have a free-to-visit fifth-floor public terrace, perhaps with the chance for people to be staring back over here, but for now it's just a crane and a heck of a lot of white sheeting. A better view can be had by walking to either end, indeed the chief interest is finding yourself above street level in the heart of the City's chief upthrust cluster.

At the Waterstones end you can see 8 and 22 Bishopsgate, the Cheesegrater and right up close the Lloyds Building with minions riding the elevators on its knobbly metal shell. Then the Scalpel, the roof terrace I'm heading to next, postmodern Minster Court, Plantation Place and the Walkie Talkie. The Shard is still visible (for now), then the Gracechurch Street end has the finer silhouettes of St Paul's dome, St Michael's tower and St Peter's spire. This roof terrace is a true oddity, a public space that's nice to have but fundamentally pointless, and if you ever need a mid-City toilet or a dry spot to eat your sandwiches it'd make an intriguing diversion.

The Garden at 120 at Fen Court
Opened February 2019, 15th floor, blogged here(map)
Lift duration: 40 seconds, Staff on duty: 6

This one's long-established, popular and still the largest roof garden in the City. You do have to endure a scanner chicane before being admitted but I was swiftly through, this time three minutes from joining the queue to reaching the roof. Get stuck behind a full party of teenage EU tourists and it could be rather longer. The lift brings you up mid-terrace with a large pergola close by, in 2019 bare but now with wisteria twinkling its last and a rose-bush shrubbery underneath. The gardeners did good.

But the best thing here is the 360° panorama from the jagged perimeter, some of which is open enough to have a proper long distance view. Tower Bridge is almost unobscured, also the Tower itself, also the helipad at the Royal London in Whitechapel at almost the same elevation as yourself. But spin round and there's also Docklands, the Crystal Palace transmitter and the London Eye, plus close-up the glories of the Gherkin in a convenient slim gap to the north. A few of the younger visitors seemed more interested in pouting than their backdrop but that's their loss. If you've never been up here, or even thought to, give The Garden at 120 a go.

Roof Terrace at One New Change
Opened November 2010, 6th floor, blogged here(map)
Lift duration: 20 seconds, Staff on duty: 3

When a shopping centre was plonked alongside St Paul's Cathedral, someone had the sense to put a tongue of public terrace on the roof. The real motive may have been to give the rooftop bar an amazing setting for sipping frozen margueritas but the rest of us are also elevated winners. The glass-sided lift whisks you up from brand central with excellent views of the cathedral funnelled down a slim reflective notch. The upper terrace is slightly stepped with plants and benches, but if you sit down the view vanishes behind a grey bulwark labelled 'Beware Sudden Drop'. The South Bank and the London Eye get a decent look-in but it's really all about Wren's dome, perfectly framed in a way that the telescope in Richmond Park no longer enjoys. Expect a brief visit, but distinctive.

Level 10 at Tate Modern
Opened June 2016, 10th floor, blogged here(map)
Lift duration: 35 seconds, Staff on duty: 1

Tate Modern had high hopes for the 10th floor of the Blatnavik Building with its cafe and a four-sided observation terrace with excellent views of the Thames. Alas it also had great views into the apartments at Neo Bankside whose residents ultimately sued and won, thus if you arrive by lift today you can only visit the cafe. All the exterior doors are locked and signs on the inaccessible balcony say NO PHOTOGRAPHY OR FILMING, with a grumpy looking security guy positioned to ensure compliance. I asked him "will the balcony ever open again?" and he grunted "no", not even the front bit, and basically the entire 10th floor is now a ghastly waste of architectural effort.

Roof Garden at The Post Building
Opened September 2022, 9th floor, blogged here(map)

This one's by far the westernmost roof terrace, hence offers a unique view across the West End's lowrise rooftops including a close-up of the British Museum's magnificent roof. I still don't understand why it's here nor why it's open daily, nor why they insist on Photo ID "and a full written name" before they'll let you up. However I didn't get the chance to test this out yesterday because when I arrived the roof terrace was "closed due to essential maintenance work", inconveniencing probably nobody but myself. I have to say that's probably the excuse I'd use if I'd built a white elephant terrace for planning reasons and wanted to avoid paying staff costs, or alternatively maybe there is some maintenance issue and the place is cursed. At least with a ticketed venue visitors would have known this in advance. Best go up The Garden at 120 instead, or plan ahead and do one of the three really high ones.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

23. Websites have a new way to spy on visitors: analyzing their SSD activity

Source: https://arstechnica.com/security/2026/05/websites-have-a-new-way-to-spy-on-visitors-analyzing-their-ssd-activity/
Site: arstechnica.com
Submitter: Brajeshwar (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-28 14:32 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 127 points · 31 comments
Language: en

No extractable content.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

24. Re: [PATCH] OOM_pardon, a.k.a. don't kill my xlock (2004)

Source: https://lwn.net/Articles/104185/
Site: LWN.net
Author: [Posted September 28, 2004 by corbet]
Submitted: 2026-05-31 17:58 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 65 points · 50 comments
Length: 301 words (~2 min read)
Language: en

From: Andries Brouwer <aebr-AT-win.tue.nl>
To: Thomas Habets <thomas-AT-habets.pp.se>
Subject: Re: [PATCH] oom_pardon, aka don't kill my xlock
Date: Fri, 24 Sep 2004 01:45:20 +0200
Cc: linux-kernel-AT-vger.kernel.org

On Thu, Sep 23, 2004 at 01:23:08AM +0200, Thomas Habets wrote:

> How about a sysctl that does "for the love of kbaek, don't ever kill these 
> processes when OOM. If nothing else can be killed, I'd rather you panic"?

An aircraft company discovered that it was cheaper to fly its planes
with less fuel on board. The planes would be lighter and use less fuel
and money was saved. On rare occasions however the amount of fuel was
insufficient, and the plane would crash. This problem was solved by
the engineers of the company by the development of a special OOF
(out-of-fuel) mechanism. In emergency cases a passenger was selected
and thrown out of the plane. (When necessary, the procedure was
repeated.)  A large body of theory was developed and many publications
were devoted to the problem of properly selecting the victim to be
ejected.  Should the victim be chosen at random? Or should one choose
the heaviest person? Or the oldest? Should passengers pay in order not
to be ejected, so that the victim would be the poorest on board? And
if for example the heaviest person was chosen, should there be a
special exception in case that was the pilot? Should first class
passengers be exempted?  Now that the OOF mechanism existed, it would
be activated every now and then, and eject passengers even when there
was no fuel shortage. The engineers are still studying precisely how
this malfunction is caused.
-
To unsubscribe from this list: send the line "unsubscribe linux-kernel" in
the body of a message to majordomo@vger.kernel.org
More majordomo info at  http://vger.kernel.org/majordomo-info.html
Please read the FAQ at  http://www.tux.org/lkml/

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

25. Using safe-area-inset to build mobile-safe layouts

Source: https://polypane.app/blog/using-safe-area-inset-to-build-mobile-safe-layouts/
Site: Polypane
Author: Kilian Valkhof
Published: 2026-05-06
HN activity: 10 points · 1 comments
Length: 1.8K words (~8 min read)
Language: en

Modern phones are not simple rectangles. They have rounded corners, camera cutouts, dynamic islands, and home indicators that double as gesture areas. Browsers know the dimensions of all of these and expose the parts that could obscure content as safe area insets.

The "safe area" is the portion of the screen that is guaranteed to be free from being obscured by system UI. The safe-area-inset is the measurement of how much space the system UI is taking up on each edge of the screen. By using these values in your CSS, you can make sure that important content and controls are not obscured by the system UI.

If you don't want your floating chat button to end up sitting behind the home indicator, where it's unreachable, you need to account for the safe area inset.

Environment variables for safe area insets

With the safe-area-inset environment variables, you can make your layout adapt to the current device's safe area and avoid those bugs. The env() function is how you read those values in CSS:

body {
  padding-top: env(safe-area-inset-top);
  padding-right: env(safe-area-inset-right);
  padding-bottom: env(safe-area-inset-bottom);
  padding-left: env(safe-area-inset-left);
}

Browser support

Safe-area-insets are baseline widely available, which means you can use them in production today and be confident that they will work for almost all your users on mobile devices.

Since it's baseline widely available, you don't really need to think about fallbacks but if you want to be extra safe, you can provide a fallback padding if the browser doesn't support env():

body {
  padding-top: 1rem; /* Fallback for browsers that don't support env() */
  padding-top: calc(env(safe-area-inset-top) + 1rem);
}

And for browsers that support env() but not safe-area-inset-* variables, you can provide a fallback value directly in the env() function. If safe-area-inset-top is not supported, it will fall back to 1rem:

body {
  padding-top: env(safe-area-inset-top, 1rem);
}

It's worth noting that this situation is purely theoretical, as all browsers that support env() also support safe-area-inset-* variables. That might not be the case with other environment variables, so it's good to know that this fallback mechanism exists.

Before we get into problem areas, let's get a general understanding of how these variables work and how you can use them to affect the layout.

In this demo, change each inset and watch how a realistic mobile UI that takes safe area insets into account shifts to remain usable:

Cutout type

Top inset (44px)

Right inset (0px)

Bottom inset (34px)

Left inset (0px)

OverlayShow safe inset areas

Page title

The specific px values here are not particular to any specific device, the point is to show how the device sets these variables and how your layout can respond to them as they change.

On real devices, you can think of these values as constants. They're provided by the browser and while they might change when switching from portrait to landscape or between OS updates that change the device UI as well as simply differ per device, they don't change dynamically as the user scrolls or interacts with the page. The browser provides them as a constant value that you can use to ensure your content is not obscured by the system UI.

Which web pages actually need this?

If you want your pages to look the best they can, all of them.

Browsers by default will prevent your site from being obscured by the notch or home indicator, so your content will be safe without any special handling. That does come with a downside, which is that the browser will give you a smaller viewport to reserve space:

Page title

You'll notice the edges here keep the site from being obscured, but they also don't look that great. Ideally we want the content to stretch edge-to-edge, but we want to make sure they're not obscured by system UI. To get that, you need to opt in to the full viewport and handle safe areas yourself.

To do so is a two-step process. First, you need to add viewport-fit=cover to your meta viewport tag:

<meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, viewport-fit=cover" />

This will make the browser stretch your page edge-to-edge:

Page title

As you can see, the content sits behind the dynamic island and home indicator. viewport-fit=cover tells the browser that you want to be responsible for making sure your content is not obscured by the system UI.

And now we can move those elements away from behind the system UI using env(safe-area-inset-*).

Page title

.content {
  padding-right: env(safe-area-inset-right);
  padding-left: env(safe-area-inset-left);
}

If you opt into the full viewport, here are the kinds of things you now have to think about to make sure your content is not obscured by the system UI:

Fixed headers and navigation bars should have enough space above or below for the notch/dynamic island/camera punch hole or home indicator
Floating chat or help buttons should remain inside the safe area
Full-screen dialogs and drawers should take up the right height without being obscured by the home indicator
Map or video controls near screen corners

Safe-area-inset doesn't provide margins

Safe-area-insets are defined to be exactly the space that the system UI is taking up. That means they don't provide any margin between the system UI's edge and your content.

If you set padding to just the safe-area-inset value, your content will sit right up against the edge of the safe area, which is right up against the system UI.

To add some breathing room, you can add your own padding on top of the safe area insets by combining things with calc(). This way you can ensure that your content is not only safe from being obscured but also has some space to breathe:

body {
  padding-top: calc(env(safe-area-inset-top) + 1rem);
  padding-right: calc(env(safe-area-inset-right) + 1rem);
  padding-bottom: calc(env(safe-area-inset-bottom) + 1rem);
  padding-left: calc(env(safe-area-inset-left) + 1rem);
}

Safe-area-inset only has non-zero values on mobile devices

env() is supported across browsers and platforms, but the safe-area-inset-* variables really only have non-zero values on mobile devices.

Desktop browsers always return 0 because there is no UI on top of pages in desktop browsers. It's only on mobile devices that these values are non-zero and that you have to account for them.

That's exactly why these bugs are so easy to miss. If you test in the Chrome responsive view, the safe area insets will still be 0 and you won't see any issues during development.

Testing on real devices is often delegated to the end of the project. By then, making layout changes to accommodate safe areas can be expensive, and the bugs can slip through to production. Even worse, they often only affect users on certain devices, so they can go unnoticed for a long time.

Polypane's device emulation supports safe area insets

Polypane is the first and only desktop browser to emulate safe area insets. Every device in Polypane has correct safe area inset values for both portrait and landscape orientations.

Here's Polypane showing the safe area insets in blue, and the small viewport height difference in pink:

We're also the only desktop browser to emulate svh, but that's a topic for another article.

With Polypane's safe-area-inset overlay visualization, you can see exactly where the unsafe areas are on each device.

Solving a specific issue: Floating buttons

Let's look at a specific example of how to use safe-area-inset values to solve a common issue: floating buttons that end up behind the home indicator and become unreachable.

Cutout type

Bottom inset (34px)

Right inset (0px)

Button offset (10px)

OverlayShow safe inset areas

Positioning

Bottom-right helper

.chat-button {
  position: fixed;
  right: 10px;
  bottom: 10px;
}

Toggle the positioning between 'Fixed position' and 'Using env()' to switch between hard-coded offsets and offsets that use safe-area-inset-bottom and safe-area-inset-right.

safe-area-max-inset

Along with safe-area-inset-*, the specification also describes safe-area-max-inset-* variables. Those are not widely supported yet, but they are worth mentioning because they have slightly different behavior:

safe-area-inset-* gives you the current inset value right now. On scroll, the browser chrome can collapse, and the inset value can shrink all the way to 0. Your element moves with that change.
safe-area-max-inset-* gives you the maximum inset the browser can report for that edge. It stays stable even when the browser chrome collapses. Use it when you want a reserved zone that does not jump around.

inset vs max-inset

Drag or scroll the phone to simulate the browser address bar appearing and disappearing.

The green button uses safe-area-inset-bottom and follows the current inset. The blue button uses safe-area-max-inset-bottom and stays put.

OverlayShow safe inset areas

inset vs max-inset

When to use which really depends on your situation. For some UI components it makes sense to move with the live viewport state, like a floating chat button that should always be just above the home indicator.

For other things, like a persistent cookie banner or a full-screen dialog, it can be better to reserve a stable zone that doesn't shift when the browser chrome collapses so that users don't inadvertently tap the wrong button.

/* Moves with the live viewport state */
.floating-cta {
  bottom: calc(env(safe-area-inset-bottom) + 1rem);
}

/* Holds a stable reserved zone regardless of browser chrome */
.persistent-zone {
  bottom: calc(env(safe-area-max-inset-bottom) + 1rem);
}

Browser support for safe-area-max-inset-*

As of now, only Chromium implements safe-area-max-inset-* so there is no support in (mobile) Safari or Firefox. That means you can't depend on it yet and should provide a fallback stack for other browsers:

.bottom-spacer {
  padding-bottom: 1rem;
  padding-bottom: calc(env(safe-area-inset-bottom) + 1rem);
  padding-bottom: calc(env(safe-area-max-inset-bottom, env(safe-area-inset-bottom)) + 1rem);
}

Notice how we're using the env() fallback mechanism to fall back to safe-area-inset-bottom if safe-area-max-inset-bottom is not supported.

Testing safe areas in Polypane

As covered earlier, safe area bugs are easy to miss during development. Chrome's responsive view always reports inset values of 0, and real-device testing tends to get pushed to the end of the project, when fixing layout issues is expensive and bugs have already reached production.

Polypane changes that. You can test safe area insets (and small viewport behavior) directly on your desktop, across multiple devices and orientations simultaneously, as part of your normal development workflow.

Catch real-device layout failures during development, not after shipping.

What to take away

Safe areas are not edge cases for unusual devices. They are the reality of modern mobile devices with camera punch holes, notches, dynamic islands, and home indicator bars. Your users are on those devices, and if you want to give them the best experience, you need to make sure your content is not obscured by the system UI.

Make sure your viewport is set to viewport-fit=cover so you get the full viewport and that you use env(safe-area-inset-*) so all your content is visible and accessible. That gives users the best experience.

Get started with testing safe areas in Polypane today, and catch real-device layout failures during development, not after shipping.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

26. Having your insulin pump die while you're on vacation

Source: https://blog.lauramichet.com/what-its-like-to-have-the-machine-that-keeps-you-alive-die-while-youre-on-vacation/
Site: Laura Michet's Blog
Submitter: speckx (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-28 18:33 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 130 points · 143 comments
Length: 3.8K words (~17 min read)
Language: en

28 May, 2026

I'm about to tell you a story about the major disaster which affected much of my decisionmaking on my week-long vacation to Santa Fe. I just got home to LA, and the situation is now resolved. But it was super fucking annoying!!

I didn't mention it in any of my other posts because I was waiting to learn how it would actually resolve.

I know a lot of people whose lives depend on access to medicine. I know fewer other people whose lives also depend on the machinery and software used to dose that medicine. Insulin pumps, pacemakers, and other crucial, always-on medical equipment are crazy useful but also contain the possibility for insane frustration and resentment. I've been pretty honest over the years that I value having an insulin pump, but that I also hate the manufacturers and designers of every pump I've ever used. If you introduced me to any person who has ever designed an insulin pump I've used, I would probably punch them in the face and cuss them out in front of their children. Every single pump I've used as caused me massive problems - though none as bad as the one I'm about to describe.

It is not possible - for me, anyway - to have a neutral, positive relationship with the machinery that keeps me alive. Every problem it has is an indignity and an insult to me. Anything it does that irritates me is a sin. Universal healthcare would make my life easier, for sure. But the irritation I feel whenever I have to deal with a pump problem will never go away until diabetes is cured.

Until then, the people who design, sell, and service these machines are both keeping me alive and also my mortal enemies. I think that this is an inherent effect of being dependent on a tech company to stay alive. You can treat the following story as a window into what that experience is like for a patient.

If you work for the company that made the pump I'm about to complain about: I fucking hate you, and I hate your pump. This is the deal you made when you decided to make machinery that keeps me alive.

There's no way out of it for either of us; it's just the dynamic we're trapped in.

Though I'm trapped in it much more than you are, aren't I?

How diabetes works

I have type 1 diabetes - the type of diabetes you get when your pancreas stops making insulin entirely. It's also called "juvenile diabetes." T1 diabetes cannot be controlled with diet or lifestyle changes - it can only be controlled by taking insulin injections multiple times a day.

Type 1 diabetes is "insulin dependent." If you don't have the insulin, you sicken and die. Going without insulin for even a few hours can make you very ill. You'll need both a basal dose of insulin acting on you 24/7, as well as bolus doses to cover the digestion of any food you eat. Insulin performs a kind of last-step role in the digestive process - it's the hormone that allows your cells to absorb energy, in the form of sugar, from your bloodstream. So running out of insulin is a Bad Time.

How my pump works

To get insulin into my body, I use an insulin pump paired with a continuous glucose monitor. My pump is a Tandem tslim X2, and my CGM is a Dexcom 6 (though I have to swap to the Dexcom 7 this month, because Dexcom is ceasing production of the older model I use). The Dexcom checks my blood sugar every couple of minutes all day long. It sends this information to my pump, which then decides whether to give me my regular dose of insulin, a lowered dose, or a higher dose. If my blood sugar is too low, I get less insulin; if my blood sugar is too high, I get more. I also have to tell the pump when I'm eating, so I can get that "bolus" dose to cover my food.

Every time I go on vacation, I have to ensure that my pump keeps running so I can stay alive. I do this by bringing about two times the number of supplies I need for the time I'll be gone. Supplies for my pump include not only insulin but also the disposable plastic medical waste my pump generates - in this case, the needles and tubes that connect my body to the pump. My pump has a disposable plastic cartridge that holds the insulin, a disposable tube that goes into my leg or torso, and a disposable quarter-inch metal needle that sits inside my skin all day long, held in place with a sticker patch.

I also need a big nasty syringe to inject insulin into the cartridge - I suck insulin out of the vial with this giant syringe, then inject it into my pump like I'm performing some kind of science experiment. It makes me look very Frankenstein if I have to do it in a restaurant.

Preparing to go into the desert

I'd be gone in Santa Fe for about seven days, so I brought about fourteen catridges and around twenty of those big-ass needles. I brought about ten or twelve "pump sites", the needle that goes into my skin. I brought two entire vials of insulin, which should be something like seven or eight times the amount of insulin I'd need. I felt that I was being very redundant.

Foolishly, I did not bring the backup-of-the-backup. I never have! I've never had my pump actually fail on me. I've been using pumps since I was in sixth grade, and it's never happened before once in my entire life. So!!!! If you're trying to choose between Minimed - which I used for nearly 20 years - and Tandem, which I use now... let this be a point of data for you!

For me, the back-up-of-the-backup would be an insulin "pen" injector containing a long-acting insulin. The insulin in my pump takes effect in less than 15 minutes, but the insulin in my backup pen slowly acts on me over the course of 24 hours. So if you take a shot from the pen every day at the same time, it has the same effect as an insulin pump would have. Instead of getting tons of tiny doses per day, you get one big slow dose. This is reliable, but less safe than the pump. You can turn a pump off if you're having a low blood sugar emergency, but once you take the shot from the pen, you're stuck with that dose for the next 24 hours.

To tell the truth: I do not even know how to use the pen. I have never needed to do this in my life.

I've lived with diabetes for 27 years and I've been on pumps for 25. I have spent a quarter of a century relying on machines to keep me alive. It has never failed on me before. It's incredible that I've been able to do this, and it's incredible that it never occurred to me to plan for a situation where the entire pump would fucking break. We can thank the FDA for that!

The machine that keeps me alive breaks down while I am on vacation

Anyway, it was only a couple days into my trip when my pump sent me this ominous message:

CARTRIDGE ALARM 20A

ALL DELIVERIES STOPPED!

This cartridge cannot be used. Remove and replace with a new cartridge.

Wow! That looks serious! I took it at face value and replaced my cartridge.

Because I am a bozo, it did not occur to me to try and suck the insulin out of the cartridge when I replaced it. I usually only replace my cartridges when they are completely empty, so I'd never before thrown out a bunch of insulin when I threw out a cartridge. Idiotically, I think I threw out about 40 units of insulin when I threw out this cartridge. That's about a third of the total amount of insulin in the thing.

You are not supposed to suck insulin out of your pump and put it in a new cartridge. That's bad! But If your pump fails on you 10x in one vacation, you might end up doing that to economize on the amount of insulin you're losing. I did this a couple times before realizing that the cartridges were fine and I could just ignore what the pump was saying.

Another thing - the Tandem tslim X2 requires the user to "prime" the pump tubing with 10 units of insulin every time the pump shuts down or the cartridge is replaced. This is by far my least favorite, most hated thing about this pump. If I am dumb enough to let my pump run out of batteries, I then waste ten units of insulin starting it back up. It's insane. Insulin is expensive; there should not be cover-your-ass lawyer-flavored features which require me to waste ten units of insulin any time I do anything unexpected with this pump. (Long before my pump failed, this specific feature had convinced me to stop using Tandem pumps the next time my insurance lets me change brands.)

So: When I replaced this first cartridge, I not only wasted the 40 units I threw out, but also the 10 units I used to "prime" the pump tubing with to set up the new cartridge. For me, that's more than one entire day's worth of insulin.

It happens a ton more times

This same error happened again two days later. I was already extremely mad about wasting 20 units of primed insulin across two cartridges, so I looked the error up online.

I immediately found this reddit thread, which explained to me that the pump itself was failing. I decided that if it happened one more time, I'd call Tandem.

I was still replacing my cartridge every time I got this error, because I took the error at face value and supposed that the cartridge itself was busted. It was not. I didn't know it at this time, but I could have followed this procedure to get the pump functioning temporarily again every time it failed:

Wait 10-15 minutes without insulin
Remove the cartridge and immediately snap it back in
Re-"load" the cartridge and prime out 10 units

This worked very reliably. The problem wasn't the cartridge; it was the pump. But for the first 5 or so times I got this error, I obediently replaced the cartridge. I wasted a fuck ton of cartridges this way.

A sequence of failed problem-solving

The third time I got the cartridge fail error, I was at a museum in Santa Fe with my husband. I immediately made us drive back to the hotel, where I called Tandem customer service and learned that my pump was indeed failing and would need to be replaced.

The call with customer service was illuminating but also frustrating. When I was in middle school, I used a pump called a Disetronic. I dimly remember getting an error code, calling it in (the pump was still functioning!) and having a woman literally drive to my house with a replacement pump for me. I lived in Connecticut, rather close to multiple different major population centers, so maybe I was just lucky... but it seems that pump companies no longer do this kind of thing at all, now that overnight shipping exists. They just mailed a replacement pump to my house, even though I wasn't located there.

Admittedly, I did have an opportunity to cause a fuss which I did not choose to take - mostly because I still assumed the situation was fixable. The woman on the other end of the line asked me, "Do you have a plan to continue your insulin pump therapy?" I said, "I guess. I will have to call my doctor and get my prescription for long-acting insulin moved to a pharmacy in Santa Fe." I don't know what she would have done if I'd said "no." I am also not sure what would have happened if I had started a fight over the decision to overnight the pump to my home. I might have been able to get it overnighted to the hotel if I was a big enough bitch about it.

Dealing with medical companies, however, makes you very eager to be compliant. I was definitely trying to cruise through this situation without causing waves or getting weird treatment from the company that literally keeps me alive. We have, as you might imagine, a weird power imbalance.

But immediately after this, my desire to be compliant led to me making an even bigger screwup. A few years ago, I began using my hospital's online messaging system to contact my doctors. It's usually faster than calling because multiple people associated with each office watch the incoming messages. If I can't get ahold of a doctor, a nurse is usually able to sort me out. It also allows me to send a long, detailed, precise message, then get a reply which is more specific, accurate, and reliable than a phone conversation usually is.

So I sent in a message containing the address of the pharmacy closest to me in Santa Fe, a request for them to send a long-acting insulin pen refill there, some details about my pump failures, and some questions about things I could do to mitigate the issue. Then I crossed my fingers and hoped someone would see it over the Memorial Day holiday weekend.

What I didn't know is that my diabetes doctor's office actually still has a on-call contact system for urgent-but-not-emergency issues which is still phone-only and does not interface with the messaging system at all, just like it did twenty or thirty years ago. The main reason I didn't know this on-call phone number existed is because there is no messaging about it anywhere on the hospital website. They just tell you to go to the emergency room!

Over the course of that Friday and the following weekend, my pump started failing about once every twelve hours. I started counting cartridges. I drew a line on the calendar and told myself: if I can't figure out what to do before this time exactly, I'll go to the emergency room.

This was dumb of me. I should have caused a bigger fuss. If I'd bitched to more people and made more phone calls and hit 0 on more phone trees, I probably would have alighted on the solution of the endocrinology on-call number, or gotten the pump overnighted to my location, or shortcut this entire process for myself. In my defense, I was trying to not be a problem. I am very bad at knowing when I need to start being a problem over my medical stuff!

I do think that it is significant, however, that when I told the pump company I wasn't at home, they didn't offer to send it to where I actually was. There wasn't a serious attempt to connect me to a pump as quickly as possible - just regular shipping addresses, formal processes, and a series of scripted rules they read out to me about returning the pump. They were more concerned with telling me that I'd be billed for the old pump if I didn't return it.

I was also very headstrong about not going to the emergency room. I know that going to an emergency room would have cost me an insane amount of money, and would have taken me hours to get to what I already knew was the solution: a simple long-acting insulin pen prescription. It would ruin my vacation, create months of paperwork followup, and cost me a ton of money while I am already unemployed. And for what?? I was still able to get the pump restarted every time it broke, wasn't I?

What it's like to drive all over northwest New Mexico with a failing insulin pump

I decided to not change our plans for the next few days at all. We'd counted on going to Bandelier National Monument, the Earthship Welcome Center near Taos, and a couple other places that were an hour or more from Santa Fe. I decided that we could continue doing all these things if I just carried all my medical equipment with me everywhere we went. If the ultimate solution was "go to the emergency room," we would never be more than an hour from the emergency room, and it would take much more than an hour for me to genuinely be in danger if my pump failed. Staying in Santa Fe didn't seem necessary.

We already had a cooler in the back of the car at all times, so I loaded it up with my insulin and threw a bag containing all my backup medical supplies in the car. And, like clockwork, my pump continued to fail once or twice a day, usually more than twelve hours apart. I wasted an extraordinary number of cartridges and many units of insulin.

Every time it happened, I did worry that my pump would fail to restart and I'd be stuck driving directly to the closest emergency room. I am very lucky that it continued to restart and that the risks I was taking didn't cause me any serious problems at all. My blood sugar was under control, and the pump was mostly working. It was just really, really annoying to deal with the moments when it wasn't!

Monday afternoon, I finally got a call from my doctor's office. They sent a new prescription for long-acting insulin to Flagstaff, where I'd arrive early the next day on the first leg of my drive home to LA. I was relieved. I was even kind of excited to use a pen for the first time, and to be without a pump on my body for the first time in nearly 30 years.

Nobody in the high desert has any long-acting insulin

This post is going on for too long already, so I'll cut to the chase:

Flagstaff did not have any insulin for me. They were out. There was no available long-acting insulin anywhere between my hotel and Sedona.
The CVS search system does not allow users to search for their medication in any pharmacies more than 25 miles away.
Astonishingly, this function isn't available to pharmacists either!!!!!! According to the guy from the Flagstaff CVS who called me, they can either search for your medication within the nearest 25 miles, or send your prescription directly to a specific pharmacy.
I was continuing to drive across the southwest to Los Angeles, because my replacement insulin pump was due to arrive there today, Wednesday, the day I returned. So it made no sense to hunt for insulin anywhere between Flagstaff and LA. I could just drive home to LA directly.
Once I was in CA, I assumed that my insurance situation would probably get easier, too - I am on a California ACA exchange plan. I would be much happier going to an emergency room in California than in any other state.

So this meant that I spent two days longer than I expected with a broken insulin pump. Again, I experienced no negative consequences from this whatsoever. I just drove directly home, found the new pump sitting in front of my door, and got everything sorted out. I did have to re-prime the pump one last time - Wednesday morning at 3 AM - but that was merely extremely annoying. Medically, I am absolutely fine. This was probably a bad lesson for me to learn.

The funniest thing, however, is that my local pharmacy in Los Angeles does not have any long-acting insulin available either. I really have no idea what to think about this. The fact that nobody could get me the damn insulin once I had the prescription is possibly even more frightening to me than the pump failure. I can't help but wonder if the plan I told the customer service rep over the phone was idiotic from the start.

It's possible that even if I threw a fit on every phone call, the only place that could have given me insulin was the place of last resort - a hospital where they would have been able to inject me with long-acting insulin in the emergency room. But how was I to know?

What have I learned

If I don't write what I've learned here, one of those hideously irritating diabetics who goes on Reddit and argues about everything from the perspective of Perfect, Unerring Care will send me an email criticizing me. Fuck you, if that's you. If you were even thinking of emailing me to criticize me about what I did, I hope you die. Of diabetes.

Here's what I will do:

Bring an insulin pen with me the next time I go on vacation.
Put the on-call number in my phone.

That's it. I will probably also be meaner to everyone who gets me on the phone in the future during an emergency. I was trying specifically to not do that, but I suppose it's helpful to be mean when your medical equipment is failing.

Everything is good now. Everything is great.

So I escaped this extremely risky and stupid problem - partially of the pump's making, partially of my own creation - with zero consequences other than the fact I had to prime out 10 units of insulin once or twice a day for about a week. I got home today and now have a new insulin pump which is identical to my old one. It works great. It continues to keep me very healthy and safe.

I hope that you can understand why - even when I made the situation worse by not throwing a big enough fit - I held in my heart a deep and powerful crystallized unit of blame for the pump company, and the pump company alone. I gotta say it again: my previous insulin pumps never broke. Not a single one of them ever stopped giving me insulin.

It's very difficult to have a normal attitude about a tech company that keeps you alive, but it's even harder to be normal about it when the tech fucking breaks. Even if we lived in a utopia, with universal healthcare, universal pharmacy medication searches, and helpful customer service reps who send backup pumps directly to my location on the backs of swift eagles... even then, I don't think it's possible to live without resentment for the technology keeping you alive.

Somewhere in the back of my head, something is always screaming: it's fucking stupid that I have to do this at all!!

#diabetes #new_mexico

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

27. The History of "Prisencolinensinainciusol"

Source: https://dirkdeklein.net/2026/02/03/the-fascinating-history-of-prisencolinensinainciusol-the-nonsense-song-that-became-a-global-hit/
Site: History of Sorts
Author: dirkdeklein
Published: 2026-02-03
HN activity: 34 points · 8 comments
Length: 639 words (~3 min read)
Language: en

In 1972, Italian singer-songwriter Adriano Celentano released a song that defied linguistic norms, confused listeners, and yet became an international sensation. The song, “Prisencolinensinainciusol,” is an energetic, rhythm-driven track that sounds like English but is, in fact, complete gibberish. This bizarre yet brilliant creation was Celentano’s experiment to showcase the barriers of communication and highlight how language can sometimes be meaningless in music.

Origins of “Prisencolinensinainciusol”

Celentano, already a well-established artist in Italy by the early 1970s, had a keen interest in American music, especially rock and roll. He admired the sound and flow of the English language in music but also realized that many Italian listeners didn’t understand English lyrics. He decided to create a song that mimicked the phonetics of American English but was, in reality, devoid of meaning. His goal was to emphasize the universal power of rhythm and melody over language.

The Song and Its Composition

“Prisencolinensinainciusol” was co-written by Celentano and his wife, Claudia Mori. The song features Celentano delivering rapid-fire lyrics in a made-up language that sounds like English but isn’t. The beat is funky, the delivery is confident, and the music is heavily influenced by the rock and R&B sounds of the time. The chorus, punctuated by the phrase “all right!”, gives listeners a familiar hook to latch onto, reinforcing the illusion of comprehensible language.

Initial Reception and Legacy

Despite its unconventional nature, the song became a hit in Italy and later spread to other countries, including France, Germany, and the U.S. It resonated particularly well with radio DJs, who saw it as a fresh and intriguing novelty track. Over time, the song gained cult status and became a favorite among linguists, music enthusiasts, and even educators who use it to discuss phonetics and language perception.

Influence on Pop Culture

“Prisencolinensinainciusol” has been covered, remixed, and referenced numerous times over the years. It has appeared in films, television shows, and commercials, proving its lasting appeal. In the age of the internet, the song found a new wave of popularity, with social media users and music historians rediscovering and celebrating Celentano’s genius.

Adriano Celentano’s “Prisencolinensinainciusol” is a testament to the universal power of music. By stripping away meaning and focusing solely on sound and rhythm, the song proves that a good melody transcends language barriers. Even five decades after its release, it remains an intriguing and beloved piece of musical history, reminding us that sometimes, words aren’t necessary to make an impact.

*”Prisencolinensinainciusol” wasn’t the only hit song featuring made-up words. Although not as big a hit, Sanomi by the Belgian band Urban Trad also gained significant recognition. Written by Yves Barbieux, the song represented Belgium in the Eurovision Song Contest 2003, held in Riga. Notably, it was the first song ever performed at the contest that was not in a natural language.

Barbieux, a member of Urban Trad, crafted the lyrics in an imaginary language. The band included Verónica Codesal, Marie-Sophie Talbot, Didier Laloy, Dirk Naessens, Cédric Waterschoot, Soetkin Collier, Philip Masure, and Michel Morvan, all contributing to the song’s unique folk-inspired sound.” It came second.

Sources

https://ig.ft.com/life-of-a-song/prisencolinensinainciusol.html

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sanomi

Donation

Your readership is what makes my site a success, and I am truly passionate about providing you with valuable content. I have been doing this at no cost and will continue to do so. Your voluntary donation of $2 or more, if you are able, would be a significant contribution to the continuation of my work. However, I fully understand if you’re not in a position to do so. Your support, in any form, is greatly appreciated. Thank you. To donate, click on the credit/debit card icon of the card you will use. If you want to donate more than $2, just add a higher number in the box left from the PayPal link. Your generosity is greatly appreciated. Many thanks.

$2.00

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

28. Odysseus – self-hosted AI workspace

Source: https://github.com/pewdiepie-archdaemon/odysseus
Site: GitHub
Submitter: Dzheky (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-31 15:50 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 123 points · 62 comments
Length: 1.8K words (~8 min read)
Language: en

─────────────────────────────────────────────── ⊹ ࣪ ˖ ૮( ˶ᵔ ᵕ ᵔ˶ )っ Odysseus vers. 1.0 ───────────────────────────────────────────────

A self-hosted AI workspace -- meant to be the self-hosted version of the UI experience you get from ChatGPT and Claude. But with more jank and fun. Running on your own hardware, with your own data -- local-first, privacy-first, and no trojan.

Features

Chat -- chat with any local model or API; adding them is super simple.
vLLM · llama.cpp · Ollama · OpenRouter · OpenAI
Agent -- hand it tools and let it run the whole task itself.
built on opencode · MCP · web · files · shell · skills · memory
Cookbook -- Scans your hardware, recommends models, click to download and serve.. easy!
built on llmfit · VRAM-aware · GGUF / FP8 / AWQ · fit scoring · vLLM / llama.cpp serving
Deep Research -- multi-step runs that gather, read, and synthesize sources into a nice visual report.
adapted from Tongyi DeepResearch
Compare -- a fun tool to compare models side by side. Test completely blind, no bias!
multi-model · blind test · synthesis
Documents -- YOU write the text, AI is there to assist, not the opposite.
multi-tab editor · markdown · HTML · CSV · syntax highlighting · AI edits · suggestions
Memory / Skills -- Persistent memory and skills, your agent evolves over time as it better understands you and your tasks!
ChromaDB · fastembed (ONNX) · vector + keyword retrieval · import/export
Email -- IMAP/SMTP inbox with AI triage built in: urgency reminders, auto-tag, auto-summary, auto-reply drafts, auto-spam.
IMAP · SMTP · per-account routing · CalDAV-aware
Notes & Tasks -- Quick notes with reminders, a todo list, and scheduled tasks the agent can act on.
note pings · checklist · cron-style tasks · ntfy / browser / email channels
Calendar -- Local-first calendar with CalDAV sync to Radicale / Nextcloud / Apple / Fastmail.
CalDAV pull · .ics import/export · per-calendar colors · agent-aware
Works on mobile -- looks and runs great on your phone, not just desktop.
responsive · installable (PWA) · touch gestures
Extras -- more to explore, happy if you give it a go!
image editor · theme editor · file uploads (vision + PDF) · web search · presets · sessions · 2FA

Demo

A full, hover-to-play tour lives on the landing page (docs/index.html). A few looks:

Chat & Agents

Deep Research

Compare

Documents

Notes & Tasks

Quick Start

Defaults work out of the box — clone, run, configure inside the app. Open the Settings panel after first login to point Odysseus at your LLM server, search provider, email account, etc. Only touch .env if you need to override deployment-level things like AUTH_ENABLED, DATABASE_URL, or pre-seed ODYSSEUS_ADMIN_PASSWORD (otherwise an initial password is generated and printed on first boot).

Contributing? See CONTRIBUTING.md for setup, testing, and pull request guidelines.

Option 1: Docker (recommended)

git clone https://github.com/pewdiepie-archdaemon/odysseus.git
cd odysseus
cp .env.example .env       # optional, but recommended for explicit defaults
docker compose up -d --build

Compose starts Odysseus, ChromaDB, SearXNG, and ntfy. First run does a full image build. Open http://localhost:7000 after the containers are healthy. If port 7000 is already taken, set APP_PORT=7001 (or another free port) in .env, recreate the container, and open http://localhost:7001.

Cookbook remote servers use an Odysseus-owned SSH key from ./data/ssh inside Docker. In Cookbook -> Settings -> Servers, generate/copy the public key and add it to the remote server's ~/.ssh/authorized_keys. After generating the key, you can also install it from the host with:

ssh-copy-id -i data/ssh/id_ed25519.pub user@server

Cookbook local downloads are stored in ./data/huggingface, mounted as ~/.cache/huggingface inside the Odysseus container. Cookbook-installed serve engines and Python CLIs are stored in ./data/local, mounted as ~/.local, so vLLM/llama.cpp installs survive container recreation.

After downloading a model, open Cookbook -> Serve, pick the cached model, and launch it. When the server answers /v1/models, Odysseus adds it to the chat model picker automatically. For NVIDIA GPUs in Docker, install the NVIDIA Container Toolkit and add gpus: all to the odysseus service if nvidia-smi is not visible inside the container.

The default Docker image is intentionally slim. For Python-based serve engines, use Cookbook -> Dependencies to install vLLM, SGLang, llama-cpp-python, or diffusers into the persisted ./data/local mount. Native CUDA builds inside the container also require CUDA toolkit binaries such as nvcc; if those are not installed in the container, use prebuilt Python wheels or serve from a remote GPU host that already has the toolkit.

Useful checks:

docker compose ps
docker compose logs --tail=120 odysseus
docker compose logs odysseus | grep -E 'ChromaDB|MemoryVectorStore|DEGRADED'
docker compose exec odysseus python -c "from services.hwfit.models import get_models; print(len(get_models()))"

Expected vector-memory startup lines in Docker:

ChromaDB connected: chromadb:8000
MemoryVectorStore initialized


The Cookbook model catalog check should print a non-zero count. If it prints 0, rebuild the Odysseus image with docker compose build --no-cache odysseus.

Option 2: Manual install — Linux / macOS

Requirements: Python 3.11+. On Linux/Termux, Cookbook also requires tmux for background model downloads and serves.

Install system packages first:

# Debian/Ubuntu
sudo apt install tmux

# Arch
sudo pacman -S tmux

# Fedora
sudo dnf install tmux

Then install Odysseus:

git clone https://github.com/pewdiepie-archdaemon/odysseus.git
cd odysseus
python3 -m venv venv
source venv/bin/activate
pip install -r requirements.txt
python setup.py            # creates data dirs and prints an initial admin password
python -m uvicorn app:app --host 0.0.0.0 --port 7000

Option 3: Manual install — Windows (PowerShell)

Windows support is not actively tested. Use it with caution; Docker on Linux or a Linux/macOS manual install is the safer path for now.

git clone https://github.com/pewdiepie-archdaemon/odysseus.git
cd odysseus
python -m venv venv
venv\Scripts\Activate.ps1
pip install -r requirements.txt
python setup.py
python -m uvicorn app:app --host 0.0.0.0 --port 7000

Open http://localhost:7000, log in with the generated admin password, and configure everything else inside Settings.

Security Notes

Odysseus is a self-hosted workspace with powerful local tools: shell access, file uploads, model downloads, web research, email/calendar integrations, and API tokens. Treat it like an admin console.

Keep AUTH_ENABLED=true for any network-accessible deployment.
Do not expose it directly to the public internet without HTTPS and a trusted reverse proxy.
Keep data/, .env, logs, databases, and uploaded/generated media out of Git. They are ignored by default.
Review data/auth.json after first boot: disable open signup unless you intentionally want it, make only your own account admin, and keep demo/test accounts non-admin.
Non-admin users do not get shell/Python/file read/write by default, and admin-only routes/tools such as MCP management, API tokens, webhooks, model/cookbook serving, backup/vault, and app settings are admin-gated. Other features are controlled by per-user privileges, so review each user's privileges before exposing a deployment.
Rotate any API keys or tokens that were ever pasted into a shared chat, demo, screenshot, or log.
If you enable API tokens or webhooks, create separate tokens per integration and delete unused ones.
Prefer binding manual development runs to 127.0.0.1; bind to 0.0.0.0 only when you intentionally want LAN/reverse-proxy access.
Before publishing a fork, run git status --short and confirm no private files from .env, data/, logs/, uploads, backups, or local databases are staged.

Putting it behind HTTPS

Odysseus serves plain HTTP on its port. That's fine for localhost and trusted LAN/VPN use, but browsers will warn ("Password fields present on an insecure page") and the login + API tokens travel in cleartext. For anything reachable outside your machine — including a Tailscale IP shared with other devices — put a TLS-terminating reverse proxy in front.

Shortest path with Caddy (auto-renews Let's Encrypt certs):

odysseus.example.com {
  reverse_proxy localhost:7000
}

For a LAN-only Tailscale deployment, Caddy + tailscale-cert or the built-in MagicDNS HTTPS feature both work. nginx/Traefik configs are similar — proxy localhost:7000, terminate TLS at the proxy. Once that's in place, the browser warning goes away and your login is encrypted.

Contributing

Help is welcome. The best entry points are fresh-install testing, provider setup bugs, mobile/editor polish, docs, and small focused refactors. See ROADMAP.md for the current help-wanted list.

Configuration

Most setup is done inside the app with /setup or Settings. Use .env for deployment-level defaults and secrets you want present before first boot. Key settings:

Variable Default Description
LLM_HOST localhost Your LLM server (e.g. llm-host.local:8000)
LLM_HOSTS -- Comma-separated list for model discovery
OPENAI_API_KEY -- Optional OpenAI key. Prefer adding providers in the app unless pre-seeding.
SEARXNG_INSTANCE http://localhost:8080 SearXNG URL. Docker overrides this to http://searxng:8080.
SEARXNG_SECRET generated on first Docker boot Optional SearXNG cookie/CSRF secret. Leave blank unless you need to pin it.
AUTH_ENABLED true Enable/disable login
LOCALHOST_BYPASS false Development-only auth bypass for loopback requests. Keep false for shared/network deployments.
DATABASE_URL sqlite:///./data/app.db Database connection string
CHROMADB_HOST localhost ChromaDB host for vector memory. Docker overrides this to chromadb.
CHROMADB_PORT 8100 ChromaDB port for manual host runs. Docker overrides this to 8000.
EMBEDDING_URL -- OpenAI-compatible embeddings endpoint

Bundled services

Docker Compose includes these by default. The bundled service ports bind to 127.0.0.1 unless you opt in to a different bind address in .env, so they are reachable from the host machine but not from your LAN or the public internet by default:

ChromaDB → vector store for semantic memory. In Docker, Odysseus connects to chromadb:8000; from the host it is exposed as ${CHROMADB_BIND:-127.0.0.1}:8100.
SearXNG → meta search for web search. In Docker, Odysseus connects to searxng:8080; from the host it is exposed as 127.0.0.1:8080.
ntfy → local notification service, exposed as ${NTFY_BIND:-127.0.0.1}:8091.

Phone push notifications via ntfy: A phone cannot subscribe to 127.0.0.1 on your server. To expose ntfy safely without opening it on every interface:

Tailscale (recommended) — set NTFY_BIND=<tailscale-host-ip> and NTFY_BASE_URL=http://<tailscale-host-ip>:8091 in .env, recreate ntfy, then point the ntfy Android/iOS app at http://<tailscale-host-ip>:8091/<your-topic>.
Enable ntfy auth and bind to LAN — add NTFY_AUTH_FILE + NTFY_AUTH_DEFAULT_ACCESS=deny-all to the ntfy service, create a user with docker compose exec ntfy ntfy user add ..., then set NTFY_BIND to your LAN IP. See the ntfy docs.

Optional external services

Ollama → local LLM server -- ollama.ai

Ollama with Docker

If Odysseus is running in Docker and Ollama is running on the host, add the endpoint in Settings as:

http://host.docker.internal:11434/v1

The default Compose file already maps host.docker.internal on Linux. Ollama also needs to listen outside its own loopback interface:

OLLAMA_HOST=0.0.0.0:11434 ollama serve

For a systemd Ollama install, set that in the Ollama service override. If Odysseus can see Ollama but requests hang or fail, check that your host firewall allows Docker bridge traffic to port 11434.

First-token latency is usually Ollama/model/hardware, not Odysseus. To compare, test Ollama directly:

curl http://127.0.0.1:11434/v1/models

Architecture

app.py                   # FastAPI entry point
core/      auth, database, middleware, constants
src/       llm_core, agent_loop, agent_tools, chat_processor, search/
routes/    chat, session, document, memory, model … endpoints
services/  docs, memory, search, hwfit (Cookbook) …
static/    index.html + app.js + style.css + js/ (modular front-end)
docs/      landing page (index.html) + preview clips


Data

All user data lives in data/ (gitignored): app.db (sessions, messages, documents), memory.json, presets.json, uploads/, personal_docs/, chroma/, settings.json.

License

MIT -- see LICENSE and ACKNOWLEDGMENTS.md.

                                  |
                                 |||
                                |||||
                  |    |    |   |||||||
                 )_)  )_)  )_)   ~|~
                )___))___))___)\  |
               )____)____)_____)\\|
             _____|____|____|_____\\\__
             \                       /
       ~^~^~~^~^~~^~^~~^~^~~^~^~~^~^~~^~^~~^~^~
               ~^~  all aboard!  ~^~
       ~^~^~~^~^~~^~^~~^~^~~^~^~~^~^~~^~^~~^~^~

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

29. Backpressure is all you need

Source: https://www.lucasfcosta.com/blog/backpressure-is-all-you-need
Site: Lucas F. Costa
Author: Lucas F. Costa
Submitted: 2026-05-31 12:11 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 154 points · 87 comments
Length: 5.5K words (~24 min read)

There are two obvious ways to use coding agents. Both are bad.

The first is to let the LLM run unattended and hope the repository survives. This is fast, exciting, and stupid. It leads to bugs, confused changes, and a flood of PRs that humans cannot review quickly enough, at least not without eventually lowering their standards and merging things they do not really understand.

The second approach is to treat the agent like glorified autocomplete and force a human to review every tiny step. This is safer, but slow enough to partially defeat the purpose of using an agent in the first place. If you still have to steer every minor decision, you have not delegated much.

In this post, I’ll cover a third, not-so-obvious approach: building ways for the agent to validate more of its own work before a human has to step in. The goal to make longer unattended sessions safe enough to be useful without fully removing the human from the loop. It should also reduce the number of low-quality PRs your teammates have to review for details the agent should have caught itself.

What backpressure is and how it can help

In systems engineering, backpressure is the mechanism by which a downstream component signals upstream that it can't accept more work, forcing the producer to slow down, buffer, or shed load.

Whenever there's no backpressure, the producer is free to generate work at will, and the consumer is forced to absorb the mismatch. Then, the consumer either falls behind, breaks under the load, or speeds up by cutting corners.

In our work, backpressure usually takes the form of a machine refusing work the producer hasn't cleaned up yet. The simplest version of that is an automated test: you don't usually submit a PR with failing tests. Ideally, your colleagues shouldn't even review a PR until all tests are green. In that case, the test suite is the backpressure mechanism for a human to clean up their code before asking for a review.

Automated tests are backpressure: the developer iterates against fast local test feedback, so the reviewer only ever sees code that's already green.

In addition to automated testing, types can also be a powerful form of backpressure.

Remember writing plain JavaScript, for example. Back in those days, it was easy to wire a component with the wrong prop shape and only find out much later, when someone clicked a button and got hit in the face with props.onSubmit is not a function.

Before TypeScript, the only way to catch the bug before production was for a reviewer to follow the prop, follow the callback, check the caller, check the caller's caller, and hope the mismatch was visible in the diff.

Some of us learned a lesson from these difficult times and started using types to make impossible states impossible. Others looked at the same lesson, nodded solemnly, and kept passing dictionaries around, but I guess that's a story for another day.

Anyway, the point here is that TypeScript added backpressure and made the producer confront the consumer's expectations before moving the code forward. Now, if a component needs a function, you can't casually hand it a string, an object, or nothing at all and hope the reviewer catches the bug. Instead, the machine will refuse the work at the boundary where you introduced the type mismatch, with no need for an expensive human review.

Types add another layer of backpressure ahead of the tests, refusing mismatches at the boundary and making the eventual human review shorter and safer.

As time passed, we kept adding more automated guardrails to the process, like linters, end-to-end tests, canary releases, and so on. We then bundled a bunch of those guardrails into CI pipelines. That way, we could stop reviewing code that wasn't even close to being ready, and we could focus our human attention on the things that machines can't check, like readability, complexity, and overall design.

Today, this lesson is easy to recognize when we're talking about compilers, automated tests, CI, and, for the true believers among us, types. However, it seems much harder to recognize when the producer is an LLM writing code faster than anyone can read it.

That's why, most of the time, the LLM's backpressure is still us. We look at the code in the editor, ask the model to fix the parts that smell wrong (multiple times), open the PR, fix any failing checks, and then someone looks at the same code again with a more serious face.

With no automated backpressure, the human is the backpressure—manually reviewing the agent's output and feeding corrections back every cycle.

Often, for extra safety, we install a review bot to check the first AI's code. Then, we copy the bot's feedback back into the coding agent. That way, we have ironically promoted ourselves to an expensive clipboard doing the mechanical work between two machines.

The next step for AI-aided software development is to stop making humans the default backpressure in the AI loop. We need tests that fail early, types that push back, benchmarks that catch regressions, and review agents that send bad patches back before they become a human's problem. That machinery is what makes delegation possible, and frees up our time to focus on higher-level feedback and design decisions instead of low-level correctness and quality issues.

With automated backpressure in place, the agent iterates against fast automated feedback and the human only steps in for a final manual review.

Next, I'll explain how I've been building that machinery in my work, how you can do the same, and interesting approaches I've yet to explore.

You can install this post's backpressure skills by running npx @lucasfcosta/backpressured in your terminal. Then, run /backpressured <goal description> in Claude — or explicitly ask Claude to use the backpressured skill — to kick off the loop.

That skill will automatically iterate towards the goal while running the backpressure checks described in this post. You can also customize the checks and the iteration process by adding a BACKPRESSURE.md file to your project with more specific instructions (in plain English).

Creating backpressure in practice

The first time I applied backpressure to an LLM, I was using Claude's /goal command. That command lets you give Claude a goal and have it keep working until it considers the goal complete.

Initially, my /goal prompts looked something like this:

/goal implement support for <brief feature description>. You should only consider the task done when all of the following criteria are met:

1. <first criterion: i.e. the button X must be disabled while the form is submitting>
2. <second criterion: i.e. the front-end must show an error message if the API returns a 400>
3. <third criterion: i.e. redirect the user to the dashboard after a successful submission>


The problem with this type of prompt is that it focused too much on the feature and not enough on the necessary tests, possible edge cases, and overall quality of the implementation. Essentially, there were no guardrails to prevent the model from declaring victory too early, so it often did. Then, it was up to me to review the code and handhold the model through the process of handling each edge case, adding tests, and refactoring the code until it was good enough to ship. That defeated the purpose of /goal, which was supposed to let me delegate the work and only get involved at the end to review the final product.

That's when I noticed I was wasting my time as a slow backpressure mechanism instead of building automated backpressure into the loop. I was bottlenecking /goal!

After noticing that, I started adding the following backpressure mechanisms into the /goal loop:

Linting, testing, and simple verification scripts
Manual testing with cURL and an actual browser
Benchmarking
Review agents (functional, tests, types, brevity)
Planning phase review
Visual design reviews
Pull-request monitoring

I'll cover each of these mechanisms in more detail below, but the general idea is that I kept adding more and more automated checks and reviews into the loop, so that the model would have to confront the consumer's expectations more frequently and catch issues on its own before they became my problem.

1. Linting, testing, and simple verification scripts

These are the simplest and most obvious forms of backpressure. If your project already has a test suite and a linter, you can start using them as backpressure mechanisms right away.

In fact, Claude already picks up tests most of the time, but as it goes along, it sometimes forgets to keep them green. Consequently, I decided to explicitly extend my prompt with checks for testing. Then, I also added other easy wins like linting and running other simple verification scripts, like a commit-message checker.

Another important thing I discovered is that it's extremely useful to ask the model to run the checks in each iteration, not just at the end. By running the checks in each iteration, I forced the model to confront the consumer's expectations more frequently, which made it more likely to catch issues early and fix them before moving on to the next step.

 /goal implement support for <brief feature description>. Here are the feature's acceptance criteria:   1. <first criterion: i.e. the button X must be disabled while the form is submitting> 2. <second criterion: i.e. the front-end must show an error message if the API returns a 400> 3. <third criterion: i.e. redirect the user to the dashboard after a successful submission>  +The task is not done until all of the above acceptance criteria are satisfied. Additionally, the following quality criteria must also be met:  +1. The linting is passing+2. Tests are all green+3. The new behavior is covered by tests+4. The commit_check.sh script is passing+ +Run these quality checks in _each_ iteration. Do NOT wait until the end to run them. You should run them after writing each patch, and you should not write a new patch until all checks are passing.+ +If any of the above criteria are not met, you must inspect the failure, fix the issue, and run the check again. Do not stop after writing the patch. Stop only after the acceptance criteria are satisfied, or after you can explain exactly what is blocking you.

Now, my prompt had the structure below.

The starting point: a single iteration phase where every patch must satisfy the functional requirements and pass the quality checks.

2. Manual testing with cURL and an actual browser

Even though I wrote 500 pages on automated testing, I'm well aware of its limitations. Automated tests are great for catching a wide range of issues, but they can't catch everything, and they certainly aren't as representative as clicking around in an actual browser or running cURL commands against a real API.

I covered that gap by adding manual testing into the loop. For that, I had to teach the model how to run my front-end and back-end applications locally. I also had to teach it how to run my docker-compose file, set up database schemas, and troubleshoot common issues that come up when running the applications locally.

I used the obra/superpowers builder to build the skills that taught the agent how to run my applications.

Then, I updated the prompt to make Claude use those skills for manual checks.

 /goal implement support for <brief feature description>. Here are the feature's acceptance criteria:   1. <first criterion: i.e. the button X must be disabled while the form is submitting> 2. <second criterion: i.e. the front-end must show an error message if the API returns a 400> 3. <third criterion: i.e. redirect the user to the dashboard after a successful submission>   The task is not done until all of the above acceptance criteria are satisfied. Additionally, the following quality criteria must also be met:   1. The linting is passing 2. Tests are all green 3. The new behavior is covered by tests 4. The commit_check.sh script is passing   Run these quality checks in _each_ iteration. Do NOT wait until the end to run them. You should run them after writing each patch, and you should not write a new patch until all checks are passing.  +After you're done iterating, use the `run_local_dependencies`, `run_backend`, and `run_frontend` skills to run the application locally and test the new behavior manually. You can use `cURL` commands to test the API endpoints and the Playwright MCP to test the front-end on a real browser. You should run these manual checks at least once before considering the task done, but you can run them more than once if you think it's necessary to catch issues that automated tests might have missed.+  If any of the above criteria are not met, you must inspect the failure, fix the issue, and run the check again. Do not stop after writing the patch. Stop only after the acceptance criteria are satisfied, or after you can explain exactly what is blocking you.

Given manual testing is slower than automated testing, you can see that I told the model to use it sparingly. In practice, that usually means near the end of the task.

Note that these changes added a new phase to the process. Before, the model would just iterate on writing code and running automated checks until it thought it was done. Now, after that iteration phase, it has to run the application locally and test the new behavior manually before it can consider the task done.

Manual testing with cURL and a real browser becomes a new post-iteration phase, run once the iteration loop settles.

3. Benchmarking

Some of the applications with which I work are performance-sensitive, so I also added benchmarking into the loop for those.

Writing that into the prompt was easy, but making the benchmarking suite easy to run and interpret was a bit more work. Still, I invested significant time in improving our benchmarking tools so that they would:

Be easy to run with a single command, so that the model could run them frequently without getting into rabbit holes.
Include multiple suites with different time budgets, so that the model wouldn't get stuck for 10m running benchmarks when it just needed a quick sanity check.
Write structured output to disk and the console, so that the model could easily understand whether a change was an improvement, a regression, or a wash.

I also created a skill specifically for running benchmarks and interpreting their results. This skill included instructions on which suite to pick, the heuristics for interpreting results, and clear acceptance criteria for what counts as a regression, an improvement, or a wash.

With that skill in place, I updated the prompt to make the model run benchmarks for any performance-sensitive applications.

 /goal implement support for <brief feature description>. Here are the feature's acceptance criteria:   1. <first criterion: i.e. the button X must be disabled while the form is submitting> 2. <second criterion: i.e. the front-end must show an error message if the API returns a 400> 3. <third criterion: i.e. redirect the user to the dashboard after a successful submission>   The task is not done until all of the above acceptance criteria are satisfied. Additionally, the following quality criteria must also be met:   1. The linting is passing 2. Tests are all green 3. The new behavior is covered by tests 4. The commit_check.sh script is passing+5. Run the benchmarks using the `run_benchmarks` skill. See the acceptance criteria inside it.   Run these quality checks in _each_ iteration. Do NOT wait until the end to run them. You should run them after writing each patch, and you should not write a new patch until all checks are passing.  +After you're done iterating:+ +1. Use the `run_local_dependencies`, `run_backend`, and `run_frontend` skills to run the application locally and test the new behavior manually. You can use `cURL` commands to test the API endpoints and the Playwright MCP to test the front-end on a real browser. You should run these manual checks at least once before considering the task done, but you can run them more than once if you think it's necessary to catch issues that automated tests might have missed.+2. Use the `run_benchmarks` skill to run the full benchmarking suite. See the acceptance criteria inside it.   If any of the above criteria are not met, you must inspect the failure, fix the issue, and run the check again. Do not stop after writing the patch. Stop only after the acceptance criteria are satisfied, or after you can explain exactly what is blocking you.

After this change, the process includes a new step within the iteration and post-iteration phases.

Benchmarking joins both the iteration loop and the post-iteration phase for performance-sensitive applications.

4. Review agents (functional, tests, types, brevity)

Review agents were the most effective form of backpressure that I added to the loop, by far.

I added review agents after noticing the types of issues that still reached me. The earlier layers caught most correctness issues, but the quality problems remained.

Those quality problems included things like readability, excessive complexity, lack of tests, loose types, and explicit casts.

Given that those issues are quite subjective, I built a review skill that included a bit of each of those criteria, and I made it run in each iteration. That way, the model would have to confront a reviewer's opinions more frequently, which made it more likely to catch quality issues on its own instead of relying on me to point them out.

Once I finished that skill, I updated the prompt to include it as another backpressure mechanism in the iteration loop.

 /goal implement support for <brief feature description>. Here are the feature's acceptance criteria:   1. <first criterion: i.e. the button X must be disabled while the form is submitting> 2. <second criterion: i.e. the front-end must show an error message if the API returns a 400> 3. <third criterion: i.e. redirect the user to the dashboard after a successful submission>   The task is not done until all of the above acceptance criteria are satisfied. Additionally, the following quality criteria must also be met:   1. The linting is passing 2. Tests are all green 3. The new behavior is covered by tests 4. The commit_check.sh script is passing 5. Run the benchmarks using the `run_benchmarks` skill. See the acceptance criteria inside it.+6. Use the `review_agent` skill to review the code   Run these quality checks in _each_ iteration. Do NOT wait until the end to run them. You should run them after writing each patch, and you should not write a new patch until all checks are passing.   After you're done iterating:   1. Use the `run_local_dependencies`, `run_backend`, and `run_frontend` skills to run the application locally and test the new behavior manually. You can use `cURL` commands to test the API endpoints and the Playwright MCP to test the front-end on a real browser. You should run these manual checks at least once before considering the task done, but you can run them more than once if you think it's necessary to catch issues that automated tests might have missed. 2. Use the `run_benchmarks` skill to run the full benchmarking suite. See the acceptance criteria inside it.+3. Run the `review_agent` skill one last time, but now tell it to review the changeset as a whole.   If any of the above criteria are not met, you must inspect the failure, fix the issue, and run the check again. Do not stop after writing the patch. Stop only after the acceptance criteria are satisfied, or after you can explain exactly what is blocking you.

This change added a new backpressure mechanism to both phases of the process, and significantly reduced the number of quality issues that slipped through to me.

Review agents run in every iteration, and once more over the whole changeset after iterating.

The next steps for this particular backpressure mechanism are to experiment with breaking down the review into multiple agents, each with a specific focus. I'm also not yet sure if it's best to ship this mechanism as a SKILL.md or an /agents/reviewer_agent.md.

5. Planning phase review

Every backpressure mechanism I've covered so far targets the implementation phase. Those worked, but the model would sometimes pick the wrong approach from the start and it couldn't course-correct its way out of a bad foundation.

I addressed that by adding a review step in the planning phase, right after the model creates the initial plan but before it starts writing code. In this case, Claude would spawn a reviewer subagent to check whether the fundamental approach was sound and it would iterate on the plan until the reviewer approved it. Only then would it move on to the implementation phase.

I was also careful to mention that this should be a lightweight plan, focused mostly on the approach and the architecture, and not on implementation details. That's because I wanted to defer implementation details to the implementation phase, where the model could ask reviewers for feedback and course-correct as it went along.

 /goal implement support for <brief feature description>. Here are the feature's acceptance criteria:   1. <first criterion: i.e. the button X must be disabled while the form is submitting> 2. <second criterion: i.e. the front-end must show an error message if the API returns a 400> 3. <third criterion: i.e. redirect the user to the dashboard after a successful submission>  +Before writing any code, produce a lightweight plan that focuses on the overall approach and architecture, _not_ on implementation details. Then, use the `review_agent` skill to review the plan and confirm the fundamental approach is sound. Keep iterating on the plan until the reviewer approves it, and only then move on to the implementation.+  The task is not done until all of the above acceptance criteria are satisfied. Additionally, the following quality criteria must also be met:   1. The linting is passing 2. Tests are all green 3. The new behavior is covered by tests 4. The commit_check.sh script is passing 5. Run the benchmarks using the `run_benchmarks` skill. See the acceptance criteria inside it. 6. Use the `review_agent` skill to review the code   Run these quality checks in _each_ iteration. Do NOT wait until the end to run them. You should run them after writing each patch, and you should not write a new patch until all checks are passing.   After you're done iterating:   1. Use the `run_local_dependencies`, `run_backend`, and `run_frontend` skills to run the application locally and test the new behavior manually. You can use `cURL` commands to test the API endpoints and the Playwright MCP to test the front-end on a real browser. You should run these manual checks at least once before considering the task done, but you can run them more than once if you think it's necessary to catch issues that automated tests might have missed. 2. Use the `run_benchmarks` skill to run the full benchmarking suite. See the acceptance criteria inside it. 3. Run the `review_agent` skill one last time, but now tell it to review the changeset as a whole.   If any of the above criteria are not met, you must inspect the failure, fix the issue, and run the check again. Do not stop after writing the patch. Stop only after the acceptance criteria are satisfied, or after you can explain exactly what is blocking you.

This change added an entirely new phase before the implementation even starts. Now, the model has to get its approach reviewed and approved before it writes a single line of code.

A planning phase is added up front: the approach is reviewed and approved before any code is written.

6. Visual design reviews

I'm honestly not sure about the efficacy of visual design reviews as a backpressure mechanism, but I think it's worth exploring.

This mechanism is especially relevant for front-end work, where the visual design is a critical aspect of the user experience. It's also an area where automated checks and even manual testing might not be sufficient to catch issues, especially when it comes to things like layout, spacing, color contrast, and overall aesthetics.

The way I built this check into the loop was by creating a skill that instructs the model to take screenshots using the Playwright MCP and review them against a Figma file or images from a Linear ticket.

That skill also included a few heuristics to help the agent compare both images more reliably. These heuristics included a list of common issues to look for, like misaligned elements, inconsistent spacing, color contrast issues, and overall visual consistency. The skill further instructed the model to break down the review into smaller parts, like checking the header, then the main content, then the footer, and so on.

 /goal implement support for <brief feature description>. Here are the feature's acceptance criteria:   1. <first criterion: i.e. the button X must be disabled while the form is submitting> 2. <second criterion: i.e. the front-end must show an error message if the API returns a 400> 3. <third criterion: i.e. redirect the user to the dashboard after a successful submission>   Before writing any code, produce a lightweight plan that focuses on the overall approach and architecture, _not_ on implementation details. Then, use the `review_agent` skill to review the plan and confirm the fundamental approach is sound. Keep iterating on the plan until the reviewer approves it, and only then move on to the implementation.   The task is not done until all of the above acceptance criteria are satisfied. Additionally, the following quality criteria must also be met:   1. The linting is passing 2. Tests are all green 3. The new behavior is covered by tests 4. The commit_check.sh script is passing 5. Run the benchmarks using the `run_benchmarks` skill. See the acceptance criteria inside it.+6. Run the `visual_review` skill to review the actual screenshots of the new feature against the design specifications 7. Use the `review_agent` skill to review the code   Run these quality checks in _each_ iteration. Do NOT wait until the end to run them. You should run them after writing each patch, and you should not write a new patch until all checks are passing.   After you're done iterating:   1. Use the `run_local_dependencies`, `run_backend`, and `run_frontend` skills to run the application locally and test the new behavior manually. You can use `cURL` commands to test the API endpoints and the Playwright MCP to test the front-end on a real browser. You should run these manual checks at least once before considering the task done, but you can run them more than once if you think it's necessary to catch issues that automated tests might have missed. 2. Use the `run_benchmarks` skill to run the full benchmarking suite. See the acceptance criteria inside it. 3. Run the `review_agent` skill one last time, but now tell it to review the changeset as a whole.   If any of the above criteria are not met, you must inspect the failure, fix the issue, and run the check again. Do not stop after writing the patch. Stop only after the acceptance criteria are satisfied, or after you can explain exactly what is blocking you.

Again, this mechanism ended up as a new item in the iteration phase. I'm still not sure if it's worth the hassle, but I think it's an interesting experiment to run, especially for front-end work where the visual design is a critical aspect of the user experience.

Visual design reviews join the iteration loop, mainly for front-end work.

7. Pull-request monitoring

Monitoring pull requests was probably the second most effective form of backpressure that I added to the loop, right after review agents.

I added this mechanism after noticing that issues still slipped through even with the review agent in place. They were usually conflicts, failing CI checks, or comments from another reviewer agent on the PR.

I built this mechanism by creating a skill that monitors the PR for a certain amount of time after it's opened. During that time, the skill checks for any new comments, CI status changes, or merge conflicts. If it detects any of those issues, it sends a notification to the model and instructs it to address the issue before considering the task done.

 /goal implement support for <brief feature description>. Here are the feature's acceptance criteria:   1. <first criterion: i.e. the button X must be disabled while the form is submitting> 2. <second criterion: i.e. the front-end must show an error message if the API returns a 400> 3. <third criterion: i.e. redirect the user to the dashboard after a successful submission>   Before writing any code, produce a lightweight plan that focuses on the overall approach and architecture, _not_ on implementation details. Then, use the `review_agent` skill to review the plan and confirm the fundamental approach is sound. Keep iterating on the plan until the reviewer approves it, and only then move on to the implementation.   The task is not done until all of the above acceptance criteria are satisfied. Additionally, the following quality criteria must also be met:   1. The linting is passing 2. Tests are all green 3. The new behavior is covered by tests 4. The commit_check.sh script is passing 5. Run the benchmarks using the `run_benchmarks` skill. See the acceptance criteria inside it. 6. Run the `visual_review` skill to review the actual screenshots of the new feature against the design specifications 7. Use the `review_agent` skill to review the code   Run these quality checks in _each_ iteration. Do NOT wait until the end to run them. You should run them after writing each patch, and you should not write a new patch until all checks are passing.   After you're done iterating:   1. Use the `run_local_dependencies`, `run_backend`, and `run_frontend` skills to run the application locally and test the new behavior manually. You can use `cURL` commands to test the API endpoints and the Playwright MCP to test the front-end on a real browser. You should run these manual checks at least once before considering the task done, but you can run them more than once if you think it's necessary to catch issues that automated tests might have missed. 2. Use the `run_benchmarks` skill to run the full benchmarking suite. See the acceptance criteria inside it. 3. Run the `review_agent` skill one last time, but now tell it to review the changeset as a whole.  +If all the above have been done, approved, and there is nothing else left to do:+ +1. Open the PR with the changes.+2. Use the `monitor_pr` skill to monitor the PR for any new comments, CI status changes, or merge conflicts for the next 24 hours. If any of those issues are detected, address them before considering the task done.+  If any of the above criteria are not met, you must inspect the failure, fix the issue, and run the check again. Do not stop after writing the patch. Stop only after the acceptance criteria are satisfied, or after you can explain exactly what is blocking you.

The final backpressure loop looked like this:

The full backpressure loop: from a goal all the way to a PR that lands clean, with checks gating every phase.

How to try this backpressure loop yourself

I have packaged this backpressure loop into a skill and made it available at @lucasfcosta/backpressured. The source is publicly available on GitHub.

The flow the skill runs: from a goal all the way to a PR that lands clean, with backpressure gates at each step.

You can install this skill in your terminal using npx @lucasfcosta/backpressured.

After installing it, run /backpressured <goal description> in Claude to start the loop — or just ask Claude to use the backpressured skill. The skill only runs when you invoke it explicitly; it won't auto-trigger on other prompts.

Then, the skill will iterate towards the goal on its own while running the backpressure checks described in this post. You can also customize the checks and the iteration process by adding a BACKPRESSURE.md file to your project.

What's next?

I'm not yet sure a SKILL.md is the correct way to package a workflow like this. I wish there were an easier way of enforcing this workflow more natively in the model, without having to rely on a skill that can be ignored or bypassed.

I also want to experiment with breaking down the review agent into multiple agents, each with a specific focus, like readability, complexity, testing, types, and so on. That way, I can have more targeted feedback and make it easier for the model to understand and address specific issues.

Anyway, regardless of how we implement backpressure or package it, I'm pretty sure this is the direction software engineering is headed. We've spent decades moving the "no" off humans. Now we have to do it again, for code that writes itself.

My maxim: any system that relies on a human to catch the machine's mistakes will be limited by the human, not the machine.

Further reading

Don't waste your backpressure
Structural backpressure beats smarter agents

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

30. 'Backrooms' Stuns with $81M Debut

Source: https://variety.com/2026/film/box-office/backrooms-box-office-record-opening-weekend-obsession-jumps-star-wars-crumbles-1236763355/
Site: Variety
Author: Rebecca Rubin
Published: 2026-05-31
HN activity: 167 points · 87 comments
Length: 1.3K words (~6 min read)
Language: en-US

This weekend was one for the box office history books.

Movie theaters across the nation were jamming with Gen Z crowds, who showed up en masse for not one but two buzzy horror films. A24’s “Backrooms” collected a jaw-dropping, record-breaking $81 million from 3,442 North American theaters in its opening weekend. That’s as ticket sales for the Focus Features breakout “Obsession” jumped again in its third frame with $26.4 million from 2,781 cinemas — and crossed the $100 million mark domestically. Both movies were directed by YouTube stars and cost nearly nothing to produce, upending conventional wisdom about the necessary components for a hit.

“This should empower the industry. There’s a new audience, and they’re waiting for this kind of content,” says analyst Jeff Bock of Exhibitor Relations. “We knew indie horror was hot, but we didn’t know how hot. It’s actually competing with the big summer blockbusters.”

The original fare ruling is especially striking at the start of summer movie season, a period that’s usually dominated by major franchises. Yet Disney’s “Star Wars” spinoff, “The Mandalorian and Grogu,” suffered a catastrophic 70% drop in its second weekend, signaling the property isn’t catering beyond an aging group of core fans. Despite playing on far more screens, “The Mandalorian and Grogu” landed in third place on weekend charts behind “Backrooms” and “Obsession.”

Directed by 20-year-old Kane Parsons, “Backrooms” has earned $118 million globally so far. The psychological thriller has obliterated projections, with early tracking suggesting a $40 million to $50 million domestic debut. With a production budget of roughly $10 million, it’s already one of the most profitable movies of the year. Though a sequel hasn’t been announced, Parsons has already started toying with the idea of turning “Backrooms” into a film franchise.

“Backrooms” also set several box office benchmarks: It delivered the largest opening weekend ever for A24, crushing the record set by Alex Garland’s 2024 thriller “Civil War” with $25.5 million. It also ranked as the biggest debut in history for original horror, as well as the best start for a first-time filmmaker on a non-franchise film. Parsons is the youngest director, by far, to have the No. 1 film at the box office. The benchmark was previously held by Josh Trank, who was 27 when 2012’s “Chronicle” opened in first place with $22 million.

Based on Parsons’ hit web series, “Backrooms” follows a furniture store owner (Chiwetel Ejiofor) who finds a secret doorway that leads him to a seemingly endless stretch of nondescript rooms. When he disappears, his therapist (Renate Reinsve) ventures into the unknown to rescue him. Nearly 85% of audiences were under the age of 35, and more than 50% were 25 or younger, according to PostTrak data.

Parsons and Barker are part of a wave of YouTubers who have turned their talents to the big screen — and brought their enormous, youthful fanbases along with them. Earlier this year, YouTube creator Mark Fischback directed, self-financed and distributed the horror film “Iron Lung,” which earned a stellar $50 million against a $3 million budget.

“Whether or not this is ushering in a new era or a paradigm shift for the business remains to be seen, but this YouTube creator-to-big screen pathway should be viewed as complementary,” says Comscore’s head of marketplace trends, Paul Dergarabedian. “It’s a production pipeline that has not existed until now.”

What’s all the more impressive is that “Backrooms” and “Obsession” aren’t cannibalizing each other at the box office. In fact, “Obsession” rose 10% from the prior weekend, which was already up a stunning 39% from its solid $17 million debut. It’s defying box office norms as the first film since “E.T. The Extraterrestrial” in 1982 to see ticket sales increase in its second and third weekends outside of the holiday season, according to Focus. After three weekends of release, “Obsession” has grossed $106 million domestically and $148 million worldwide against a mere $1 million production budget. It’s already the highest-grossing domestic release for Focus, besting the tally of 2019’s “Downton Abbey” with $96.8 million in North America.

“Blumhouse-Atomic Monster has the No. 1 and No. 2 movies in the country this weekend, both made for almost no money. Theaters are packed,” producer Jason Blum wrote on Twitter. “What a time to be making scary movies.”

As “Backrooms” and “Obsession” generated the lion’s share of attention, “The Mandalorian and Grogu” tumbled to third place with just $25 million from 4,300 venues in its sophomore outing. Such a catastrophic decline signals the Force didn’t remain strong during the franchise’s seven-year absence from the big screen, though insiders at the company were aware “The Mandalorian and Grogu” could pose a challenge as the continuation of a Disney+ series.

So far, the “Star Wars” installment has generated $137.4 million domestically and $246.6 million globally. It’s found money in the eyes of cinema operators, who knew Disney could have dropped “The Mandalorian and Grogu” on its streaming service. For the studio, which produced the space opera spinoff for $165 million, movie theaters represent another revenue stream before the movie lands on Disney+ — not to mention the hordes of Grogu toy sales. Meanwhile, the company is hoping that next summer’s “Star Wars: Starfighter,” an original adventure directed by Shawn Levy and starring Ryan Gosling, serves as a fresh start for the franchise.

“Weekend two had to be big, but ‘Mandalorian and Grogu’ just crashed and burned,” says Bock. “That’s more of a reception of this film than the larger ‘Star Wars’ universe.”

With much of the attention on “Backrooms” and “Obsession,” two other new releases — Sony’s PG family comedy “The Breadwinner” and Focus Features’ war drama “Pressure — fell short of expectations.

“The Breadwinner” rounded out the top five on North American charts with $7.5 million from 2,352 theaters. The movie landed behind Lionsgate’s musical biopic “Michael,” which is in its sixth weekend of release. “The Breadwinner” stars Nate Bargatze, one of the world’s top-touring comedians, as a husband who agrees to become a stay-at-home dad when his wife lands a deal on “Shark Tank.” Audiences were much fonder of the film compared to critics, as evidenced by the “A-” grade on CinemaScore and the 28% on Rotten Tomatoes. Sony produced the film for $25 million.

“The movie is over-performing in the middle states of the country,” says David A. Gross, who publishes the box office newsletter FranchiseRe. However, he notes, “these [comedies] generally do not travel overseas.”

“Pressure” debuted at No. 7 with a soft $5.4 million from 1,829 venues. Although the film, a World War II drama, was set as counter-programming against the family-oriented tentpoles and horror hits, older crowds weren’t as eager to leave home. Ticket buyers who did venture out seemed pleased, awarding the movie an “A” grade on CinemaScore. Brendan Fraser portrays Dwight D. Eisenhower in “Pressure,” which takes place in the tense 72 hours leading up to D-Day.

“Michael,” which has demonstrated exceptional staying power since April, brought in $11.7 million over the weekend. So far, the Michael Jackson biopic has earned $339.9 million in North America and a mighty $851.3 million globally. It should soon outpace 2018’s “Bohemian Rhapsody” ($911 million) as the highest-grossing musical biopic of all time.

Next weekend could produce a horror trifecta with Paramount’s parody sequel “Scary Movie.” Then summer should be sizzling with Steven Spielberg’s sci-fi adventure “Disclosure Day” (June 12), Pixar’s “Toy Story 5” (June 19) and DC’s “Supergirl” (June 26). Meanwhile, July brings Universal’s “Minions and Monsters” (July 1), Disney’s “Moana” remake (July 10), Christopher Nolan’s historical epic “The Odyssey” (July 17) and Sony’s “Spider-Man: Brand New Day” (July 31). Box office watchers believe the four-month stretch, regularly the most profitable period for the business, could hit $4 billion for only the second time since the pandemic.

“Moviegoing is hot. ‘Backrooms’ and ‘Obsession’ are electrifying the market, and it’s sensational,” says Gross. “But the industry also needs the big summer productions and franchises to deliver.”

Woody, Odysseus and Peter Parker — the industry is looking to you.

