Hacker News Top 30 — 2026-05-28

Generated on 2026-05-28 03:16 UTC

1. Can we have the day off?

Source: https://mlsu.io/posts/day-off/
Site: mlsu.io
Submitter: mlsu (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-28 00:40 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 545 points · 338 comments
Length: 338 words (~2 min read)
Language: en-us

May '26

So, apparently we are at the cusp of the entire world’s white collar workforce (and, by extension, much of the US workforce) undergoing a revolution in productivity. AI is the technology that is going to revolutionize the way we work, the way we interact with the world, the way we learn, the way we socialize, and all of this. This sounds great. Really, it does. Everything getting faster and easier would be an extraordinary boon to all of our lives.

Can we have a day off then?

If AI is going to 10x our productivity across the board, that means that I should be able to produce the same amount of output by midday on Monday that, in the before times, would have taken all week.

So can I just take Friday off? From here on out, I’ll work Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, and then take Friday off. We can even declare Friday to be something like an “AI workers’ day;” on Thursday I promise I’ll work my ass off writing great prompts and then the agents can churn on them all day on Friday. In that case, you’d hardly even lose Friday, right?

And like, this would apply across the board, of course. So you, the board of directors, and the C-suite, you guys could take Friday off to go to play an entire 18 holes at the golf course. It’ll be beautiful, can you imagine? You don’t have to be in the office, because I’m not going to be in the office. You don’t have to be at the office, because the AI agents are there. And neither do I!

Just one extra day. Seems reasonable and quite a small change really, in light of the total world revolution across every swathe of human productivity.

(Yo, Elon: I’m trying to increase the fertility rate. Childcare for 3 small children is six thousand dollars a month here in California. Do I have to go into the office all five days this week? Why not four?)

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

2. YouTube to automatically label AI-generated videos

Source: https://blog.youtube/news-and-events/improving-ai-labels-viewers-creators/
Site: YouTube Official Blog
Author: The YouTube Team
Published: 2026-05-27
HN activity: 577 points · 347 comments
Length: 389 words (~2 min read)
Language: en-us

May 27, 2026 [[read-time]] minute read

We've heard consistently from our community that they value transparency when it comes to generative AI content. That’s why since 2024, we've been labeling content when creators disclose they've used AI tools.

We've learned in that time about what people find useful when it comes to AI disclosures, and today we're making two updates that we think will make this process much simpler and more intuitive for creators and viewers on YouTube.

More visible, simplified labels

We’re moving the disclosure label for photorealistic and meaningfully AI altered or generated content to a more prominent position.

For Long-form Videos: The label will now appear directly below the video player, above the description.
For Shorts: The label will appear as an overlay on the video itself.

By moving these labels on to the main stage, viewers get the context they need at a glance. This is now the single label format for all photorealistic and meaningfully AI altered or generated content on YouTube.

For content that is unrealistic, animated, or slightly altered, viewers can find this disclosure in the expanded description.

AI usage disclosure at video upload time.

Introducing automatic AI detection

While we still require creators to manually disclose when they use realistic AI, we want to make the process more seamless and reliable. Starting in May 2026, we’re rolling out new internal signals to help identify AI-generated content.

If a creator doesn’t specify whether or not they used AI, but our systems detect significant photorealistic AI use, we will now automatically apply a label.

As this technology continues to improve, creators remain in control. If a creator thinks their content was incorrectly identified as AI-generated, they can update the disclosure status in YouTube Studio. However, disclosures will remain permanent in a handful of cases, including:

Content created using YouTube’s own AI tools, like Veo or Dream Screen.
Content containing C2PA metadata indicating they were fully generative AI.

Our commitment to responsibility

These changes are designed to balance transparency with creator control. It’s important to note that a disclosure label alone does not change how a video is recommended or whether it’s eligible to earn money. In a world where AI is changing what’s possible, our goal is simple: make it as easy as possible for creators and viewers to have the right information.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

3. I think Anthropic and OpenAI have found product-market fit

Source: https://simonwillison.net/2026/May/27/product-market-fit/
Site: Simon Willison’s Weblog
Author: Simon Willison
Submitted: 2026-05-27 16:39 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 688 points · 848 comments
Length: 1.8K words (~8 min read)
Language: en-gb

27th May 2026

Anthropic are strongly rumored to be about to have their first profitable quarter. Stories are circulating of companies surprised at how expensive their LLM bills are becoming from usage by their staff. I think this is because OpenAI and Anthropic have both found product-market fit.

Enterprise customers are now paying API prices
I think they’ve found product-market fit
And they’re ramping up
The AI-failure stories around this are pretty thin
We also know the labs are spending a lot
API revenue is becoming less important
April is a new inflection point

Enterprise customers are now paying API prices

I currently subscribe to the $100/month Max plan from Anthropic and the $100/month Pro plan from OpenAI. If you are a heavy user of coding agents these plans are a fantastic deal. I just ran the ccusage tool on my laptop to get an estimate of how much I would have spent if I were to pay for API tokens in the past 30 days and got:

$1,199.79 for Anthropic Claude Code
$980.37 for OpenAI Codex

That’s $2,180.16 worth of tokens for $200—not bad at all! I’m a moderately heavy user of these tools, but I’m certainly not running agents every hour of the day and night.

I had assumed that companies making extensive use of agents were getting similar discounts. It turns out I could not have been more wrong about that.

I haven’t been able to track down the exact date, but at some point in the last six months Anthropic switched their Enterprise plan (originally “Claude seats include enough usage for a typical workday” back in August 2025) to $20/seat/month plus API pricing for usage. This story about the change from The Information is dated Apr 14, 2026, but cites an Anthropic spokesperson claiming that the pricing change occurred in November 2025. Existing customers are finding out about the change as they renew their contracts.

OpenAI made a similar pricing change in April. The Codex rate card (Internet Archive copy) currently says:

Note: On April 2, 2026, we updated Codex pricing to align with API token usage, instead of per-message pricing. This change was applicable to new and existing Plus, Pro, ChatGPT Business and new ChatGPT Enterprise plans.

On April 23, 2026, we made this update for all existing ChatGPT Enterprise plans as well, inclusive of Edu, Health, Gov, and ChatGPT for Teachers.

It’s a little harder to decode as they quote prices in “credits”, but as far as I can tell those credit costs are an exact match for the API token costs listed for those models.

All of which is to say that as of April 2026 the “Enterprise” cost for both OpenAI Codex and Anthropic Claude Code/Cowork is the same as the listed API price.

GPT-5.5 (released April 23rd) is 2x the API price of GPT-5.4. Opus 4.7 (April 16th) is around 1.4x the price of Opus 4.6 when you take their new tokenizer into account.

So April saw both leading model companies release new frontier models with a higher API price, and both companies now have measures to lock their enterprise customers (who tend to sign year-long deals) at those API prices, not the previous extreme discounts.

I think they’ve found product-market fit

Why these sudden aggressive moves on pricing? Both Anthropic and OpenAI are planning to IPO, but I suspect there’s a more important factor here: I think they’ve finally found product-market fit, with the coding/general-purpose agent products embodied by Claude Code/Cowork and Codex.

Tools like ChatGPT are wildly popular, but that wild popularity has been difficult to turn into revenue. In February OpenAI boasted more than 900 million weekly active users for ChatGPT, but only 50 million—5.6% of that—were paying consumer subscribers.

Charging $10-$20/month per user is an OK business, but you’d need 1-2 billion subscribers sticking around for four years to cover $1 trillion in infrastructure.

Companies spending $200+/month/user will get you there a whole lot faster—and as noted above, as a power-user I’m at ~$1,000/month in API costs per vendor already.

Coding agents really did change everything. These are tools which burn vastly more tokens, but are also quickly becoming daily drivers for the work carried out by extremely well-compensated professionals. Right now that’s still mostly software engineers, but a coding agent is a tool that can automate anything you can do by typing commands into a computer... so they are clearly applicable to a much wider set of skilled knowledge workers.

As I’ve discussed on this site at length, the models released in November 2025 elevated agents to being genuinely useful. We’ve had six months to get used to that idea now—it’s no wonder companies are beginning to spend real money on this technology.

You could argue that ChatGPT achieved product-market fit when it became the fastest-growing consumer app in history back in February 2023... but it certainly wasn’t making any actual money back then. Coding agents plus enterprise pricing marks the point when these companies start making very real revenue. Maybe even enough to start covering their costs!

And they’re ramping up

As further evidence that enterprise agents represent product-market fit for these companies, consider their open job listings.

OpenAI have 703 open jobs right now, of which I’d categorize 229 (32.6%) as relating to enterprise sales and support—account executives, “Go To Market”, “Forward Deployed Engineers” and the like.

Anthropic have 390 open jobs, 105 (26.9%) of which look enterprisey to me.

It’s pleasingly ironic that these AI labs have picked a business model with such a heavy demand on human labor—enterprise sales contracts don’t close themselves without a whole lot of humans in the mix!

(I ran this analysis by scraping their job sites with Claude Code, then having it use Datasette’s JSON API to pipe that data into Datasette Cloud where I used Datasette Agent for the analysis, exported here. Dogfood!)

The AI-failure stories around this are pretty thin

I started digging into this in response to a growing volume of stories claiming that large companies were sounding the alarm because their AI usage costs had grown so large.

The most widely cited of these stories appear quite overblown to me.

The most discussed has been Uber, based on this report where CTO Praveen Neppalli Naga indicated that Uber had “maxed out its full year AI budget just a few months into 2026”, mostly thanks to Claude Code.

Given that Claude Code only got really good in November it’s entirely unsurprising to me that a budget set in 2025 may have failed to predict demand for that tool in 2026!

That Uber story was further fueled by comments made by Uber’s COO, Andrew Macdonald, on the Rapid Response podcast. I tracked down the segment and there really isn’t much there. Here’s what Andrew said:

But then you sometimes go and talk to your senior engineering leaders and you’re saying, OK, how many projects that were on the cutting room floor got moved above the line because of the productivity gains because 25% of our code commits were via Claude Code last quarter?

That link is not there yet, right? I think maybe implicitly there’s more that is getting shipped. But it’s very hard to draw a line between one of those stats and, OK, now we’re actually producing like 25% more useful consumer features, right? And that line is hard to draw.

Somehow this fragment turned into headlines like Uber’s COO says it’s getting harder to justify the money spent on AI tokenmaxxing, because the market for stories about AI failures remains enormous.

The other popular story around this is Microsoft starts canceling Claude Code licenses, ostensibly to encourage their engineers to dogfood their own Copilot CLI agent instead—but The Verge reporter Tom Warren says “sources tell me the decision is also a financial one”, triggered by the June 30th end of Microsoft’s financial year.

I think both of these stories support my “product-market fit” hypothesis. The best advice I ever heard on pricing a product was that your customer should suck air through their teeth and then say yes. Uber’s budget overrun and Microsoft’s seat cancellations look like that effect playing out in practice.

We also know the labs are spending a lot

The big AI labs spend billions of dollars on both training and inference. Credible figures are hard to come by, but we did get one huge hint as to the figures involved from, oddly enough, the recent SpaceX S-1:

[...] in May 2026, we entered into Cloud Services Agreements with Anthropic PBC (“Anthropic”), an AI research and development public benefit corporation, with respect to access to compute capacity across COLOSSUS and COLOSSUS II. Pursuant to these agreements, the customer has agreed to pay us $1.25 billion per month through May 2029 [...]

The Anthropic announcement said that this deal meant they could “increase our usage limits for Claude Code and the Claude API”, heavily implying that Colossus is being used for inference, not model training.

Anthropic already have vast amounts of compute from other providers. The fact that they’re willing to spend $1.25 billion per month for extra capacity from just one of their vendors hints at how big these inference budgets have become.

API revenue is becoming less important

Over the past two years my impression has been that OpenAI made more of their income from subscription revenue while Anthropic made more from their API.

Anthropic’s API revenue was historically quite dependent on a small number of large API customers—this VentureBeat story from August 2025 quotes “sources familiar with the matter” suggesting that just Cursor and GitHub Copilot were responsible for $1.2 billion of the company’s then-$4 billion revenue.

Today Anthropic are rumored to hit $10.9 billion in the second quarter, potentially even operating at a profit for the first time.

This pivot-to-Enterprise suggests that the labs have realized that the real money lies in cutting out the middlemen. Anthropic’s Claude Code directly competes with Cursor and Copilot. No wonder Cursor are investing in their own models!

April is a new inflection point

I’ve called November 2025 the November inflection point because that was when GPT-5.1 and Opus 4.5, combined with their respective coding agent harnesses, got good—good enough that we’ve spent the last six months adapting to agent systems that can reliably get useful work done.

I think April 2026 is a new inflection point where the revenue implications of this have started to land, to the benefit of the frontier AI labs and with material impacts on the budgets of large companies.

We’ll know for sure how real this moment is when the S-1 documents for the upcoming Anthropic and OpenAI IPOs give us some real, audited numbers to get our teeth into.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

4. SimCity 3k in 4k (2025)

Source: https://www.thran.uk/writ/hdid/2025/12/simcity-3k-in-4k.html
Site: Thranpages
Author: Thran
Submitted: 2026-05-27 17:36 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 302 points · 112 comments
Length: 899 words (~4 min read)
Language: en-gb

SimCity 3000 is the best SimCity. It's built upon a souped-up version of the Sc2K engine. It features isometric art, crafted pixel by pixel. It strikes the right balance of features and complexity; it feels like it could be mastered but without coddling you. It also has a high resolution Jazzy/new age OST.

Running it on modern systems takes a few tweaks but is certainly doable. By "modern" I mean Windows 10 LTSC 2021, Ryzen 5 3600, Radeon Rx 7600, 48 GB of RAM, 4K monitor.

I first installed SC3k from its CD ROM. I've had this Scholastic Edition CD all my life, I actually purchased it at a school book fair in a primary school building that no longer exists. But the disk still does, and I will not pay for the same game twice. The installation completed without trouble on 64-bit Windows 10. The game launched but it wasn't very playable:

There was no widescreen support
The resolutions supported were relics like 800x600 and 1024x768
The game was laggy when scrolling
The game accelerated when scrolling
There is a big slowdown after loading a city
The music doesn't play without using the CD, and some of it was missing!
Some tiles had missing graphics for a few seconds before their contents were drawn.

Not to worry. There are remedies for each of these. By the end of this article, you will have a SimCity 3000 game that looks just like this:

Behold, SimCity 3000 in 4K! Risky biscuits: building 1WTC and 2WTC but no hospitals or fire stations. I like to tease fate.

1. GOG Patched EXE

The patched EXE will enable widescreen support. It also acts as a No-CD patch. GOG.com contributed this patch and have shared it for a public download:

Download: From GOG. Mirror. MD5: 638eb5b3e7de9ada9b61a1ea40d276a4.

Download this and replace the original EXE with it. Now you can start the game and choose a larger resolution. However, the mouse acceleration will now be too much. Also, the game will appear horribly askew if you've chosen a resolution that has a factor of 8, which is very likely because that's most of them. Not to worry. We can fix that too.

2. Tweak the mouse acceleration

Edit the SC3U.ini file. Modify or set this variable:

[Navigation]
ScrollMarginFactor = 0.005787


Source: CorinaMarie @ Simtropolis

3. Install the D3D Wrapper Alternative

This will fix the resolution weirdness, meaning you can play the game at full 4k. My monitor is 3840x2160 native, and this will make the game support it. It will also fix any other graphical acceleration problems on modern cards and DirectX 11+.

Download PCGW. Mirror MD5: e97d0989cab120608800f2e3395581a7

Extract these files to your SC3K Apps directory. That's it. Almost...

Configure the D3dWrapper

By default the D3d Wrapper will run in borderless, not fullscreen. That means your Taskbar will push the game off the screen! This is allegedly for better compatibility for streaming, but since I'm not an egotist who needs every second of his life broadcast to an audience, we will switch it to true fullscreen.

Inside the SC3K Apps directory there is a file dxwrapper.ini. Make the following changes:

[d3d9]
EnableWindowMode = 0
...

[FullScreen]
FullScreen = 1


I also did this:

EnableVsync = 1


4. Install the 4GB patch

When scrolling the map, you'll see tiles appear as a small pale cube before their contents are loaded into view. Installing the 4GB patch will give the game more RAM to play with, and should help, but I haven't confirmed this scientifically. There's no harm installing it anyway.

Download: NTCore

Run this on the SC3K.exe file. It will allow the game to use more RAM on 64-bit systems.

5. Disable the auto updater

The slowdown when first opening the game is caused by the auto-updater trying to contact a long-dead update server. You can disable it with this patched .ini file:

Download: catty-cb @ SimTropolis. Mirror. MD5: e01ec9e7568560f493ff4cbbebb0e3d4

Installation:

"Save this file (making sure to unzip it and rename it to UpdateSettings.ini) to "C:\Program Files\Maxis\SimCity 3000 Unlimited\Apps\Updater", overwriting the existing UpdateSettings.ini file."

Basically rename it to UpdateSettings.ini and stick it in the Apps/Updater directory.

6. Missing Music on SimCity 3000 Unlimited

Some of the music from the original release is missing from an .ini file, even though it is present in Unlimited. Fix that with the following patch:

Download Patrxgt @ PGGW. Mirror. Md5: 5877e363565850306131e564e364481c

Extract that into your base SC3k directory.

Finally, if you installed SC3K from CD like me, the music is not copied to your computer. Fix that by navigating to the CD directory: APPS/RES/SOUND/MUSIC then copy the .xa files to the same directory on your HDD. Done!

Job: Done!

That's it. Now you can get back to dismissing petitioners, building golden statues of yourself, and zoning quiet farmland only to have it immediately bought over and turned into a brood of Smoke-O-Matics. All on your shiny Windows 10 box, in glorious 4K resolution!

Other links:

A handy stratgey guide.
Hotkeys. Not all of them are obvious.
OST Listing and Conversion Guide

A note on Windows 11

These steps have been confirmed working on Windows 10. I don't know about Windows 11, I presume it will work there also, but I refuse to let that abomination anywhere near my home. If you are unlucky enough to be stuck with W11 but have success with these steps, let us know in the comments.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

5. What Apple and Google are doing to push notifications

Source: https://www.jacquescorbytuech.com/writing/what-apple-and-google-are-doing-your-push-notifications
Site: jacquescorbytuech.com
Submitter: iamacyborg (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-27 19:24 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 192 points · 201 comments
Length: 7.2K words (~32 min read)
Language: en-gb

I wrote recently about what Google, Yahoo, Microsoft, and Apple are doing to your email: how four providers stopped being transport layers and turned into active intermediaries between brands and their customers, parsing, ranking, summarising, and increasingly answering on the recipient's behalf.

The same thing is happening to push, with two companies in control instead of four. Apple and Google run the only two pipes that matter, and every notification you have ever sent has passed through one of them. Over the last five years the on-device model that now sits between delivery and your lock screen began summarising, reordering and, on some surfaces, rewriting it.
Notification summaries on Android.

Push as a battery problem

Push begins as a battery problem. In June 2009 Scott Forstall stood at WWDC and made the case that an iPhone could not afford to let every installed application maintain its own background poll against a remote server. The proposal, delayed from its initial September 2008 announcement after Apple decided to restructure the underlying infrastructure for scale, was the Apple Push Notification Service, a single persistent TLS connection from each device to Apple, over which any registered third party could deliver alerts.1 APNs shipped with iPhone OS 3 on 17 June 2009. Google followed in 2010 with Cloud to Device Messaging, then Google Cloud Messaging in 2012, then Firebase Cloud Messaging in 2016.2

The channel was intermediated from the start. Every notification you send to an iPhone passes through Apple's servers; every one to an Android phone passes through Google's. The platforms have always been able to throttle, drop, log, deprioritise or refuse. For most of the channel's history they did very little of it visibly. The architecture was permissive of intervention; they simply chose not to intervene much. That restraint is what ended.

Fifteen years of platform intervention

The early consumer push era between 2009 and 2017 was comparatively quiet. APNs and the various Google services delivered to whichever apps the user had installed, with limited platform-level filtering and minimal user controls beyond a single per-app on or off toggle.

Android's first significant on-device intervention was notification channels in Android 8 Oreo, August 2017.3 Before Android 8, individual notifications carried a priority level decided by the sender. After Android 8, that lever passed to the developer at the channel level and then to the user at the channel level. The developer declared a small number of channels per app (downloads, messages, promotions, and so on), each with an importance value from IMPORTANCE_NONE to IMPORTANCE_HIGH; the user could then independently mute, demote, badge-disable or fully block any channel without affecting the others.3 Once a channel's importance was set by the developer it could not be raised later. Any app targeting Android 8 had to declare channels or notifications would simply not display.

Apple introduced its own version in iOS 15 in September 2021 under different language. Focus, Scheduled Summary, and a new four-level interruption taxonomy (passive, active, time-sensitive, critical) restructured how iOS treated each push.4 Time-sensitive was the only level you could meaningfully address, and Apple was explicit, then and now, that you should not use it for marketing.4 Android made permission itself the lever in August 2022, when Android 13 turned POST_NOTIFICATIONS into a runtime permission, requiring an explicit user grant rather than the implicit opt-in that had applied since the platform's launch. Opt-in rates fell predictably: Pushwoosh's 16 million device sample showed gaming apps losing nearly a third of their opted-in base and news apps dropping 19 percent.5 Batch's 2025 benchmark, drawn from more than 800 billion messages across 10,000 apps, reported Android opt-in falling from 85 percent to 67 percent in a year and the cross-platform average settling at 61 percent.6

Every step subtracts a degree of sender control. Some of it passes to the user, and that is a good thing: a person deciding what is allowed to interrupt them is the channel working as it should. The rest passes to the platform, and that is the part that should concern a sender, because the platform's judgment is opaque, unappealable, and increasingly made by a model rather than by a setting the user chose. Over fifteen years the channel has been rebuilt around one assumption: the receiver's attention is a scarce resource the platform is obliged to defend. It defends that resource for its own reasons as much as the user's. A clean, low-fatigue notification surface protects the platform's retention and ecosystem, reduces uninstalls, and shows off its AI, so the editing is the platform guarding an asset it owns, not pure user advocacy. As a sender you are on the wrong side of that assumption, whichever way the control moved.

What email did first

Email is further along, and I've told that story in full. The same intermediation has been building on push in parallel, a step behind, which makes email a reliable preview of where push is going. Push is the harder case, though: email at least gives senders some instrumentation to see it working, Postmaster Tools and deliverability dashboards, where push gives them almost none. There is no push equivalent of the inbox, either: an email persists in a place the recipient can scroll back through, search and return to, while a notification lives only in the notification centre, which clears, drops and summarises what passes through it and retains nothing reliably. Machine learning has decided inbox placement since the late 1990s, when Bayesian spam filtering moved providers off rule-based filters and onto classifiers weighing content, sender reputation and recipient engagement; authentication standards (SPF, DKIM, DMARC) layered on later as signals feeding those models rather than replacements for them. Marketers slowly learned to treat email less as a publishing act than as a request a hidden classifier grants or denies.

Gmail's tabbed inbox in 2013 sorted legitimate mail into Primary, Promotions, Social and Updates with the same kind of classifier. The Promotions tab was not the spam folder but a separate category for commercial mail the user had agreed to receive yet the model judged promotional; Apple Mail added its own categorisation in 2024. Each move pushed the line between the sender's intent and the user's experience another step away from the sender.

Mail Privacy Protection, shipping in iOS 15 in September 2021, was the visibility blow. Apple Mail began prefetching remote content through Apple-controlled proxies whether or not the user opened the message, masking the IP address and breaking the open-pixel mechanism marketers had relied on for a decade. One vendor, Omeda, watched Apple-driven open rates climb from 22.6 to 40.5 percent in six months purely from those prefetches rather than from readers.7 The open rate in its old form became unrecoverable, and click-through and downstream conversion took over as the engagement signal.

Then Yahoo and Google made deliverability itself the gate. From early 2024, any sender pushing real volume to personal inboxes has had to authenticate with SPF and DKIM, align DMARC, offer one-click unsubscribe and keep spam complaints under a low ceiling, or not reach the inbox at all; Google moved from deferrals to outright rejection in November 2025, and Microsoft published equivalent rules.8 Apple Intelligence summarisation reached Mail in October 2024, and Gmail's Gemini summaries followed.

Push has now arrived at roughly the same intermediation maturity email reached a decade earlier, with a few differences in the mechanism that cut against you. Email runs on open, federated protocols (SMTP, IMAP, and the DKIM and DMARC standards) that anyone can implement; the reading client is decoupled from the provider, so a recipient can open the same mailbox in any app; and a subscription is just an address on a list that you, the sender, hold. Push has none of that. A user's permission lives inside a specific install on a specific device, a native app or, since iOS 16.4, a home-screen web app, tied to a token (APNs or FCM) that Apple or Google can invalidate at will, and you hold no list you can take elsewhere. Web push widens who can send, with no App Store download required, but the notification still lands in the same tray under the same on-device editing, so it broadens the channel without escaping the editor. Email has DKIM signatures a receiving mailbox can check; push has no analogue, because every notification is already signed by Apple or Google's infrastructure as a condition of being delivered at all. Email gives you layout control via HTML; push gives you a small structured payload and little control over the collapsed lock-screen view beyond the platform's templates. You can supply a richer custom layout for the expanded view, a content extension on iOS, custom layouts on Android, but it renders only once the user pulls the notification open, and the collapsed text the summariser works on stays template-bound. Email lives in a queue the user opens deliberately; push interrupts.

In email, the death of the open rate should have taught marketers what an open always was: a proxy for delivery at best, never for engagement. Plenty never learned, and still read opens as engagement today. Push is heading the same way. You are losing the ability to tell whether your notification was summarised, hidden behind a Focus mode, deprioritised by an on-device model, or filed into a quiet folder.

The on-device editor

Email's editing happens mostly in transit. Gmail's Promotions classifier, the spam filter, sender-reputation systems and bulk-sender policy enforcement all run on the provider's servers, reading the payload as it passes. Push's editing is downstream of all that. The transport is a relay, end-to-end encrypted in the case of web push, and the decisions about whether a notification is shown, summarised, deprioritised or grouped are made on the device at the display layer. The on-device model is what matters here, not the network, and its weights and signals are not public.

Apple Intelligence runs on a 3 billion parameter on-device foundation language model and a larger Parallel-Track Mixture-of-Experts server model available via Private Cloud Compute. The on-device model uses KV-cache sharing and 2-bit quantization-aware training to fit Apple's silicon; the technical report published in July 2025 describes the architecture in detail.9, 10 An earlier report from July 2024 set out how the summarisation adapter itself is trained: on a data mixture of email, message and notification payloads, with the target summaries generated synthetically by the larger server model and then filtered.11 The model is not used directly for each Apple Intelligence feature. Small LoRA-style adapters of typically tens of megabytes, dynamically loaded by the operating system, specialise the base model for specific tasks: summarisation, entity extraction, refinement, notification prioritisation among others.11 Apple's news summarisation problems in late 2024 and early 2025 were tractable to address feature-by-feature because the base model did not need replacing; the adapter for a surface could be retrained or switched off. After the BBC complained that summaries were generating false headlines, Apple disabled them for News and Entertainment in iOS 18.3, began rendering AI summaries in italics, added a per-app off switch on the lock screen, and started warning that summaries may contain errors.12 The editing is neither invisible nor permanent: where a user turns it off, their full text, which is your text, shows again. The defaults still summarise, and most people never change them, but the backlash bought senders a partial reprieve.

Google's equivalent, Gemini Nano, runs inside AICore, an Android system service introduced in Android 14 that holds the model on the system partition, shares its weights across all authorised apps, and isolates each inference request without persisting input or output data.13 AICore is governed by Android's Private Compute Core principles: restricted package binding, no direct internet access, model updates delivered through Google Play System Updates.13 Gemini Nano comes in multiple sizes, with Nano 1 for standard memory devices and Nano 2 for higher-RAM devices, each routed automatically to the device's NPU, GPU or CPU. Like Apple's adapter approach, AICore supports Low-Rank Adaptation so that individual features (Pixel Recorder summaries, notification organising, smart reply) can be specialised without retraining the base.13 On the Pixel 10 series and Samsung Galaxy S26 series, notification summaries and the Notification Organiser run on this stack; by secondary reporting the One UI summary surface is Android's own System Intelligence rather than a Samsung-specific model, though OEM AI stacks are poorly documented and shift fast, so treat the specifics as provisional.14
Gemini Nano architecture.

The editorial decision for a given notification is the product of several layers. Your app constructs a payload and submits it to APNs or FCM. The platform's infrastructure delivers it to the device, where the operating system applies any user-controlled rules first: Focus modes, Do Not Disturb schedules, channel mutings, per-app blocks. The notification then enters the platform's ranking and presentation logic. On iOS, if Notification Summaries are enabled and the notification is groupable with others from the same app or category, the operating system passes the combined text to the on-device foundation model with the summarisation adapter and replaces the original title and body with a generated line marked by a sparkle icon and italics.15 If Priority Notifications is enabled (off by default since iOS 18.4) the system applies a learned per-app ranking that can pin some alerts and demote others.16 If Reduce Interruptions Focus is active, the model evaluates whether each notification clears the user's customised importance threshold.15

Two granted patents are confirmed via Google Patents and assignee searches. Microsoft Technology Licensing LLC, US 11,340,963, granted 24 May 2022, describes improving "the clarity of information provided in automatically generated notifications ... by substituting one word in the notification with another more specific word, adding additional content ... and/or by rephrasing the content for grammatical correctness and/or clarity".17 This is the explicit ML rewriting of notifications, filed in January 2019, predating the iOS 18 controversy by years. Google LLC, US 11,609,806, describes a trained machine learning model using prior interactions between the user and the target application to decide whether and when to deliver a notification.18 Google's prioritisation work runs back further: US 8,707,201, with a priority date of 2012 and a continuation granted in 2017, describes an on-device ranking model that scores each notification, updates itself from user input, and graphically emphasises the ones it judges most important, the same shape Apple would later ship as Priority Notifications.19 The resemblance is not evidence of borrowing: several companies patented variants of ranking notifications by learned user behaviour in the same few years, which says the direction was obvious by the early 2010s, not that one vendor took it from another. Other patents in the prioritisation, summarisation, predictive-timing and cross-device-coordination cluster exist but were not positively attributable to a known platform-vendor assignee at the time of writing and have been left out rather than cited speculatively.

You have limited mechanisms to influence any of this. On iOS, UNNotificationServiceExtension lets your app code briefly mutate a delivered notification before display (decrypting payload, fetching an image, modifying text); UNNotificationContentExtension lets you define a custom UI for expanded views. Neither runs after the platform's summarisation or prioritisation steps. The apns-priority header offers a choice between 5 (delivered at a time that conserves power, for non-urgent alerts) and 10 (delivered immediately, for genuinely interactive ones). On Android, NotificationListenerService is the system-level API OEMs and accessibility apps use to read incoming notifications; you write to NotificationManager and declare channel importance, but you cannot opt out of the system's classification. The Gemini Nano stack runs after your payload is parsed. There is no API by which you can detect whether your notification was summarised, filed into the Promotions section of the Notification Organiser, suppressed by Focus, or quietly demoted by Priority Notifications.

Wearable platforms inherit this stack. Apple Watch mirrors notifications from the iPhone by default but obeys the iPhone's Focus and Summary state. From watchOS 11 the Smart Stack uses on-device signals (location, time, calendar) to surface relevant widgets; you don't target the Watch directly, only decide whether your iOS notifications mirror, via the user-facing toggle. Wear OS bridges phone notifications to a paired watch by default, with developer controls (BridgingConfig, setBridgeTag, setDismissalId) that suppress duplicates when a companion watch app is installed; you can suppress watch delivery for low-priority alerts, but you cannot force watch delivery for a notification the user has muted on the phone. The wearable is a strict subset of the phone's notification stream, with the same platform editing applied upstream and one additional filter (bridging behaviour and watch-side complications) applied downstream.

What users actually do with notifications

Most notifications do not prompt immediate action. People register them and carry on, and only a fraction produce an immediate switch into the app. This awareness role was first established on the desktop, in Iqbal and Horvitz's CSCW 2010 field study of Outlook alerts, and the mobile literature has confirmed and built on it since.20

Sahami Shirazi, Henze, Dingler, Pielot, Weber and Schmidt's "Large-Scale Assessment of Mobile Notifications" at CHI 2014 collected close to 200 million notifications from more than 40,000 users via an instrumented Android launcher. The paper identified the importance hierarchy users give different notification categories, with messaging notifications consistently ranked most valuable and promotional notifications consistently ranked least.21 The original empirical case for treating message-from-a-person and message-from-a-brand as different surfaces, which the Android Notification Organiser now codifies twelve years later, is in this paper.

Pielot, Church and de Oliveira's MobileHCI 2014 work "An In-Situ Study of Mobile Phone Notifications" found that users faced 63.5 notifications a day on average, mostly from messengers and email, and attended to them within minutes whether or not the phone was on silent.22 Mehrotra, Hendley and Musolesi's "PrefMiner" at UbiComp 2016 built on this with an interpretable rule-learning approach: the system extracted human-readable if-then rules from a user's interaction history and presented them for acceptance, with more than 50 percent of the generated rules accepted in deployment.23 Mehrotra, Pejovic, Vermeulen, Hendley and Musolesi's "My Phone and Me: Understanding User's Receptivity to Mobile Notifications" at CHI 2016 showed that even valuable notifications cause disruption, and that the psychological traits of the individual mediate the perceived disruption.24 Pielot and Rello's "Productive, Anxious, Lonely: 24 Hours Without Push Notifications" (arXiv 1612.02314, CHI 2017) reports a one-day notification blackout in 30 participants that made people more productive but also more anxious and less socially connected, and more than half of the participants began to disable or manage notifications more consciously after the study.25 The line from this research to shipping product is direct. Okoshi and colleagues built Attelia, a middleware that detected breakpoints in a user's phone activity and held notifications until one arrived, cutting cognitive load by 46 percent in a controlled study and 33 percent in the wild,26 and a later large-scale deployment inside the Yahoo! Japan app reported up to a 60.7 percent increase in click rate from timing alone.27 Mehrotra and Musolesi's survey of intelligent notification systems is the umbrella reference for the field.28

Localytics, before its acquisition by Upland Software in February 2020 and integration into Upland's Customer Experience Management Cloud, published findings widely cited: 52 percent of users who disable push notifications eventually churn from the app entirely; 2 to 5 notifications per week is the optimal range for most apps and exceeding it materially increases uninstalls; segmented audiences open at roughly double the rate of broadcast.29 Leanplum, now part of CleverTap, published that personalised notifications had open rates around 800 percent higher than generic broadcasts and that 90 percent of opened push notifications produce an action within an hour. CleverTap's own 2025 fintech report finds segmented campaigns averaging 16.3 percent open rate against 4.7 percent for untargeted campaigns.

These numbers are vendor self-reports and should be discounted accordingly, but the direction is consistent across vendors, methods and decades. Volume kills permission. Relevance is the only reliable lever you control. Time-of-send matters, but less than relevance. Anything that looks promotional gets classified as promotional, often correctly. Users tolerate transactional and conversational notifications at far higher volumes than promotional ones, which is why the Promotions category in Android's Notification Organiser looks set to become the centre of gravity for marketer-sent push, the way Gmail's Promotions tab did for email, though how systematically promotional push gets relegated still varies by manufacturer and is less settled than the email case.

None of this bites evenly. The editing falls hardest on broadcast and promotional push; the notifications people actually want tend to pass through untouched or amplified. A message from a person, a critical alert that overrides Focus, a Live Activity tracking a ride or a delivery, a status update on something the user set in motion, these clear the filters precisely because the user wants them, and some gain screen presence rather than lose it. Live Activities are the clearest case: an ActivityKit session renders onto the Lock Screen and Dynamic Island, a surface separate from the notification tray, so the summariser and grouping never touch it, and Android's Live Updates and ongoing notifications do the same. For genuinely live, transactional content, a ride, a delivery, a match, a timer, that is the cleanest route around the editor, with the limit that it only works for events that are actually ongoing; you cannot dress a promotion as a Live Activity. The controls are user-facing too: summaries, Focus, channels and permissions can all be switched off. The catch is that defaults govern and most people never change them, and the argument here is about marketer broadcast, which is most of what gets sent and nearly all of what gets edited.

Dekker, Baumgartner, Sumter and Ohme's 2024 Media Psychology study "Beyond the Buzz" ran a one-week randomised trial in which disabling notifications did not reduce how often people checked their phones, nor their screen time.30 People compensated by going to the apps directly. Read that as confirmation that turning down your volume rarely costs as much engagement as the opt-out rate implies, because the users who opt out often still come back to the app on their own.

What the marketer can see

Your visibility into all of this is poor by design, and getting worse.

The available metrics, in increasing order of unreliability, run sends, accepted-by-platform, delivered-to-device, displayed-on-device, opened, attributed conversion. APNs and FCM expose accepted-by-platform reliably, since your server gets a response code on submission. APNs does not provide delivery receipts the way SMTP does; the most you know is that Apple has accepted the payload and queued it.31 FCM gives you somewhat more, including a message ID and, in some cases, a delivery callback, but the line between "delivered to device" and "displayed to user" stays opaque. iOS storing only the most recent notification per app when offline means older notifications can be silently dropped before they ever reach the user.32

Lifecycle platforms (Braze, Iterable, OneSignal, Airship, CleverTap, MoEngage, Pushwoosh, Customer.io, Batch) layer their own measurement on top, exposing per-message delivery, open and click rates aggregated from the SDK in your app. The SDK records when the notification was shown, when the user tapped it, and whether the tap produced a session start. The granularity depends on whether your app declares a NotificationServiceExtension on iOS or an equivalent broadcast receiver on Android, which lets the SDK confirm receipt. Without that, "delivered" collapses back to "accepted by APNs/FCM," which inflates your apparent delivery rate relative to what users actually see.

Click-through rate, as OneSignal's own guidance documents, is conventionally taps divided by deliveries, with deliveries usually meaning "passed through FCM or APNs." That counts notifications that were never displayed, swiped away unread, dismissed silently, or hidden behind a Focus or Reduce Interruptions filter. The "confirmed delivery" metric some platforms expose is closer to the truth, since it counts notifications the SDK saw render, but it still can't tell you whether the user saw the rendered notification before dismissing it.33

Mobile measurement partners (AppsFlyer, Adjust, Branch, Singular, Kochava) attribute downstream sessions to specific push campaigns by embedding tracking links in the payload and matching them against subsequent SDK events.34 On iOS this has worked under SKAdNetwork constraints since App Tracking Transparency in April 2021, with the wrinkle that re-engagement attribution (as opposed to install attribution) doesn't require ATT and uses the IDFV or app-level identifiers instead. Re-engagement attribution is therefore one of the few measurement chains you reliably keep.

In-app analytics (Amplitude, Mixpanel, Heap, PostHog) sees the downstream session but not the upstream notification on its own. Stitching the two is a solved integration problem: pipe your push platform's send and open events into the analytics tool on a shared user identifier, through a native connector, an event stream like Braze Currents, or a reverse-ETL job, and notification, session and conversion line up, give or take the identity-resolution leaks around logged-out users and reinstalls. What that does not recover is the silent middle of the funnel: how often a delivered notification was displayed, summarised, deprioritised, suppressed by Focus or never seen. The push platform cannot tell you that either, because APNs, FCM and the operating system never report it. That middle is dark.

There is no platform-provided signal for any of the following. Whether a notification was bundled into a Notification Summary on iOS. Whether it was placed in the Promotions section of the Notification Organiser on Pixel. Whether Reduce Interruptions silenced it. Whether Priority Notifications demoted it. On iOS, whether the user swiped it off the lock screen without reading it. Whether the user is in a Focus mode that suppressed it. Whether iOS's storage limit caused it to be dropped before display. Whether Samsung's One UI 8.5 summarised it. The one place push reads better than email runs the other way: on Android a delete-intent fires when a user swipes a notification away, so a deliberate dismissal is loggable, an explicit rejection email never exposes. It is Android-only, fires only for notifications that were shown, and cannot tell a considered swipe from a clear-all, so it is a narrow win, but a real one.

You measure push in 2026 the way email marketers measure email after Mail Privacy Protection: with metrics you know sit downstream of an editing layer you can't see, calibrated against conversion data that captures only the users who acted. The notifications that produce measurable conversion are a non-random subset of the ones you sent, and the bias runs in the direction of the platform's judgment of relevance. If your engagement metrics improve over time, you might be sending better notifications, or you might be sending notifications the platform increasingly trusts, and you cannot tell the two apart from inside the dashboard. Email at least gives you Google Postmaster Tools as a partial diagnostic. Push gives you nothing equivalent.

Writing for the model in the pipe

Broadcast copy no longer survives intact. On-device summarisers compress a notification to its gist, so what comes through is the concrete fact, not the brand voice around it. Lead with the payload, the amount, the name, the time, the action, and a summary has something to keep. Bury it behind a brand-voice opener, an exclamation, an emoji or a pun, and the summary can keep the emoji and drop the meaning, or keep the wrong half. The Sahami Shirazi finding that users rank notifications by sender category and information type, not by literary quality, is the indirect backing; nobody has published a direct test of how to write for a summariser.21

Treat the title as a structured data field that happens to be written in natural language. "Your delivery is 15 minutes away" is summary-stable. "We've got great news!" is not, because it carries no fact. As a rough self-check, see whether the title still tells the user something useful when stripped to its first few words: if it does, it has a fact a summariser can keep; if it does not, it was a brand-voice signal, and the platform, the user or both will edit it out of recognition. Treat that as a habit, not a guarantee. The same principle applies to Live Activities and Live Updates: the proposition is the field (ETA, score, step count), not the brand wrapper.

The case for not abusing the time-sensitive interruption level is documented in Batch's developer guidance: "If your time-sensitive notifications are not often interacted with, iOS will prompt your users from the lock screen to let them disable time-sensitive alerts for your app".4 One tap and the level is off, per-app, from the lock screen, decided by the user. You get no equivalent appeal.

Shifting weight to owned surfaces

Push should carry less of the lifecycle programme. The surfaces you own inside the app, in roughly increasing order of intrusiveness, are: passive in-product cards (in a feed the user reaches deliberately, neither summarised nor blocked by Focus), persistent in-app message centres or inboxes (a permanent location the user can return to), targeted in-app messages triggered on session events (modal, slide-up or banner, shown only during an active session), and embedded messaging primitives inside the product flows themselves (placed on the screens users already visit to complete a task). None of these passes through APNs or FCM. None is touched by Apple Intelligence or Gemini Nano. None is summarised. None is suppressed by Focus. And all of them are fully visible to you: the SDK records render, dismiss and interaction events with no platform-mediated gap.

The catch is that owned surfaces only reach the active user. Someone who hasn't opened the app in fourteen days can't be reached by an in-app message; they can only be reached by push. So push becomes your channel for re-engaging dormant users and for transactional, time-sensitive alerts to active ones. The in-product surfaces become the channel for everything else: cross-sell, upsell, content discovery, education, value-add. Batch's 2025 data showed in-app messages clicking at 16.1 percent on Android and 17.9 percent on iOS for promo-code campaigns, well above push CTR.6 The same data shows the reachable in-app audience is smaller than the reachable push audience, because in-app requires a session. Push exists to bring users back into the product; once they're there, the owned surfaces take over.

Treat push and the in-product surfaces as a portfolio. The platform's editor only acts on one of them.

What this becomes

The on-device language model, once it's there, has uses beyond summarisation. Apple's Foundation Models framework, exposed to developers from iOS 18.4 onwards, lets any app call the same model the operating system uses, for summarisation, entity extraction, text understanding, refinement and short dialog.10, 35 Google's ML Kit GenAI APIs, sitting on top of AICore, expose summarisation, proofreading, rewriting and image description.13, 36 The model isn't a feature any more; it's infrastructure, available to any app that asks. The next step, visible in Google's "smarter, more proactive Android with Gemini Intelligence" framing and Apple's roadmap toward a more agentic Siri, is for these models to act on the user's behalf in response to your notification: open the app, complete the booking, dismiss the alert, draft the reply.37 Apple has patented a version of exactly this: a digital assistant that detects which notification you are looking at, takes a spoken instruction, and carries out the action in the app or in the notification system itself.38 The underlying capability is not speculative. Yahoo's researchers showed a decade ago that a provider can model the causal chain of messages a recipient expects, a purchase confirmation predicting a shipping notice predicting a delivery alert, and detect when the chain breaks.39 A platform that can already anticipate your next message, and already runs an on-device model over the one in front of you to summarise it, has the building blocks for handling the notification on your behalf. The acting layer is still to come, and when it ships the heavier reasoning will likely run server-side, on Apple's Private Cloud Compute or Google's cloud models, rather than wholly on the device. The plumbing for this already has names. Apple's App Intents framework lets a developer expose typed app actions to Siri and Apple Intelligence; on Android, App Actions and Gemini's emerging ability to act inside third-party apps do the equivalent.40 The implication for senders is concrete: the work is no longer only writing a notification a summariser will not mangle, but exposing the action behind it, so an agent can complete the booking or clear the alert without the user opening the app at all. The notification stops being the destination and becomes a trigger consumed by an agent, and the click-through metric that anchored ten years of push measurement loses most of its meaning.

What to do about it

You are negotiating with an editor you cannot see, running on a model you cannot inspect, that answers to the user rather than to you. You cannot out-shout it, and there is no appeal. Ten things follow from that.

Reserve push for the jobs nothing else can do. It is the one channel that reaches someone who has not opened the app in weeks, so its surest use is waking dormant users and carrying genuinely time-critical, transactional alerts. Cross-sell, upsell, education and discovery can work on push when they are timely and personal enough to clear the relevance bar, but they default to promotional and compete worst for the interruption budget, so they usually do more, and risk less, on a surface the user opened on purpose.
Build push around the user's own activity and requests, not your campaign calendar. Two kinds of notification survive intermediation by design. The first is the signal the user set up themselves: a price-drop or back-in-stock alert, a watchlist or threshold trigger, the status of something they are waiting on. The second is the event your product generates from their own state: a document shared with them, a comment or reply on their work, a job that finished, a limit crossed, the next step in a task they are mid-flow on. Both clear the relevance bar automatically, because the notification is about the recipient's own stuff rather than your campaign, and both should deep-link straight into the place in the product where they can act on it. This is the inverse of broadcast: the trigger comes from the user, you only carry it, and the editor has no reason to suppress something tied to its own user's activity.
Ask for permission in context, not on launch. Since Android 13 made notification permission an explicit runtime grant, opt-in rates have fallen sharply. Request it after you have shown value, tied to a feature the user actually wants notified about, not behind a system prompt on first open. The permission is the whole channel; do not spend it on a cold ask.
Segment and personalise; broadcast is the worst use of the channel. The vendor data, directional as it is, has pointed the same way for a decade: segmented and personalised notifications open at roughly double the rate of broadcasts, and a generic blast both underperforms and spends permission you do not get back. If you would not send it to a named person for a specific reason, do not send it to everyone.
Never spend an interruption you have not earned. Do not dress marketing as time-sensitive; iOS lets the user switch that off per app from the lock screen, and you get no appeal. Volume kills permission, and relevance is the only lever you keep.
Engagement is your deliverability; prune the dead opt-ins. The platform's ranking learns from whether people act on you, so a large base that never taps trains the model to demote you and nudges the user toward switching you off. Push has nothing as systematic as email's sender-reputation machinery, and the effect is more app- and OS-specific, but the direction is the same. Sunset subscriptions that have gone quiet. A smaller base that engages holds more reach than a big one that is ignored.
Lead with the fact, not the voice. Put the concrete payload, the amount, the name, the time, the action, at the front rather than behind a brand-voice opener. Summarisers compress to the gist and keep what is machine-readable, so a fact-led title tends to come through the rewrite intact where a tone-led one does not. Treat that as a sensible default, not a measured rule: nobody has published the test for it, and the supporting evidence is indirect (users value information type over literary quality, and the summariser is built to extract the point).
Stop trusting the push dashboard. Opens and clicks sit downstream of an editing layer you cannot see, and the conversions you can measure are a biased sample of the notifications the platform already chose to favour. Downstream conversion is the least-bad signal, but push conversion events are sparse, so at normal sending volumes it rarely clears statistical significance per campaign and you are often reading noise dressed as a result. The honest posture is doubt: confirm render through the SDK where you can, pool campaigns and lengthen windows before believing a number, and read rising engagement as "the platform trusts me more" at least as readily as "my copy got better."
Move the weight to surfaces you actually own. Your in-app inbox, logged-in product screens, physical mail and the loyalty surface where you are the platform have no model in the pipe: nothing summarises, ranks or silences them, and you can measure them end to end. Run push and owned surfaces as one portfolio, not as rivals.
Build for the agent, not just the lock screen. As Siri and Gemini begin acting on notifications, the clean, machine-readable proposition is the thing an agent can execute, and the action behind it has to be exposed as something the agent can invoke, through App Intents on iOS or App Actions on Android, not buried three taps into your UI. Write so a model could carry out your message without a human ever reading it.

Push, like email, was never really owned. It was just less rented than social, and the lease is being repriced in the platform's favour with every release. The senders who come through the next decade intact will not be the ones who send the most, or the cleverest. They will be the ones whose message the editor would defend if asked, because the recipient wanted it anyway, and the ones who already moved their best work to the surfaces no editor stands in front of. Write for the model you will never see. Build for the channels it cannot reach.

I just got an iPhone 17 Pro, so I look forward to seeing how Apple Intelligence's features work in progress.

1

Apple Developer Documentation. Registering your app with APNs (User Notifications). https://developer.apple.com/documentation/usernotifications/registering-your-app-with-apns
2

Google / Firebase. Firebase Cloud Messaging documentation. https://firebase.google.com/docs/cloud-messaging
3a3b

Android Developers. Create and manage notification channels (importance levels IMPORTANCE_NONE to IMPORTANCE_HIGH, channels required from Android 8.0). https://developer.android.com/develop/ui/views/notifications/channels
4a4b4c

Batch. Understanding and managing iOS 15 time-sensitive interruption level. https://help.batch.com/en/articles/5543431-understanding-and-managing-ios-15-time-sensitive-interruption-level
5

Pushwoosh. 2025 Android 13 Impact: Opt-In Rates and User Engagement. https://www.pushwoosh.com/blog/android-13-opt-in-rates-research/
6a6b

Batch. EXCLUSIVE: The Great Push Notifications Benchmark 2025. https://batch.com/ressources/etudes/benchmark-notifications-push-crm-mobile
7

Omeda. The Impact of Apple's Mail Privacy Protection: 6 Months Later. https://www.omeda.com/blog/the-impact-of-apples-mail-privacy-protection-6-months-later/
8

Google Workspace Admin Help. Email sender guidelines and FAQ (5,000/day bulk-sender threshold, SPF/DKIM, DMARC alignment, RFC 8058 one-click unsubscribe, 0.3% spam-rate ceiling, November 2025 enforcement). https://support.google.com/a/answer/81126 ; https://support.google.com/a/answer/14229414
9

Apple Machine Learning Research. Introducing Apple's On-Device and Server Foundation Models. https://machinelearning.apple.com/research/introducing-apple-foundation-models
10a10b

Apple Machine Learning Research / arXiv. Apple Intelligence Foundation Language Models Tech Report 2025 (arXiv 2507.13575). https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.13575
11a11b

Apple Machine Learning Research / arXiv. Apple Intelligence Foundation Language Models (arXiv 2407.21075, July 2024). https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.21075
12

Apple's statement temporarily disabling Apple Intelligence notification summaries for News and Entertainment apps in iOS 18.3 (January 2025), alongside italic labelling of AI summaries, a per-app lock-screen toggle, and a beta "may contain errors" warning, as reported by CNBC. https://www.cnbc.com/2025/01/16/apple-disables-ai-notifications-for-news-in-its-beta-iphone-software.html
13a13b13c13d

Android Developers. Gemini Nano on Android. https://developer.android.com/ai/gemini-nano
14

SamMobile. AI notification summaries coming to Galaxy devices with One UI 8.5 (reportedly Android System Intelligence / on-device Gemini Nano), October 2025. https://www.sammobile.com/news/one-ui-8-5-ai-notification-summaries-galaxy-devices/
15a15b

Apple Support. Summarize notifications and reduce interruptions with Apple Intelligence on iPhone. https://support.apple.com/guide/iphone/summarize-notifications-reduce-interruptions-iph1fbe7d2b9/ios
16

Apple Newsroom. Introducing Apple Intelligence for iPhone, iPad, and Mac (Priority Notifications, summaries, Reduce Interruptions Focus), June 2024. https://www.apple.com/newsroom/2024/06/introducing-apple-intelligence-for-iphone-ipad-and-mac/
17

Microsoft Technology Licensing LLC. US 11,340,963 - Augmentation of notification details (granted 24 May 2022). https://patents.google.com/patent/US11340963B2/en
18

Google LLC. US 11,609,806 - Determining whether and when to provide notifications based on application content. USPTO. https://image-ppubs.uspto.gov/dirsearch-public/print/downloadPdf/11609806
19

Google LLC. US 8,707,201 B1 - Systems and methods for prioritizing notifications on mobile devices (priority date 27 June 2012, granted 22 April 2014); continuation US 9,817,869 B2 (granted 2017). https://patents.google.com/patent/US8707201
20

Iqbal, S. T. and Horvitz, E. Notifications and awareness: a field study of alert usage and preferences. CSCW 2010. https://erichorvitz.com/shamsi_iqbal-eric_horvitz_cscw_2010.pdf
21a21b

Sahami Shirazi, A., Henze, N., Dingler, T., Pielot, M., Weber, D. and Schmidt, A. Large-Scale Assessment of Mobile Notifications. CHI 2014. https://weberdo.com/publications/2014-Large-Scale-Assessment-of-Mobile-Notifications.pdf
22

Pielot, M., Church, K. and de Oliveira, R. An In-Situ Study of Mobile Phone Notifications. MobileHCI 2014, pp. 233-242. https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/2628363.2628364
23

Mehrotra, A., Hendley, R. and Musolesi, M. PrefMiner: Mining User's Preferences for Intelligent Mobile Notification Management. UbiComp 2016. https://pure-oai.bham.ac.uk/ws/files/29201286/PrefMiner_Mining_User_s_Preferences_for_Intelligent_Mobile_Notification_Managemen.pdf
24

Mehrotra, A., Pejovic, V., Vermeulen, J., Hendley, R. and Musolesi, M. My Phone and Me: Understanding People's Receptivity to Mobile Notifications. CHI 2016, pp. 1021-1032. https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/2858036.2858566
25

Pielot, M. and Rello, L. Productive, Anxious, Lonely: 24 Hours Without Push Notifications. arXiv 1612.02314. https://arxiv.org/pdf/1612.02314
26

Okoshi, T., Ramos, J., Nozaki, H., Nakazawa, J., Dey, A. K. and Tokuda, H. Attelia: Reducing User's Cognitive Load due to Interruptive Notifications on Smart Phones. IEEE PerCom 2015. https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b69d4d0a57a7dfebd42168b85661a4b14bd29d12
27

Okoshi, T., Tsubouchi, K., Taji, M., Ichikawa, T. and Tokuda, H. Attention and Engagement-Awareness in the Wild: A Large-Scale Study with Adaptive Notifications. IEEE PerCom 2017. Project page: https://www.ht.sfc.keio.ac.jp/~slash/research/attelia/
28

Mehrotra, A. and Musolesi, M. Intelligent Notification Systems: A Survey of the State of the Art and Research Challenges. arXiv 1711.10171 (2017). https://arxiv.org/abs/1711.10171
29

Upland Software. Upland Software Acquires Localytics, Raises Guidance (7 February 2020). https://uplandsoftware.com/resources/acquisitions/upland-software-acquires-localytics-raises-guidance/
30

Dekker, C. A., Baumgartner, S. E., Sumter, S. R. and Ohme, J. Beyond the Buzz: Investigating the Effects of a Notification-Disabling Intervention on Smartphone Behavior and Digital Well-Being. Media Psychology 28(1), 2024, pp. 162-188. https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/15213269.2024.2334025
31

Apple Developer Documentation. Handling notification responses from APNs (the status codes APNs returns on submission). https://developer.apple.com/documentation/usernotifications/handling-notification-responses-from-apns
32

OneSignal Documentation. Push overview. https://documentation.onesignal.com/docs/en/push
33

OneSignal. Guide to Understanding Push Notification Performance. https://onesignal.com/blog/guide-to-understanding-push-notification-performance/
34

Singular. Push Notification Campaign Measurement. https://support.singular.net/hc/en-us/articles/34936651200539-Push-Notification-Campaign-Measurement
35

Apple Machine Learning Research. Updates to Apple's On-Device and Server Foundation Language Models. https://machinelearning.apple.com/research/apple-foundation-models-2025-updates
36

Google for Developers. Overview of the ML Kit GenAI APIs. https://developers.google.com/ml-kit/genai
37

Google Blog. A smarter, more proactive Android with Gemini Intelligence. https://blog.google/products-and-platforms/platforms/android/gemini-intelligence/
38

Apple Inc. US 12,243,523 - Digital assistant for providing handsfree notification management (detecting the notification a user attends to, taking a spoken instruction, and performing the action; PCT publication WO2023049140A1, 2023). https://patents.google.com/patent/WO2023049140A1/en
39

Gamzu, I., Karnin, Z., Maarek, Y. and Wajc, D. You Will Get Mail! Predicting the Arrival of Future Email. WWW 2015 (Companion). https://doi.org/10.1145/2740908.2741694
40

Apple Developer Documentation. App Intents: Integrating actions with Siri and Apple Intelligence. https://developer.apple.com/documentation/appintents/integrating-actions-with-siri-and-apple-intelligence

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

6. Why Ctrl+V won't paste images in Claude Code on WSL, with a fix

Source: https://rajveerbachkaniwala.com/blog/2026/05/24/on-the-difficulty-of-pasting-a-picture/
Site: @rajveerbach’s blog
Author: Rajveer Bachkaniwala
Published: 2026-05-24
HN activity: 15 points · 5 comments
Length: 1.6K words (~7 min read)
Language: en

tl;dr Use Claude Code in WSL inside Windows Terminal? Copying an image in Windows and pressing Ctrl+V in Claude Code doesn't work. Three things break: (1) WSL only hands Windows images to the Linux side in an old BMP format Claude Code can't read; (2) WSL also keeps quietly overwriting your fixes a moment later; (3) Windows Terminal grabs Ctrl+V before Claude Code can see it. The fix is a small Windows program that converts the image to PNG, a Linux script that puts it on the Linux clipboard (and re-asserts once after WSL overwrites it), and one extra keybinding for Claude Code so the keystroke actually reaches the program.

Copy an image in Windows. Open Claude Code inside a WSL terminal launched from Windows Terminal. Press Ctrl+V. Nothing happens.

Three small things between the Windows clipboard and Claude Code’s chat input are broken. Each one is harmless on its own. Together they make image paste fail completely. Here’s what they are and the workaround I built until the upstream fixes catch up.

What’s actually broken

1. The Windows-to-Linux clipboard sync only knows about an ancient image format

WSL has a built-in piece called WSLg (the “g” is for graphics). Its job is to make Windows and the Linux side share things — including the clipboard, so copy-paste works across the boundary. For text, it works fine. For images, it does two things badly.

First, it only syncs images in one direction: from Windows to Linux. Anything copied from a Linux app doesn’t flow back to Windows as an image.

Second, when WSLg sends a Windows image over to Linux, it converts it into a single, dated format — a specific old BMP variant that uses an obscure colour encoding (“BI_BITFIELDS”). Most software’s BMP readers can’t handle it. Claude Code’s reader is one of those. It tries to read what arrives, gets nothing useful, and gives up — silently. No error, no toast, no visible failure. The image just doesn’t attach.

(This is a known bug: claude-code#50552.)

2. The same Windows-to-Linux sync silently overwrites your workarounds

You might think: fine, I’ll bypass WSLg for images. Read the Windows clipboard myself, convert the image to PNG, push the PNG straight onto the Linux clipboard. Claude Code will then find a PNG when it looks for an image, and the paste will work.

There’s even a standard Linux command for putting things on the clipboard: wl-copy. So you do exactly that — Windows image → PNG → wl-copy --type image/png.

It works. For a moment. Then it stops working again. Here’s what WSL does to you:

You put a PNG on the Linux clipboard.
WSLg notices the Linux clipboard changed, and dutifully syncs it back to Windows. The Windows clipboard now reflects “PNG.”
The Windows clipboard just changed. That fires WSLg’s other half — the half that pushes Windows changes over to Linux. As we know from problem #1, that half only knows how to push BMP.
So your good PNG on the Linux side gets overwritten with the broken BMP, shortly after you put it there.

The cruellest part: the program you wrote to watch the Windows clipboard never sees step 4 happen. WSLg writes to the Linux clipboard directly — it doesn’t go through the Windows clipboard to do it. So from your watcher’s point of view, the Linux clipboard just silently mutates, with nothing for you to react to.

3. Windows Terminal eats Ctrl+V before Claude Code sees it

Suppose you fix everything above and a real PNG sits reliably on the Linux clipboard. Press Ctrl+V in Claude Code. Still nothing happens.

The reason: Windows Terminal — the program you’re typing into — has its own meaning for Ctrl+V. It’s the standard “paste text from the Windows clipboard” shortcut. So when you press Ctrl+V inside Windows Terminal:

Windows Terminal sees the keystroke first.
It pastes (or tries to paste) the Windows clipboard as text into the terminal input.
The keystroke never makes it down to the Linux side.
Claude Code’s image-paste code (internally named chat:imagePaste) never runs.

The terminal is one layer above Claude Code. It eats the input before the program below can react.

The fix

Three small components, one per failure, laid out in the diagram below.

clip-listener.exe — runs on Windows and encodes each clipboard image as a real PNG via Windows’ own GDI+. Sidesteps the BMP problem (#1).
wsl-clip-bridge — runs in WSL, pushes the PNG onto the Linux clipboard with wl-copy, and re-asserts once half a second later if WSLg has overwritten our PNG with the broken BMP. Handles the silent clobber (#2).
Alt+V keybinding in ~/.claude/keybindings.json — triggers Claude Code’s chat:imagePaste handler without going through Ctrl+V, which Windows Terminal would eat. Routes around #3.

What changes when the bridge is installed. Without it (top), images flow straight to Claude Code as broken BMP and the paste fails. With it (bottom), a Windows listener encodes a real PNG and a Linux script puts it on the Linux clipboard, re-asserting once after WSLg's overwrite. The user presses Alt+V instead of Ctrl+V to bypass Windows Terminal.

End to end: snip an image in Windows, press Alt+V in Claude Code, image attaches.

The full source — the Go listener, the bash bridge, the install script, and a more detailed walkthrough — lives at github.com/rajveerb/wsl-clip-bridge.

Try it yourself

Prerequisites: WSL2 with WSLg (Windows 11, or a recent Windows 10 + WSL update), Go 1.20+ on the Linux side for cross-compiling the Windows binary.

git clone https://github.com/rajveerb/wsl-clip-bridge.git
cd wsl-clip-bridge
sudo apt install wl-clipboard
./install.sh --with-autostart --with-keybinding


That last command does four things: cross-compiles the Windows-side listener (GOOS=windows GOARCH=amd64), drops the binaries into ~/.local/share/wsl-clip-bridge/ and ~/.local/bin/, appends a snippet to ~/.bashrc that starts the bridge on every new WSL shell, and writes ~/.claude/keybindings.json with alt+v → chat:imagePaste.

Open a fresh WSL terminal. The bridge starts in the background. Verify:

# copy any image in Windows (Win+Shift+S)
wl-paste -l   # should print image/png


Then in Claude Code, press Alt+V. The image attaches.

The repo README walks through each step in more detail (running without the install script, stopping or uninstalling the bridge, debugging via the log).

Whose problem is it?

Four things contribute to the failure. The first problem above (“an ancient image format”) is really two separate issues, so the table splits them apart:

# Failure Whose problem
1 WSLg only sends Windows images to Linux as image/bmp Microsoft (WSLg)
2 Claude Code can’t read the BMP it actually receives Claude Code — one-PR fix
3 WSLg overwrites the Linux clipboard from Windows, silently Microsoft (WSLg); only matters because of #1 and #2
4 Windows Terminal grabs Ctrl+V before WSL programs see it Microsoft (Windows Terminal); Claude Code could route around it

#1 is hardcoded in WSLg’s clipboard bridge (rdpclip.c in Microsoft’s Weston fork): exactly five Windows→Linux format mappings, and the only image one is CF_DIB → image/bmp. The strings image/png and image/jpeg don’t appear in the source. The upstream issue microsoft/wslg#833 has been open since September 2022.

#2 is broader than the post above implies, and more fixable than I first thought. Claude Code bundles sharp as its image library, in its WebAssembly build. That build’s bundled libvips has no BMP loader — not just no BI_BITFIELDS variant, no BMP support of any kind. Claude Code does detect BMP on the clipboard and try to convert it via sharp(bmpBuffer).png().toBuffer(), but the call dies with “Input buffer contains unsupported image format.” Despite the user-facing implication that BMP is supported, sharp’s WASM build can’t read any BMP. The actual upstream fixes are: ship sharp’s native libvips build (which has BMP support); ship a small BMP→PNG converter that doesn’t go through sharp at all; or shell out to ImageMagick or GDI+ on detection failure. Any of these obsoletes this entire bridge.

#3 isn’t hypothetical. The bridge’s log on this machine shows it directly, with timestamped lines like re-asserted clip-1.png (was: image/bmp,) after every Snipping Tool capture. Interestingly, synthetic Clipboard::SetImage calls from PowerShell never triggered it; only the Snipping Tool path did, which suggests WSLg keys off something specific in how Snipping Tool finalises its writes. A single re-assertion at +0.5 s catches it reliably; the three additional retries I tried earlier never fired.

#4 is hardcoded in a place that surprised me. Windows Terminal’s Ctrl+V handler isn’t in defaults.json (that file only binds Ctrl+Shift+V). It’s in ConHost’s windowio.cpp, where the inputKeyInfo check on 'V' with IsInVirtualTerminalInputMode and ShouldTakeOverKeyboardShortcuts swallows the keystroke before the inner program ever sees it. Tracked at microsoft/terminal#5790, open and on “Backlog” since 2020.

The kicker on #4 — Claude Code already defaults chat:imagePaste to Alt+V on native Windows. It just doesn’t apply that default in WSL, because WSL reports as Linux and the Windows-specific code never runs. The cleanest upstream fix isn’t even new functionality: detect “running in WSL inside Windows Terminal” at startup and apply the existing Windows Alt+V default there too. No keybinding file required from the user.

When this stops being needed

WSL starts sending PNG to Linux → the Windows listener is no longer needed.
Claude Code learns to read the BMP variant → the Windows listener is no longer needed.
Windows Terminal stops grabbing Ctrl+V → the custom keybinding is no longer needed.

When all three happen, removing the workaround is one pkill, a couple of rms, and taking the relevant snippets out of .bashrc and ~/.claude/keybindings.json. Nothing else on the system depends on it.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

7. The Ask

Source: https://randsinrepose.com/archives/the-ask/
Site: Rands in Repose
Submitter: digitallogic (Hacker News)
Published: 2026-05-25
HN activity: 18 points · 12 comments
Length: 1.7K words (~8 min read)
Language: en-US

Coffee in hand, I sit down in the Cave. Any Tuesday during the work week, a sip, and I parse the calendar.

1:1 — he’s fine. Status meeting — listen. Staff meeting — read the notes from last week. Exec review — figure out the biggest fire, have a defensible opinion. Wait — Mark Team Review? Who is Mark? And what are we reviewing? Double-click on the meeting — unfamiliar names. No agenda. AND IT’S AN HOUR? I message my Chief of Staff, who is familiar with this morning meeting vetting process. Carolyn responds immediately, “No clue. They run one of the infrastructure teams. We’ve never worked with them.”

AN HOUR. And I have no idea what is happening during this time. My finger hovers over the Decline button when I remember that part of my job involves infrequent but important meetings.

In your regular 1:1s, you’ve sorted out how to communicate. He’s an introvert, and I must pull him out of his shell. She’s operationally focused — which is great — but we must move to strategy and stop crossing things off lists. Your approach is well-known and expected. This is a good 1:1. It’s high-signal, predictable, and a worthy investment. In the infrequent but important meeting, you have no such contract.

But you still go.

Three Assumptions, Three Meetings, Three Asks

Let’s start with three assumptions as you sit down and get comfortable:

There is a good reason that this meeting exists.
There is a good reason that you are in this meeting. You are not a meeting accessory. You are expected to do something because of your attendance. In senior leadership circles, we call this “The Ask.” Someone in this room has an ask specifically for you.
This meeting has a human capable of making sure this ask is delivered. Heads up: this might be you. Stay tuned.

The Promotion Conversation

Let’s start with an easy one. An individual on your team you never meet with schedules thirty minutes. If trust is high, someone (probably their manager) has already given you context (“She’s new and wants to get to know the team”), but let’s assume you have no heads-up. Just thirty minutes and a name.

It’s not the point of this chapter, but the arrival of this mystery is always good news. I mean, they might be quitting, but the fact that you are involved in that possible disaster is good news — you’ll have a chance to react. These meetings are infrequent and vitally important.

Ok, not quitting, but nervous. They keep saying, “I know you’re busy,” and you keep saying, “My job is the team, and that’s you.” Nice job, slick, but what is the good reason? What’s the ask? And who is going to make this happen?

For this meeting, you are the person who needs to get to the ask. No one told you what’s coming, so even though they proactively got time on your calendar and they’ve been chit-chatting for ten minutes trying to connect, what’s the ask?

It’s a simple question, and I’ve used it thousands of times: “How can I help?”

“I’m wondering how you got started as a manager and…” The Ask: I want to become a manager.

“I’ve been working really hard and…” The Ask: I want more compensation.

“Well, I heard it’s important as part of the promotion process to get visibility with your Director…” The Ask: I want someone to finally explain how the promotion process works.

Those are three. There are many more, but the initial point is not the ask; the point is to be the human who wants to help. Leadership, especially senior leadership, gives off this air of otherness, of being busy, of having access to information that others do not. While some of this might be true, in this meeting, you are simply there to help.

The We-Need-You-(Your Team)-For-Something-Only-You-Can-Do-(And We’re Not Quite Sure How This All Works)-Meeting

Harder now. Again, it’d be super if someone took the time to tell you what was going down in this meeting, but as we’ll discover shortly, this miss is part of a larger problem. Larger meeting, more people. The other privilege (curse) of senior leadership is that teams meeting you for the first time spend a lot of time fretting about how to present to you. They ask your managers, “How does she like to be presented to? What questions is she going to ask?” The end result for this meeting is a lot of formality — they want to set the table… just so.

Hour meeting, and we’re twenty minutes in, and it’s all still preamble. It’s an unfamiliar team, and you’ve never worked with them before, so much of this is irrelevant, but a senior leader’s job is the constant gathering of intelligence, so, yeah, you know who many of the folks are and what they build. You knew a lot of this before you met, right?

The core issue in this meeting is one of culture. This team doesn’t know how your team works, builds, or plans, so they are laying it thick. They have an ask, but the issue isn’t figuring out what they want to build; it’s explaining how you can build with them.

It would’ve been great if a program manager, project manager, or other operationally minded human had intercepted this meeting, but they didn’t, so it’s you. You need to explain:

How your team builds plans, where you are in the current planning cycle, and when the next planning cycle kicks off.
How you and your leadership allocate your precious humans during this cycle — how the hard decisions about what is built are made.
How you have historically worked with new teams. What’s worked and what has not.

If this information feels remedial, just imagine how this team feels. You and your team are accountable for an important bit of software or infrastructure that is required by this other team. The problem is, for reasons that should be addressed, you and your team are a black box, so now you’re in this meeting.

Five minutes to go, and heads are nodding, and there is a path forward. My hard-earned advice:

You might not get to The Ask. That’s ok. There needs to be another meeting.
If you get to The Ask, never say yes. All those good feelings and nodding mean the room is communicating; they don’t mean their Ask is good or aligns with your strategy. That’s the next meeting.

The Shared Fate Meeting

This one is non-obvious, and to understand it, I need to tell you a story. Back at the fruit company, my boss told me, “And don’t forget to meet with Rachel. You’re going to be building with her at some point. Good person to know.”

Of course. First ninety days? Meeting with everyone is my jam, so I meet with Rachel. Smart, a culture carrier, a great conversation. Let’s meet again. We do. And then again. However, after three meetings, my assessment is that we aren’t going to be building anything for years.

I moved my Rachel meetings to my dangerous bucket of nice-to-haves, which means they are the first thing to drop when work gets spicy. Which is always.

My impression is Rachel received the same guidance about the necessity of meeting me, so when I started to reschedule frequently, she Slacked me and gave me a gentle reminder, “Shouldn’t we be meeting?” Of course. Looking forward to it. We don’t.

Almost two years later, during my performance review, my boss informs me that Rachel’s boss is disappointed that we stopped meeting… because we did. We weren’t building anything together, and I was busy with the work ahead of me. My boss, this is a career-limiting move.

A senior leader’s job isn’t just the constant gathering of intelligence; it’s playing the long game. I resume my fortnightly 1:1 with Rachel. Still a good human, culture carrier, and, again, every conversation was valuable. A year after our regular meetings resumed, we randomly discovered two planned programs happening on opposite sides of the company that were about to collide head-on. After a few more meetings, we compared notes and built a joint proposal, making the other proposals irrelevant (those teams did not want to do the work anyway) by asking our teams to work together on the effort.

My boss, after reviewing the proposal, commented, “See?”

See what? Three years ago, two SVPs had a feeling that Team Rands and Team Rachel would accidentally stumble upon a possible huge waste of work performed by unwilling teams who would prefer we didn’t do it?

That’s ridiculous.

It’s Not Ridiculous

I am going to write something, and if you’re a full-time engineer who has never worked as a leader of people, you’re going to be mad. Much of the work of senior leadership is feeling and instinct. You were right to be suspicious. What was The Ask for the Rachel meeting? It wasn’t the eventual joint proposal. The Ask was “Our feeling is these teams need to work closely together — please figure out why.”

My working life would be much easier if the decisions were all well defined and supported by a rich set of verifiable data, but more than I want to admit:

I’m staring at a random 1:1 and sitting in a meeting with no agenda, and I’m listening to my gut: What is really going on here?
I’m attempting to solve what appears to be a vast, impossible problem and intuit, “You know, Parker and David… they’ll know how to tackle this.” I can’t really explain why.
Sitting on my bike, riding to work, the idea will just pop into my head, “Monday. First thing. You’re going to say this ridiculous thing to this person because that’s going to force them to see the situation differently.”

But it’s not guessing. Those feelings came from experiences I’ve had over and over. That instinct has been built by endless trial and error. That meeting? The one with a bad title, but those two attendees I keep hearing about? I should probably go and figure out The Ask.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

8. RamAIn (YC W26) Is Hiring

Source: https://www.ycombinator.com/companies/ramain/jobs/hqvmyKN-founding-gtm-engineer
Site: Y Combinator
Submitter: svee (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-28 02:21 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 1 points · 0 comments
Length: 509 words (~3 min read)
Language: en

RamAIn builds the world's fastest computer-use agents for enterprise work. We're a YC W26 company on a mission to eliminate repetitive, manual workflows by training AI agents that operate legacy systems, desktop apps, and web portals the same way humans do — but 10× faster and more reliably.

Founders

RamAIn was founded by Shourya Vir Jain (CEO) and Vansh Ramani (CTO), who met at IIT Delhi and dropped out to build AI-native automation for enterprise workflows.

Shourya previously worked at McKinsey, where he saw firsthand how much enterprise work still depends on manual interaction with legacy systems. He is also a FIDE-rated chess player (2118), was ranked top-20 globally under 16, and previously built and scaled an enterprise AI company to over 6-figures in ARR.

Vansh is an AI researcher who worked at CMU on scalable machine learning and representation learning. His research includes publications at ICLR and ACS, and "Panaroma," one of the fastest vector search algorithms, later merged into Meta's FAISS. He focuses on building high-performance reasoning and planning systems for real-world deployment.

Role

We're looking for a technical GTM builder to own our top-of-funnel revenue infrastructure as our first business hire. You'd be the third person working full-time on the company, working directly with the founders.

This is a good fit if you've built outbound systems from scratch - wiring together enrichment pipelines, AI personalization, and sequencing automation - and you want to apply that to one of the most interesting problem spaces in enterprise AI.

What you'll own

Designing and owning our outbound infrastructure end-to-end: lead enrichment, ICP scoring, AI-personalized sequences, and email deliverability
Building automations that surface buying signals and trigger the right outreach at the right time
Owning CRM architecture - workflows, reporting, and pipeline visibility
Experimenting with new channels and approaches to generate qualified pipeline
Identifying where manual GTM work can be automated and building the system to replace it

What we're looking for

0–4 years of experience in GTM engineering, technical RevOps, or a growth/marketing role where you were building automations and pipelines, not just running campaigns
Hands-on with modern GTM tooling - Clay, Apollo, Instantly, or similar - you've built multi-step enrichment and sequencing workflows, not just set up a table
Comfortable with Python or SQL well enough to work with data, call APIs, and build lightweight scoring or enrichment logic
Top-of-funnel focused - you know how to build systems that generate qualified pipeline at scale, from ICP definition through to booked meetings
Genuine interest in AI; ideally you've used LLMs to automate research, personalization, or signal detection in a GTM context

Imagine your AI could literally do work by taking actions on the screen!

RamAIn builds the world's fastest computer-use agents for enterprise work. We're a YC W26 company on a mission to eliminate repetitive, manual workflows from enterprise teams - automating legacy systems, desktop apps, and web portals with AI that operates just like a human at the keyboard. We move fast, think deeply, and build things that matter.

Founded by CMU, IIT Delhi, McKinsey and YC alumn

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

9. A New Typst Template for Pandoc

Source: https://imaginarytext.ca/posts/2025/typst-templates-for-pandoc/
Site: imaginarytext.ca
Author: JMax
Submitted: 2026-05-26 05:08 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 48 points · 6 comments
Length: 946 words (~5 min read)
Language: en

Last summer I spent a lot of time with Typst (at that point v0.11) and Pandoc, working on a flexible and reusable workflow to typeset markdown-formatted articles to PDF. I designed a Pandoc template for Typst that would do nice things with layout and typography, and I posted about that here.

Fast-forward to spring 2025. In the intervening months, Typst has been upgraded twice (to v0.13) and Pandoc has upgraded at least 3 times (currently at v3.6.4), and my templates don’t work anymore. Partly this is because Pandoc’s own Typst output template is different and makes some different assumptions about how it is called, and partly because major changes to Typst’s logic emerged since v0.12

So this past month – in the context of a graduate class I teach – I set about rebuilding my workflow. My new templates (see below) use Pandoc’s default Typst output template, which itself does very little in terms of formatting, but now utilize an actual Typst Template (that is, written for Typst, not for Pandoc). It’s called like so:

pandoc file.md -o file.pdf  -V template=article.typ --pdf-engine=typst


Note that this looks kinda similar asking Pandoc to use one of its templates, but note that this is actually -V passing a variable to Pandoc… Pandoc’s own template.typst watches for this to be set, and then imports the named template. That’s a little syntactically confusing (I was confused), but it does separate out Pandoc’s logic from Typst’s logic. As it should be. This ought to be a little more robust long-term, too.

Breaking that up a bit for clarity…

pandoc article.md \
  -f markdown --wrap=none \
  -t pdf --pdf-engine=typst \
  -V template=article.typ \
  -o article.pdf


The Typst template I’ve produced assumes you’re running it this way, and it gathers all the metadata Pandoc can recognize from your markdown source. I’m assuming you have a metadata block at the top of your markdown source with things like title, author, date, and so on.

You can download the template, and I’ll explain how it works below:

Download article.typ

The Template

I’ve set up this template to do a fair bit of work; not all of this may be needed; you can disable stuff if you like. Let’s walk through it section by section.

The first part is a content-to-string mapping that I cribbed straight from Pandoc’s minimal Typst template… this just assembles multi-part metadata (like authors’ names and emails) and makes it available to Typst.

After that we set up the conf for the template, setting up default values for the things that are coming in from document metadata, as well as boilerplate stuff like page size and format, base font, and numbering options.

The first big customization is a set of routines for running heads and footers (feets?): specifically, if we have left and right facing pages (as in a book), we want the headers and footers to align left and right, and also optionally to include different content on each. If you don’t care about L & R pages, you can first change the margins (line 41) so that “inside” and “outside” are the same value, and then set the running headers to be the same for both L & R – it’s simply based on whether the current page number is even or odd. You could also set the align to centred if you prefer.

Next up is a set of basic text properties: Typst has support for OpenType font options, so you can turn on ligatures, old-style figures, and so on.

Below that (from line 110ff) are a set of parameters defining the styling for block-quotations, code blocks, images and captions, ad footnotes. There’s not a lot to this, just some attention to details. It’s a little nicer than the defaults, to my eye.

Line 143 onward defines three levels of headings, with some stylistic differences that you could mix and match and customize as you like. Some of this formatting is fancier than it needs to be, merely demonstrating what Typst can do and making it easier to tweak the styles later on.

Following line 170, I have set up two labelled sections: for epigraphs and for a References section: styling these distinctively (e.g., a hanging indent for the Refs). These are invoked by this bit of markdown which Pandoc recognizes, and which results in a Typst ‘label.’ This is equivalent to putting an ID on a div in HTML:

::: {#epigraph}
It was the best of times...
:::


You could follow suit and style whatever labels you want to put in your content.

After that (line 185ff), we ask Typst to style specific bits of text. A nice example is the regex that matches a date followed by “CE” – this will put the “CE” in smallcaps. Another one styles URLs. You could make lots more of these!

After line 192 is the actual layout of the document. I kept this simple, but this could be much more elaborate, simply by writing more Typst code here. We begin with a title/metadata display block: the title, authors, date, and abstract, formatted with a bit of extra vertical space around it and with a line separating this from the body.

Then we display the body text. Here, I set the paragraph style (justified, and with first-line-indents). I set these here instead of earlier, so that the title block isn’t also trying to have first-line-indents and justification.

Last, a little colophon giving credit to Typst and Pandoc.

This is functionally the same as what I blogged about last summer, although the code is a little simpler and better organized (partly because Typst is smarter; partly because I read the Typst docs better)

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

10. I'm Getting into Mesh Networks (Meshtastic, MeshCore, and Reticulum)

Source: https://www.jonaharagon.com/posts/im-getting-into-mesh-networks-meshtastic-meshcore-and-reticulum/
Site: Jonah Aragon
Author: Jonah Aragon
Published: 2026-01-26
HN activity: 95 points · 27 comments
Length: 3.7K words (~17 min read)
Language: en

I love networking, a lot. So much so that I've run my own ISP since 2024, complete with its own ASN, IPv4/6 address space, fiber optics, etc.

However, do this and you quickly realize how reliant you still remain on central service providers. The internet is a mesh, but the real players on that mesh are few, far between, and easy to coerce into censorship and other bad things. Even after ascending to the lofty realms of direct BGP peering myself, my access to those resources is locked behind yearly fees from ARIN. Ownership of the "real estate" of the internet, IP addresses, no longer exists.

The tragedy of modern computing is that the local compute we own in our offices, on our laps, or in the palm of our hands is massively, massively powerful, but Big Tech companies actively refuse to take advantage of that fact. Why are you, I, and our neighbors largely relegated to consuming access from big players when the computers we have are capable of so much more?

Mesh networking, sending packets of data through many directly interconnected peers instead of through central datacenters, promises to free us from our reliance on central service providers, and it's something I've been really excited about lately.

Of course, there is good reason for how the internet is currently designed. High bandwidth connections are costly, and for some applications lowering latency as much as possible is very important, which realistically requires continent- and ocean-spanning fiber optics with as few middle-men as possible.

This doesn't mean we need to put all our eggs in this basket though. While bandwidth-intensive services like Netflix or latency-sensitive services like gaming are not likely to come to mesh networks anytime soon, there are a vast number of applications which are perfectly suited to mesh networking:

Messaging, social networking, and general information sharing are very practical uses for mesh networking where access, censorship resistance, and resiliency are increasingly critical for many people around the world.

For applications like this, we don't need to trench fiber connections through the ground to get everyone connected. In the modern mesh networking space, much of the innovation is happening in the LoRa radio space.

LoRa radios use license-free, sub-gigahertz radio bands that are available for public use in nearly all countries around the world. Compared to the license-free 2.4 GHz or 5 GHz radio you'd recognize from Wi-Fi (but is also used by many other technologies), LoRa operates at much lower power and, importantly and simultaneously, at much longer range.

Mesh networking over the airwaves presents a very unique opportunity for our societies. We could build a resilient, peer-to-peer network that coexists with the internet, enabling connectivity in currently underserved regions and increasing our personal sovereignty online by maintaining a functional backup to the internet for our most critical needs.

It's also just a freeing feeling to be able to send a message to someone else relying only on devices that you and people in your network own outright, instead of renting the capability to do so from your local ISP or Elon Musk's Starlink.

Meshtastic

The obvious frontrunner in the mesh networking space is Meshtastic, mostly because they were the first in the consumer LoRa mesh space, or at the very least the first to do it pretty well.

It's easy to see why Meshtastic has quite a bit of popularity: it's a real product designed with a specific use-case in mind (mobile messaging and device tracking, primarily), not a technical project just trying to build a network and hoping the use-case comes later.

This is very appealing for most people who just want something they can buy and use out of the box, like a set of walkie-talkies from Wal-Mart. Unfortunately, much like those cheap walkie-talkies in comparison to more serious technology like amateur radio, Meshtastic's core design holds the platform back from achieving its full potential.

Meshtastic's first-mover advantage is pretty hard to overcome, especially when it already works reasonably well for small, private groups like hikers or event-goers.

For a very large and public mesh, however, it's become clear to most people that Meshtastic by design is a fairly untenable solution. Some public mesh groups have increased the bandwidth available to Meshtastic by giving up some range, but it's a stop-gap solution that doesn't fix the problems Meshtastic has in this environment at the end of the day.

💡

To be perfectly upfront with you, this post will be glossing over many Meshtastic and MeshCore features, because I feel they are both non-serious solutions compared to Reticulum for reasons I will explain later on in this post. I can almost guarantee I have been running Meshtastic and MeshCore for longer and with more infrastructure than you, and in fact I still do, despite not really believing in their long-term success, so... Any omissions or "lack of problem solving" in this post are not due to a lack of knowledge, but simply because fully detailing the many problems they have is outside the scope of this article.

I think most people who are serious about public mesh networking have moved on to researching other solutions, or will have to soon.

MeshCore

MeshCore is one of these potential solutions some public mesh groups have begun switching to.

While Meshtastic's original design essentially floods the network with every message being sent, hoping it eventually reaches the correct destination, MeshCore has an actual routing system that can send messages only through a path of specific devices on the mesh that include the sender and recipient.

This results in a monumental reduction in radio transmissions, the advantages of which can't be understated. It makes the network less congested and more reliable, and for people who are mainly interested in messaging as opposed to sharing sensor/location data that Meshtastic remains well-suited for, it's no surprise that many larger groups have begun to shift to MeshCore.

Unfortunately, MeshCore is not a true mesh in the way public mesh enthusiasts would probably like it to be. At a very high level, devices in MeshCore are broken up into two categories: companions and repeaters.

Companion devices would be what most people use to send and receive messages, while repeaters are the devices which actually mesh with each other and extend the overall network's range. What this means is that a companion always has to be in range of a repeater to access the network, companions never relay messages between themselves on behalf of other companions.

There are advantages to this approach. MeshCore allows messages to traverse up to 64 hops away, which is an enormous real-world scale when LoRa repeaters can be many miles apart in ideal conditions. Even in the best possible case, Meshtastic's default 3-hop limit (albeit configurable up to 7) places a real limit on how far messages can spread.

It's very true that anyone can participate in MeshCore as a repeater, so all the tools to build your own mesh are certainly there. It's just that it requires some additional planning, coordination, and centralization that I don't view as totally necessary.

The bigger problem I have with MeshCore is that many parts of it are proprietary. While the underlying protocol and the firmware for some radios is open source, all of the official MeshCore clients are proprietary, and even have features paywalled.

Proprietary software is simply not disaster-ready, and that goes doubly so for software reliant on central payment processors.

I am not the type of person who needs to use open-source software 100% of the time by any means (although it'd be nice), but the only point in my mind of having an off-grid mesh network in the first place is total freedom and control, so in this particular case I simply cannot ever support a closed-source solution.

Efforts are already being made to create unofficial open source clients for MeshCore. I won't discount this fact, but at the end of the day most people in the MeshCore ecosystem will be in the official, proprietary ecosystem, and I don't think MeshCore has enough advantages, users, or reliability to warrant adopting at this very early stage of mesh networking.

We have a unique opportunity as enthusiasts to adopt the best mesh networking solution we can, before the "network effect" truly sets in and locks people in place to a particular platform. I think we can do better than Meshtastic and MeshCore.

Problems

Unfortunately, both Meshtastic and MeshCore are highly limited, and don't scale well. Meshtastic barely can scale to a regional mesh in ideal scenarios, and while MeshCore fares better here, it's still unlikely to scale to the size of many larger regions, much less countries or planets.

The thing is, Meshtastic and MeshCore are both more applications than they are protocols. They enable simple instant messaging communication over LoRa, but they don't give much thought to mesh networking applications beyond what their client apps officially support.

They're geared towards communicating with a small, local group, and any public meshes on these networks are really exceptions rather than the standard use-case.

Another problem is that Meshtastic and MeshCore both rely on LoRa pretty much exclusively.

LoRa is very cool for building ad-hoc, low-bandwidth mesh networks, and it's a blessing that we have it available in most countries as an unlicensed option we can operate on without a ham radio license, and with modern digital technologies like encryption that are mostly forbidden on amateur radio.

It's hardly the perfect solution for many scenarios though, and it is quite slow.

In a perfect world, the mesh networking/routing software would be completely independent of the physical network that connects all these devices together.

For example, I want to be able to build cheap, local LoRa networks in neighborhoods and other regional communities, and interconnect them with more powerful point-to-point microwave connections, or even fiber or the internet.

Meshtastic (and I believe MeshCore via some unofficial "gateways") have some hacky methods of interconnecting different meshes with MQTT, but the experience is quite poor and it's clear that this type of connectivity is not a first-class experience on the network. Especially on Meshtastic, bridging to the internet with MQTT can degrade the network so much that it becomes impractical to use among any more than a handful of people.

It should be possible to build a mesh routing solution that intelligently routes packets between nodes over many different types of connections, completely seamlessly so that the experience of using the mesh never changes based on your specific interface.

Luckily for us, this has already been done!

Reticulum

Reticulum is extremely cool.

It's a networking stack that intelligently provides strongly-encrypted routing over a wide variety of physical networks, including LoRa. Like MeshCore, it has automatic routing over paths on the network, but unlike MeshCore, those paths can traverse not only over LoRa but over any supported interface.

Additionally, like Meshtastic, Reticulum essentially works out of the box with devices operating on the same local network. Connect two devices on the same LoRa frequency and you have a functional mesh right away, with no advanced networking skills or dedicated repeaters required.

This makes Reticulum very well suited both for small, private networks like Meshtastic, and for very large networks that MeshCore tends to work better with, likely going beyond MeshCore's capabilities with promises of planetary-level scalability.

The best part is that you can easily start small with Reticulum and everything will work perfectly fine, but once a member of your small network interconnects with a different Reticulum network simultaneously, the networks can seamlessly combine, enabling complete interoperability without the need to fiddle with settings or all agree on some common radio protocol as in Meshtastic-land.

You can mix-and-match Reticulum connections over LoRa radio, your local LAN network, point-to-point Wi-Fi or microwave connections, the internet, Tor or I2P, and even over networks like packet radio for the ham enthusiasts out there.

Many Networks

Essentially, Reticulum can theoretically support any network you can interact with via TCP, UDP, or just a simple serial interface. It takes the bandwidth of all the networks you connect to into account when determining the best paths for messages to traverse, optimizing both for distance and to use the resources of each physical network efficiently.

Heterogeneous connectivity is Reticulum's bread and butter, basically. The project's documentation probably says it best:

In conventional networking, mixing different transport mediums typically requires gateways, translation layers, and careful configuration. A WiFi network doesn’t natively interoperate with a packet radio network without additional infrastructure, and you can’t just download a car over a serial port, or send an encrypted message in a QR code. Reticulum treats heterogeneity as a core premise. The protocol is designed to seamlessly mix mediums with vastly different characteristics [...]

For network designers, this means you are free to use whatever mediums are available, affordable, or appropriate for your situation. You might use LoRa for wide-area low-bandwidth coverage, WiFi for local high-capacity links, I2P for anonymous Internet connectivity, and Ethernet for infrastructure backhauls, all within the same network. Reticulum handles the translation and coordination automatically.

While I don't think homegrown mesh networks should be reliant on the internet or I2P in the long run, I think first-class support for connectivity over TCP and other internet protocols is still a significant advantage for people striving to build local, public mesh networks.

Interconnected Local Meshes

Distinct local groups being able to interconnect is a huge boon for content availability on the network, and the beauty is that all these network links in Reticulum automatically become redundant as more connections are made.

A local mesh in Minneapolis could interconnect with a local mesh in Chicago over the internet, for example, but perhaps in the future some dedicated network operators are also able to establish a direct connection via microwave or LoRa between those cities. Connections may normally continue to traverse the internet at higher speeds, but in the event of an outage those alternate/ad-hoc paths can take over seamlessly, because they're all just paths on the same, single Reticulum network.

In the worst case scenario, a local Reticulum mesh lacking any connections to other Reticulum networks is going to fall back to only regional content availability, which is still the most that you'll realistically get from Meshtastic and MeshCore.

Perhaps just as importantly, Reticulum enables connectivity across borders. LoRa has a bit of a problem, which is that it operates on different frequencies in different jurisdictions. While LoRa operates on 915 MHz at up to 1 watt of power in the United States, it runs at 868 MHz (or 433 MHz) at much lower power levels in much of Europe, or 923 MHz in Asia, etc.

This means that a Meshtastic or MeshCore network in Asia will never natively connect to one in Europe. Again this could be worked around with "hacky" bridge solutions like MQTT, but Reticulum would natively interconnect two different LoRa networks seamlessly as long as one common gateway point could be found: For example, an 868 MHz radio in one country connected to a 923 MHz radio in another via some other means like a fiber link, or a 2.4 GHz microwave connection, or the internet, or even packet radio. As long as some connectivity point (or multiple) can be found, then Reticulum routing between different physical networks would work seamlessly without any central servers required.

This is all possible without any sort of central coordination, which is the most important part of building a truly decentralized network. Network operators are free to create segments of the network in any way they see fit, and if/when those segments become connected, Reticulum handles the convergence of those networks automatically.

Reticulum's address space is global, and every node has a unique address guaranteed by the encryption Reticulum uses. There's no potential for different Reticulum networks to have overlapping addresses, and no need for a central authority to hand out addresses in the fashion that IANA/ARIN/RIPE/etc. hand out IP addresses on the traditional internet.

Reticulum Applications

Although building the network well gives Reticulum a distinct advantage over Meshtastic and MeshCore, it is not enough to just build a network alone.

The developer of Reticulum realized this, of course, and built a number of applications that work on Reticulum seamlessly: NomadNet is one of the most popular, providing messaging, file sharing, and text-based browsing in a terminal app (which has mouse support too, thankfully).

Using a terminal won't appeal to many people though, so you can also use Sideband, a GUI app for Android and PC, or Meshchat to communicate, as well as many other apps which use Reticulum.

Fortunately, many of these communications apps work with each other, so you can choose between them at will. While you can really build essentially any app or protocol on top of Reticulum, many of the messengers standardize on a handful of homemade protocols: LXMF, LXST, and RRC.

While understanding what these protocols mean is not particularly important for people just looking to use the network, the important thing to know is that Reticulum already has an ecosystem of apps that connect with each other generally using the same underlying protocols, and provide similar functionality to Meshtastic's and MeshCore's apps for messaging and other functions.

Reticulum's Biggest Problem

Unfortunately, despite being what I'd consider perhaps the perfect public mesh networking platform, Reticulum has a big drawback holding it back from supplanting public MeshCore and Meshtastic networks today, and it's not the apps or anything to do with the software.

Reticulum's main problem is that it does not have dedicated firmware for LoRa radios in the same way Meshtastic and MeshCore do.

Installing Meshtastic on a cheap device like a Heltec V3 creates a full, standalone Meshtastic node capable of sending & receiving messages, and relaying data throughout the network.

With Reticulum you can use the same cheap hardware with firmware called RNode to make LoRa connections. However, Reticulum's RNode firmware functions basically as a LoRa modem for a connected computer, not as a standalone mesh node itself.

RNode is completely unintelligent, requiring a connection to a computer running Reticulum to send and receive messages and to route messages to other nodes on the Reticulum network.

For most people who would simply be using the network, this is not actually a problem. Even with Meshtastic, it is very rare for most people to try and communicate using only a standalone device (one exception being the LILYGO T-Deck).

Instead, people commonly connect their Meshtastic-enabled LoRa radios to their phones or their computers, all of which are very capable devices which could easily run Reticulum while connected to RNode if people wanted to switch.

Where this does present a real problem to Reticulum is where it comes to infrastructure.

In the world of Meshtastic and MeshCore, many people are running remote and often solar-powered nodes on high hilltops or buildings to selflessly increase the capacity of the network.

When it comes to Reticulum, these remote nodes would not only need a LoRa radio running RNode, but a full computer running Reticulum to enable the mesh capabilities. This computer could be as simple as a Raspberry Pi Zero, but even that level of additional price and added power consumption makes this setup fairly untenable for many unattended installations, especially solar-powered ones.

Progress is being made on this front. In particular, a port called microReticulum for ESP32 and better devices is continually being developed. I really hope it succeeds, because the ability for current Meshtastic and MeshCore operators to switch to Reticulum routing with no additional hardware necessary could instantly, radically boost the adoption of a much more capable public mesh network like Reticulum in many communities.

What's Next

There's work to be done here, but at the end of the day Reticulum is the only solution that promises to let people create local networks, large and small, and interconnect those networks organically into a seamless, global mesh.

It's a killer feature that I think many people intuitively want from Meshtastic and MeshCore, but that those networks will never actually be able to provide.

I see a lot of advantages to all three of these apps. Meshtastic is really slick for a group of hikers who just want to text and share GPS easily instead of using voice walkie-talkies. MeshCore has some compelling features for local/neighborhood messaging, perhaps off-grid messaging at a large event like DEF CON.

If that's your use-case, then cool, but I am begging people with grander ambitions in the mesh networking space to focus on the most practical solution to the problem here.

There are many groups creating a region-wide or larger public Meshtastic network, when it is simply the wrong solution to the problem at hand, and this should be self-evident to anyone who's tried to use Meshtastic in this scenario.

I think many people get swept up in "collecting nodes" on Meshtastic and the thrill of seeing as many "connected" devices as they possibly can, but at least in my local area I see little consideration to how well-connected and functional the network actually is. When you look beyond being simply aware of nodes in your local area, and actually try to interact with those nodes, failed messages and communication issues are common.

Reticulum offers not just a messenger app or a way to share GPS & other sensor data, but a full-fledged alternative to the internet itself. This enables critical applications that would not be possible on Meshtastic and MeshCore.

For example, I can share access to any Kiwix file, including the entirety of Wikipedia, to anyone on Reticulum, which would make quick information sharing a breeze in a disaster scenario.

All of this is why I'm settling on Reticulum for what I want to build and see in the world. If other people are interested, I'll share more details about what I'm actually working on building myself here, and other mesh topics.

And certainly if you're in Northeast Minneapolis, get in touch. God only knows how critical tools like this could quickly become around here, and it's better to prepare today than be forced to learn all of this tomorrow 🙂

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

11. Rust (and Slint) on a Jailbroken Kindle

Source: https://sverre.me/blog/rust-on-kindle/
Site: Sverre
Submitter: homarp (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-27 19:51 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 111 points · 12 comments
Length: 945 words (~5 min read)
Language: en

../rust-on-kindle Published on: 26. May 2026

I recently jailbroke my 7th generation Kindle Paperwhite. While my motivation probably should have been "breaking free from Amazon's clammy and tightening grip", the truth is I wanted a way to use it as a clock on my nightstand. I found this project and figured I could just make some adjustments to the code. And that worked fine. But as I now had opened the door, I started thinking about if I could get Rust to work on the Kindle as well. Maybe I could do more useful stuff with it? As I have recently started to tinker with Home Assistant and smart devices again, the idea of a dashboard for some of the features could be a fun project. And while there are probably many perfectly fine projects out there, I haven't made any of those.

Telling a programmer there's already a library to do X is like telling a songwriter there's already a song about love.
-Pete Cordell

Cross compiling Rust for the Kindle

After some research I found out that I needed to target ARMv7 and musl libc. I have dabbled with Rust on ARM machines before, and know from painful experience that getting the Rust compilation toolchain to work on such low-powered devices is a non-starter. Luckily there are great tools for cross compilation. My go-to for cross compiling Rust is, rather ironically, cargo-zigbuild. The Zig compiler ships with musl libc sources and headers built in, for all supported architectures. It also has its own linker, so zig cc can act as a complete cross-compile toolchain for any musl target, on any host. Compiling for the Kindle becomes as easy as:

* Installing Zig 
* Installing cargo-zigbuild
* cargo zigbuild --release --target armv7-unknown-linux-musleabihf

Getting shell access on the Kindle

With my hello-world-app ready and built, I needed a way to get it on the kindle and run it. While I probably could have used KUAL which I installed during the jailbreaking process, I wanted to also be able to see stdout to verify my application actually works. After some digging I found the USBNetwork tool that allows for setting up SSH access to your device either via USB or Wifi. For convenience I added an entry in my sshconfig and copied over my public key. Note: ssh-copy-id did not work for me, I had to add my .pub file to /mnt/us/usbnet/etc/authorized_keys on the Kindle.

Hello, World! Now what?

With shell access in order I was able to confirm that my cross compilation toolchain did indeed work, "Hello, World!" showed up as expected. But a program that prints to stdout readable over SSH is not much help on a Kindle.

As Rust has matured, quite a few GUI libraries have sprung up. Personally, I only have experience with Slint, so that is what I reached for. Could I get it to work on the Kindle? From my experience with getting Slint to run on a Raspberry Pi I knew the ARMv7 platform was supported out of the box. The missing links would be output to the e-ink screen and input from the touch panel.

We have visual!

Slint supports various renderers and backends, including a handy and lightweight software renderer that works on basically anything. By supplying a LineBufferProvider that implements process_line() we are able to take one by one line of rasterized visual output, convert it to grayscale and write it to the framebuffer, that on my Kindle is just a file at /dev/fb0 that we have memory mapped. I love the linux philosophy of "everything is a file" sometimes. Now the only thing left to do is to notify the driver to refresh the display, which is how e-ink works. This is done via the libc crate with ioctl() (input/output control). We pass in the dirty region to be refreshed, handily provided by Slint internals.

Touch me here, touch me there

With pixels on the screen, the other half of the puzzle is getting the touch panel to talk to Slint. And again the "everything is a file" mantra comes to the rescue: the touch controller shows up as /dev/input/event1, and we can just read() from it. Each read gives us back a struct that the kernel has written directly into our buffer: a timestamp, an event type, a code, and a value. No parsing, no protocol, just a memory layout we have to match.

The Kindle uses the Linux kernel's multi-touch protocol type B, which means events arrive as a stream of "the X coordinate is now this", "the Y coordinate is now that", "the tracking ID is now this" and then a SYNC_REPORT event that says "okay, that batch is done, you can act on it now". So we accumulate the latest X, Y and tracking ID as events come in, and on each SYNC_REPORT we figure out what to dispatch to Slint. A tracking ID of -1 means the finger lifted, which becomes a PointerReleased. Otherwise, the first sync after a touch-down becomes a PointerPressed, and any subsequent ones become PointerMoved. Slint handles the rest.

It actually works!

After a lot of debugging of no visible output, screen not refreshing, double refresh flashes, touch input not registering, touch input registering twice and lots of more bugs I had a counter and a increment button.
×

With an seemingly working (at least for my specific device, it will probably need adjustments for other Kindle versions) kindle-backend for Slint, I extracted the relevant code into a separate crate and published it on crates.io.

With that in order, I just need to draw the rest of the owl (dashboard). That will be another time.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

12. FBI Arrests CIA Official with $40M in Gold Bars in His Home

Source: https://www.nytimes.com/2026/05/27/us/politics/fbi-arrest-cia-official-gold-bars.html
Site: nytimes.com
Submitter: cwwc (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-27 23:23 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 143 points · 72 comments

Scrape failed: http 403

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

13. DuckDuckGo search saw 28% more visits after Google said people love AI mode

Source: https://www.pcgamer.com/hardware/duckduckgos-ai-free-search-saw-nearly-28-percent-more-visits-in-the-week-following-googles-insistence-that-people-love-ai-mode/
Site: PC Gamer
Author: Jess Kinghorn
Published: 2026-05-27
HN activity: 702 points · 349 comments
Length: 546 words (~3 min read)
Language: en

(Image credit: Serene Lee/SOPA Images/LightRocket via Getty Images)

These days, a typical Google Search feels like an obstacle course. Type out 'upcoming PC games 2026' and your gaze has to swerve around a chunky AI overview which recycles the work of human writers in a bid to kneecap efforts to click away from Google. It's a bleak state of affairs for what was once the premier discovery tool for the internet, and as such many users are looking for alternative search engines.

DuckDuckGo has been one major winner of this Google Search abandonment. Just for a start, visits to its AI-free search page noai.duckduckgo.com between May 20 to May 25 are said to have increased by 22.7% on average week-on-week, with the figures peaking May 24 at 27.7%.

The DuckDuckGo mobile app saw installs spike in the US by 18.1% on average compared to the previous week. TechCrunch reported this growth was sustained over six days, peaking at 30.5% on May 25. An even greater number of iOS users hit download on the app though, with installs seeing an average week-on-week growth of 33% and a peak of 69.9%.

Latest Videos From

This all follows Google CEO Sundar Pichai claiming last week that, "People love [Search's AI Mode]." DuckDuckGo CEO Gabriel Weinberg criticised Google's all-in-on-AI approach to Search, telling Paul Thurrott, "Google is force-feeding AI with no way to opt out. As a result, their results are getting worse, not better. We want to be the place that puts users in charge and allows them to decide how much or how little AI they want."

To be clear, Google isn't about to lose its Search crown; DuckDuckGo represents about 2% of the search engine market in the US—Google still enjoyed about 85% as of last month.

(Image credit: David Paul Morris/Bloomberg via Getty Images (left) / Mateusz Slodkowski/SOPA Images/LightRocket via Getty Images (right))

DuckDuckGo also offers AI products such as duck.ai, which allows users to chat privately with a number of major LLMs such as GPT-5 mini and Claude Haiku 4.5. Given that Google reported its revenue from search grew by 19% during Q1 2026—apparently thanks to its "AI experiences like AI Mode and AI Overviews"—it wouldn't make much business sense for any company to completely exile itself from the AI industry at this moment in time.

However, DuckDuckGo has endeavoured to prioritise user choice and privacy. Weinberg said earlier this week, "Everything you do in DuckDuckGo is private, we don’t collect search histories or chats, and nothing is used for AI training."

Keep up to date with the most important stories and the best deals, as picked by the PC Gamer team.

According to chief communications officer Kamyl Bazbaz, DuckDuckGo's own AI overviews remain popular—though so does the option to filter out AI-generated images from search results. He said, "People just want a choice." Amen to that.

Jess has been writing about games for over ten years, spending a significant chunk of that time working on print publications PLAY and Official PlayStation Magazine. When she’s not investigating all things hardware here, she's either constructing a passionate defence of a 7/10 game, daydreaming about her debut novel, or feeling wistful about the last time she chased some nerds around a field with an oversized foam sword.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

14. Interleaved Deltas

Source: https://mmapped.blog/posts/51-interleaved-deltas
Site: mmapped.blog
Author: Roman Kashitsyn
Published: 2026-05-22
HN activity: 37 points · 0 comments
Length: 2.5K words (~12 min read)
Language: en

✑2026-05-22dsa

Weave structure
Active revision set
Reconstructing revisions
Computing deltas
Extending weaves
Reconstructing deltas
Conclusion
Exercises

A weave has a reputation of one of the most reinvented data structures in history.
Victor Grishchenko, Mikhail Patrakeev, Chronofold: a data structure for versioned text

Progress is often viewed as a transition from simple to complex. Although individual systems do become more complex over time, long-term progress happens when new ideas and advances in hardware make simple designs feasible.

Think of the simplest version control system you can imagine. It probably stores project snapshots in a backup directory. Maybe it compresses files for efficiency. Add hashing for content addressing, and the sketch starts to resemble Git. I don’t mean this as an insult to Git; quite the opposite:

the structure of a Git repository is stunningly simple. It’s so simple in fact, that you’ll be surprised at the sophistication of the things you can do with it. But that’s the way the best code will always be: simple, solid premises out of which complex applications arise.
Wincent Colaiuta, A look back: Bram Cohen vs Linus Torvalds

The Source Code Control System (sccs), developed by Marc J. Rochkind in the early seventies, had to be more sophisticated. It operated on one file at a time and stored all its revisions in a data structure called interleaved deltas or weaves.

If Git felt like something I could have invented myself, weaves captivated and intimidated me for years. When I finally found time to work out the algorithms, the resources were scarce BitKeeper wiki offers a good introduction. Bram Cohen wrote a reference implementation, but I found it impenetrable. , so I published my study for future explorers. You can find the full source code at roman-kashitsyn/weaver.

Weave structure

A weave is a sequence of instructions for reconstructing file revisions. An instruction consists of a type and an operand.

Type Operand Meaning
Line Line index Output a line.
BeginInsert Version number Start a block of lines added in a version.
BeginDelete Version number Start a block of lines deleted in a version.
End Version number Close a block for a version.
⊕ The weave instruction type.

type InstructionType int

const (
	Line InstructionType = iota
	BeginInsert
	BeginDelete
	End
)

// Instruction is a weave instruction.
type Instruction struct {
	Type InstructionType
	// Payload contains the instruction payload.
	// For Line instructions, it's the line number.
	// For other instructions, it's the version ID.
	Payload int
}

func (i Instruction) Line() int {
	return i.Payload
}

func (i Instruction) VersionID() VersionID {
	return VersionID(i.Payload)
}


All line instructions must belong to an Insert or Delete block. The integer in the line instruction points into the global line pool. Using line indices instead of strings shrinks the weave and makes instructions uniform.

Unlike in xml or json, weave blocks can overlap. For example, if v1 adds lines 1 and 2, v2 appends lines 3–6, and v3 removes lines 2–4, then v3’s delta overlaps with deltas of the first two versions.

   ⎧ Insert v1
   ⎪ 1
Δ1 ⎨ Delete v3  ⎫
   ⎪ 2          ⎪
   ⎩ End v1     ⎪
   ⎧ Insert v2  ⎬ Δ3
   ⎪ 3          ⎪
   ⎪ 4          ⎪
Δ2 ⎨ End v3     ⎭
   ⎪ 5
   ⎪ 6
   ⎩ End v2


Versions in a weave depend on one another. In the example above, v3 depends on both v1 and v2 because it deletes lines that they introduced. The relationship between v1 and v2 is ambiguous: v1 could be v2’s parent, or they could be independent branches that v3 merged.

The weave alone is not enough to deduce dependencies between deltas. Most weave-based systems express these dependencies using activation sets.

Active revision set

sccs has hierarchical revision names (1.4 and 2.1, for example). When you check out a revision, the system uses heuristics to compute its activation set—the collection of deltas that contribute to the file content.

I think of activation sets as switches controlling streetlamps on a dark avenue. Flipping them reveals or hides parts of the weave.

For my experiment, I chose flat sequential revision numbering. Each revision can have one or more parents Revisions with multiple parents represent merge commits. . Parent revisions are numerically smaller than their children, so no version can be its own ancestor. Activating a revision also activates all of its parents, so computing the active set requires a graph traversal.
⊕ An active set is a collection of deltas that together make a file revision. We compute it by traversing the version graph.

type VersionID int

type ActiveSet []bool

func (s ActiveSet) Contains(v VersionID) bool {
	return v >= 0 && int(v) < len(s) && s[v]
}

func (s ActiveSet) Deactivate(v VersionID) ActiveSet {
	out := slices.Clone(s)
	out[v] = false
	return out
}

type Version struct {
	ID          VersionID
	Parents     []VersionID
	Author      string
	Description string
	Date        time.Time
}

func activeSetForVersion(versions []Version, v VersionID) ActiveSet {
	activeSet := make(ActiveSet, len(versions)+1)
	stack := []VersionID{v}
	for len(stack) > 0 {
		w := stack[len(stack)-1]
		stack = stack[:len(stack)-1]
		activeSet[w] = true
		for _, p := range versions[w-1].Parents {
			if !activeSet[p] {
				stack = append(stack, p)
			}
		}
	}
	return activeSet
}


We’re now ready to tackle the version reconstruction algorithm.

Reconstructing revisions

To reconstruct a revision, we compute its active set and scan the instruction list, keeping track of currently open blocks in a priority queue. If the instruction opens an insert block—for any revision—or a delete block for an active revision, we push it onto the queue. We copy lines if the block at the top of the priority queue is active (that’s why we keep inactive inserts in the queue).

We need a priority queue because blocks can overlap (see the Weave structure section for an example). If blocks were properly nested, a stack would suffice.

My implementation uses a sorted slice as a priority queue for brevity (heaps require a lot of boilerplate in Go).
⊕ The Reconstruct function recovers the lines of any file version stored in a weave.

var (
	ErrBadWeave = errors.New("E001: malformed weave")
	ErrBadDelta = errors.New("E002: bad delta")
)

// Reconstruct locates the lines enabled in the given version set.
// It returns the boolean mask of enabled "Line" instructions
// and the IDs of versions that introduced the enabled lines.
//
// Returns [ErrBadWeave] if the instructions aren't a valid weave.
func Reconstruct(
	instructions []Instruction,
	activeSet ActiveSet,
) (mask []bool, versions []VersionID, err error) {
	mask = make([]bool, len(instructions))
	openBlocksByVersion := make(map[VersionID]int)
	// activeBlocks are sorted by VersionID (ascending).
	var activeBlocks []Instruction
	activeBlock := func(v VersionID) (int, bool) {
		return slices.BinarySearchFunc(activeBlocks, v,
			func(instr Instruction, target VersionID) int {
				return cmp.Compare(instr.VersionID(), target)
			})
	}

	for offset, instr := range instructions {
		switch instr.Type {
		case Line:
			if len(activeBlocks) == 0 {
				return nil, nil, ErrBadWeave
			}
			top := activeBlocks[len(activeBlocks)-1]
			v := top.VersionID()
			if activeSet.Contains(v) && top.Type == BeginInsert {
				mask[offset] = true
				versions = append(versions, v)
			}
		case BeginInsert, BeginDelete:
			v := instr.VersionID()
			if _, ok := openBlocksByVersion[v]; ok {
				return nil, nil, ErrBadWeave
			}
			if instr.Type == BeginInsert || activeSet.Contains(v) {
				at, _ := activeBlock(v)
				activeBlocks = slices.Insert(activeBlocks, at, instr)
			}
			openBlocksByVersion[v] = offset
		case End:
			v := instr.VersionID()
			if _, ok := openBlocksByVersion[v]; !ok {
				return nil, nil, ErrBadWeave
			}
			at, found := activeBlock(v)
			if found {
				activeBlocks = slices.Delete(activeBlocks, at, at+1)
			}
			delete(openBlocksByVersion, v)
		default:
			return nil, nil, ErrBadWeave
		}
	}
	if len(openBlocksByVersion) > 0 {
		return nil, nil, ErrBadWeave
	}
	return mask, versions, nil
}


Returning the bit mask of enabled line instructions (instead of their contents) simplifies many operations, including weave extension and delta reconstruction.

Before we can start adding changes to weaves, we need diffs.

Computing deltas

Given two sequences of items, we want to find a transformation that turns the first sequence into the second and uses the fewest steps.

The transformation is a sequence of deltas (also known as hunks) that specify an action (Insert, Delete, or Keep) and the items it acts upon. I called such a transformation a diff script.

The diff algorithm I’m most familiar with is the lcs algorithm See, for example, the first section of An Algorithm for Differential File Comparison by J. W. Hunt and M. D. McIlroy. . It computes an optimal diff script in two stages:

Use dynamic programming to build the lcs table. The lcs[i][j] entry is the length of a longest common subsequence of a[i:] and b[j:]. Fill the table back-to-front in both dimensions.
Traverse the lcs table to recover the actions, moving toward lcs increase when a and b don’t align.
⊕ The DiffScript function computes an optimal edit script for two sequences of integers.

type Action int

const (
	Insert Action = iota
	Delete
	Keep
)

type Delta struct {
	Action Action
	Items  []int
}

func appendDelta(script []Delta, action Action, item int) []Delta {
	n := len(script)
	if n > 0 && script[n-1].Action == action {
		script[n-1].Items = append(script[n-1].Items, item)
		return script
	}
	return append(script, Delta{Action: action, Items: []int{item}})
}

// DiffScript computes the optimal edit script for turning a into b.
func DiffScript(a, b []int) (script []Delta) {
	n, m := len(a), len(b)

	// Build a table of lengths of LCS(a[i:], b[j:]).
	lcs := make([][]int, n+1)
	for i := range lcs {
		lcs[i] = make([]int, m+1)
	}
	for i := range slices.Backward(a) {
		for j := range slices.Backward(b) {
			if a[i] == b[j] {
				lcs[i][j] = 1 + lcs[i+1][j+1]
			} else {
				lcs[i][j] = max(lcs[i+1][j], lcs[i][j+1])
			}
		}
	}

	// Traverse the LCS table and reconstruct the optimal edits.
	for i, j := 0, 0; i < n || j < m; {
		switch {
		case i < n && j < m && a[i] == b[j]:
			script = appendDelta(script, Keep, a[i])
			i++
			j++
		case i < n && (j == m || lcs[i+1][j] >= lcs[i][j+1]):
			script = appendDelta(script, Delete, a[i])
			i++
		default:
			script = appendDelta(script, Insert, b[j])
			j++
		}
	}

	return script
}


A practical system would use Myers diff or Bram Cohen’s patience diff. James Coglan, the author of Building Git, wrote a series of blog posts explaining Myers diff and patience diff in great detail.

Now that we have deltas, let’s add them to a weave.

Extending weaves

The Interleave function takes a weave and a version within that weave (identified by an active set) and incorporates new deltas, producing a new weave.

It calls the Reconstruct function to annotate each active line in the weave and then traverses the instructions and deltas in parallel, adding new instructions that match delta actions. The parallel loop body is the following procedure:

Copy unmarked instructions to the output as is.
Upon finding the first marked line, stop and consult the delta action.
If the action is Insert, append its items as lines to the output, surrounding them by a BeginInsert/End block.
If the action is Delete, open a BeginDelete block, copy the input stream as long as its active lines match the delta items, then close the block.
If the action is Keep, copy the input until all items have appeared as active lines.
⊕ The Interleave function adds new deltas to a weave.

// Interleave adds new deltas to a weave.
//
// Returns [ErrBadWeave] if the instructions aren't a valid weave.
// Returns [ErrBadDelta] if the deltas don't apply cleanly.
func Interleave(
	instructions []Instruction,
	activeSet ActiveSet,
	deltas []Delta,
	v VersionID,
) (out []Instruction, err error) {
	mask, _, err := Reconstruct(instructions, activeSet)
	if err != nil {
		return nil, err
	}

	i, j, n, m := 0, 0, len(instructions), len(deltas)

	// consumeLines outputs instructions
	// until it sees all expected lines.
	consumeLines := func(expected []int) error {
		skipped := 0
		for skipped < len(expected) {
			if i >= n {
				return ErrBadDelta
			}
			out = append(out, instructions[i])
			if mask[i] {
				if expected[skipped] != instructions[i].Line() {
					return ErrBadDelta
				}
				skipped++
			}
			i++
		}
		return nil
	}

	for i < n || j < m {
		for i < n && !mask[i] { 
			out = append(out, instructions[i])
			i++
		}
		if j < m {
			delta := deltas[j]
			switch delta.Action { 
			case Insert: 
				out = append(out, Instruction{BeginInsert, int(v)})
				for _, item := range delta.Items {
					out = append(out, Instruction{Line, item})
				}
				out = append(out, Instruction{End, int(v)})
			case Delete: 
				out = append(out, Instruction{BeginDelete, int(v)})
				if err := consumeLines(delta.Items); err != nil {
					return nil, err
				}
				out = append(out, Instruction{End, int(v)})
			case Keep: 
				if err := consumeLines(delta.Items); err != nil {
					return nil, err
				}
			}
			j++
		} else if i < n {
			return nil, ErrBadDelta
		}
	}
	return out, nil
}


Now, we can recover any version stored in a weave and detect and apply changes. The last missing piece is extracting deltas.

Reconstructing deltas

How do we know what changed in version ? We could recover and its predecessor and diff the outputs, but it would be wasteful, given that the weave already stores deltas. A more direct approach is to use the bit masks returned by the Reconstruct function to detect lines that become inactive if we deactivate .
⊕ The ReconstructDelta function diffs two active revision sets.

// ReconstructDelta extracts the changes between two active version sets.
func ReconstructDelta(
	instructions []Instruction,
	beforeSet, afterSet ActiveSet,
) (deltas []Delta, err error) {
	before, _, err := Reconstruct(instructions, beforeSet)
	if err != nil {
		return nil, err
	}
	after, _, err := Reconstruct(instructions, afterSet)
	if err != nil {
		return nil, err
	}

	for i, instr := range instructions {
		if instr.Type != Line {
			continue
		}
		switch {
		case before[i] && after[i]:
			deltas = appendDelta(deltas, Keep, instr.Line())
		case !before[i] && after[i]:
			deltas = appendDelta(deltas, Insert, instr.Line())
		case before[i] && !after[i]:
			deltas = appendDelta(deltas, Delete, instr.Line())
		}
	}
	return deltas, nil
}


ReconstructDelta can compute deltas between any two versions. If we need the delta of a particular version , we diff and .

vSet := activeSetForVersion(versions, v)
vDelta, err := ReconstructDelta(instructions, vSet.Deactivate(v), vSet)


Now we have enough machinery to build a simple version control system that can support most of sccs’s features.

Conclusion

Nobody in their right mind would use sccs today, yet it shaped modern software as few systems did. Marc J. Rochkind’s paper won the first icse Most Influential Paper Award in 1989, but as David Parnas notedMarc J. Rochkind, A Retrospective on the Source Code Control System, the system was influential, but the paper itself didn’t matter. What mattered most was the idea that software evolution can and should be tracked.

Git is ubiquitous today, and its connection to sccs is more than ideological. Git borrowed many ideas from BitKeeper, a distributed version control system that powered Linux kernel development between 2002 and 2005. BitKeeper, in turn, was a direct descendant of sccs and used weaves to track changes.

Conflict-free Replicated Data Types and the Pijul version control system employ data structures that are strikingly similar to weaves because their history representation makes conflicts easier to resolve Ironically, sccs didn’t support merges. .

Weaves always return.

Exercises

Explain why Reconstruct pushes inactive BeginInsert instructions onto the queue but ignores inactive BeginDelete instructions.
Assemble weave algorithms into a simple single-file version control system.
Extend the system to detect history file corruptions.
Implement two-way merge for any two versions.
Extend the system to handle repositories, not just single files.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

15. Incident with Pull Requests, Issues, Git Operations and API Requests

Source: https://www.githubstatus.com/incidents/xy1tt3hs572m
Site: githubstatus.com
Submitter: maxnoe (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-27 12:15 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 271 points · 194 comments
Length: 95 words (~1 min read)
Language: en

Resolved

This incident has been resolved. Thank you for your patience and understanding as we addressed this issue. A detailed root cause analysis will be shared as soon as it is available.

Posted May 27, 2026 - 13:16 UTC

Update

We're continuing to investigate degraded performance of Git operations, Issues and Pull requests.

Posted May 27, 2026 - 12:54 UTC

Investigating

We are investigating reports of degraded performance for API Requests, Git Operations, Issues and Pull Requests

Posted May 27, 2026 - 12:10 UTC

This incident affected: Git Operations, API Requests, Issues, and Pull Requests.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

16. Go: Support for Generic Methods

Source: https://github.com/golang/go/issues/77273
Site: GitHub
Author: griesemer
Published: 2026-01-22
HN activity: 204 points · 151 comments
Length: 2.2K words (~10 min read)
Language: en

Proposal: Generic Methods for Go

A change of view.

Background

For clarity, in the following we use the term concrete method (or just method when the context is clear) to describe a non-interface method declared like a function but with a receiver; and we use the term interface method to describe the name and signature of a method of an interface.

Per the current spec, a concrete method is a function with a receiver. Syntactically this is not quite true: while functions can be generic, methods cannot. They cannot declare new type parameters themselves; but they can have a receiver of a generic type (and thus have method-local names for the type parameters of the receiver type).

A reason for this discrepancy is that we have historically viewed the primary role of methods as a means to implement an interface: permitting type parameters on concrete methods would imply that we must also permit type parameters on interface methods. Go doesn't support such generic interface methods because we don't know how to implement (calls of) them, or at least we don't know how to implement them efficiently. Specifically, because Go doesn't require a concrete type to declare the interfaces it implements, and instead this is a dynamic property, it cannot be known at compile time which of the infinite possible instantiations of concrete methods will be needed at run time. This shortcoming has long been known and was discussed at length in the original Type Parameters Proposal.

But concrete methods are not just a means for implementing interfaces. A method is a function associated with a type, and accessed through the namespace of that type. Therefore methods are useful for organizing code even if they don't ever implement an interface. Furthermore there is a syntactic benefit: x.a().b().c() may naturally be read left to right, whereas c(b(a(x))) is evaluated inside out. Both these aspects of methods are also well known.

For these reasons, Go users have requested generic methods for a long time and the idea is widely popular. There are at least two proposals filed on the issue tracker:

#49085 (Allow type parameters in methods, Oct. 2021, with > 900 positive emojis)
#50981 (Add generics to methods, Feb. 2022)

So far we have resisted adding generic concrete methods because it always implied that we also needed generic interface methods. The Go FAQ even states that "we do not anticipate that Go will ever add generic methods". Perhaps a change of view is in order: concrete methods are a language feature that is useful in itself, irrespective of interfaces. If a concrete method is a function with a receiver, a generic concrete method can be a generic function with a receiver. The fact that such methods may not be invoked via an interface is an orthogonal aspect: if an interface syntactically can’t include a method with type parameters, then a generic concrete method naturally plays no role in satisfying that interface because there can’t be an interface method with matching type parameters.

Note that the original Type Parameters Proposal discussed this alternative view as well, as expressed in the following paragraph:

"Or, we could decide that parameterized methods do not, in fact, implement interfaces, but then it's much less clear why we need methods at all. If we disregard interfaces, any parameterized method can be implemented as a parameterized function."

We may have reached some clarity on this point: generic concrete methods are useful by themselves, even if they don't implement interface methods.

Proposal

We propose that concrete method declarations should look exactly like function declarations, but with receivers. Specifically, the syntax of a method declaration should accept type parameters as do function declarations. The syntax of function declarations is as follows:

FunctionDecl = "func" FunctionName [ TypeParameters ] Signature [ FunctionBody ] .

The syntax of method declarations should be changed from (old):

MethodDecl = "func" Receiver MethodName Signature [ FunctionBody ] .

to (new):

MethodDecl = "func" Receiver MethodName [ TypeParameters ] Signature [ FunctionBody ] .

Alternatively, to the same effect, the syntax can express directly what we say in prose: a method (declaration) is a function (declaration) with a receiver, and combine the two productions. This removes a syntax production and emphasizes the similarities:

FunctionDecl = "func" [ Receiver ] identifier [ TypeParameters ] Signature [ FunctionBody ] .

The scope of an identifier denoting a type parameter of a generic method begins after the name of the method and ends at the end of the method body. This matches existing rules for type parameters of functions and method receivers. Constraints for method type parameters may refer to type parameters declared with the method receiver because they are in scope.

Calling a generic concrete method works as expected: either, type arguments are provided as needed, or type inference determines any missing type arguments, exactly like for generic function calls.

Method expressions and method values continue to work as expected: if the method is generic, the resulting function is generic and the existing rules for using generic functions apply.

The grammar will need a small adjustment: currently type arguments may only be supplied to operand names which are (possibly package-qualified) identifiers for generic functions and types. Per the syntax for operands (old):

Operand     = Literal | OperandName [ TypeArgs ] | "(" Expression ")" .  
…  
OperandName = identifier | QualifiedIdent .  
TypeArgs    = "[" TypeList [ "," ] "]" .

Methods can be attached to arbitrary user-defined types, and values of such types may be denoted by various expressions, not just qualified identifiers. To permit instantiation of generic methods, type arguments must move from the syntax for operands to the syntax for primary expressions, resulting in the updated productions (new):

Operand     = Literal | OperandName | "(" Expression ")" .

PrimaryExpr = Operand |
              Conversion |
              MethodExpr |
              PrimaryExpr Selector |
              PrimaryExpr Index |
              PrimaryExpr Slice |
              PrimaryExpr TypeAssertion |
              PrimaryExpr Arguments |
              PrimaryExpr TypeArgs .

(Notably, type arguments are already parsed as part of primary expressions in the current implementation. This is necessary because an instantiation such as T[int] and an index expression a[i] are syntactically indistinguishable. In the language specification, the syntactic overlap between these two is maintained solely for the sake of documentation.)

Methods of interfaces are not changed. Importantly, a generic concrete method does not match against an interface method with the same name and signature because the interface method syntactically cannot have matching type parameters.

Generic methods also won't be accessible via reflection (by name or index) for the same reason that uninstantiated generic functions are not accessible: the reflect package doesn't have a mechanism to instantiate a generic value or type (and it is unclear how one would provide such a mechanism).

This is the entirety of the proposal.

Examples

Given a (non-interface) receiver base type S, we may associate a generic method m with it:

type S struct { … }  
func (*S) m[P any](x P) { … }

Given a variable s of type S (or a value of type *S), we can call m as follows:

var s S  
s.m[int](42)    // explicit type argument int  
s.m(x)          // type argument P is inferred from x

A receiver base type may itself be generic:

type G[P any] struct{ … }  
func (*G[P]) m[Q any](x Q) { … }

Calling m requires a variable whose type is an instantiation of G, but there is no other difference in the way m is called.

An interface I with a method m:

type I interface {  
	m(string)  
}

may be implemented by a suitably instantiated generic type G (this is true in current Go):

type G[P any] struct{ … }  
func (G[P]) m(P) { … }

var g G[string]  
var _ I = g		// valid because G[string].m has signature m(string) which matches m(string) of I

But I is not implemented by a type H with a generic method m:

type H struct{ … }  
func (H) m[P any](P) { … }

var h H  
var _ I = h		// invalid because H.m has signature m[P any](P) which doesn't match m(string) of I

Here's another, less abstract example, related to the Go library. A Reader type with a generic Read method:

type Reader struct{ … }  
func (*Reader) Read[E any]([]E) (int, error) { … }

does not implement io.Reader, even though it might if there were some way to instantiate the method as (*Reader).Read[byte] (which there is not, and we are not proposing it).

Method expressions (and method values) work as expected. Given the Reader type from above, the method expression Reader.Read produces a generic function with type parameters and signature:

[E any](*Reader, []E) (int, error)

If the type itself is generic, it must be instantiated (per existing Go rules for generic types) before it can be used in a method expression. For instance, given a generic List type with a generic formatting method format:

type List[E any] struct { … }  
func (*List[E]) format[F any](E, F) string { … }

the method expression List[string].format will result in a function with type parameters and signature

[F any](string, F) string

In particular, List.format is not a valid method expression (List is not instantiated), nor does it produce the generic function signature

[E any, F any](E, F) string	// not the signature of List.format

Implementation

Specification

The change to the language specification is small and fully backward-compatible. The syntax changes have been outlined above. The corresponding prose changes are similarly straightforward.

Whenever there is a language change, updating the specification is a tiny part of the work needed to get documentation updated in general. This includes existing documents traditionally maintained by the Go team (which we plan to keep fresh as much as possible), to 3P documentation beyond our control (external blog post, articles, books, etc.). These will become partly out of date and may or may not be updated, but that is not avoidable if we want to make changes to the language.

Compiler

The parser already accepts type parameters for methods for robustness but complains with an error. Removing that error is a trivial change. The parser also already handles index expressions and instantiations together. If any changes are needed at all, they will be minimal. The type checker will need various adjustments, most likely involving the removal of restrictions, the details of which will only become apparent by doing the actual work.

The compiler back-end changes are likely more significant. That said, method calls via non-interface receivers can be resolved statically (at compile time): because the type of the receiver is not an interface, its type is statically known, and thus the called method is also statically known. Conceptually, such method calls can be rewritten into function calls. If the method itself is generic, the method call can be rewritten into a call of a corresponding generic function.

For instance, given the type G, method m, and instance x of G:

type G[P any] struct{ … }  
func (G[P]) m[Q any](x Q) { … }

var g G[string]

the method call

var s string  
g.m(s)

can be translated into a function call f(s) of the generic function

func f[Q any](g G[string], x Q) {  
	G[string].m[Q](g, x)		// using a call of method expression G[string].m  
}

or

func f[Q any](g G[string], x Q) {  
	g.m[Q](x)			// using a call of method value g.m[Q]  
}

This is not to say that an implementation will be trivial. But the principal translation mechanism is understood.

The import/export data format will need to be updated to allow for type parameters on methods. This is likely the most disruptive change because of the many different exporters and importers that exist, some of which are used for language tools, reside in different repositories, and all must remain in sync with the compiler's export format. Carefully staged updates are needed in order to not break existing infrastructure. We have done import/export data format changes in the past, and while tedious, they can be done.

Libraries and tools

No change of the existing libraries is required, but future (versions of these) libraries may want to use generic methods.

The impact on tools may be significant as they will need to handle the new language feature. The go/types API's Signature type already provides accessors for receiver and ordinary type parameters, so it's possible that no API changes are needed there, but go/types clients cannot rely on the (current) fact that only one of type parameter lists is present. Judging from past experience, it may take one or two release cycles for all tools to catch up. It is difficult to judge the amount work involved without actually doing the work.

Other considerations

This proposal adds a new feature to the language by removing a restriction; thus it is fully backward-compatible with existing Go. Importantly, it also doesn't preclude the implementation of generic interface methods at some point, should we find an acceptable implementation solution that doesn't impose a cost when the feature is not used.

Generic functions and types make it possible to write more complex code and adding generic methods will further increase that capability. But used appropriately, generic methods can simplify and generalize situations where currently more complex work-arounds are needed (see #49085 for an example).

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

17. Google employee charged with $1M Polymarket insider trading bet on search term

Source: https://www.cnbc.com/2026/05/27/google-employee-polymarket-insider-trading.html
Site: CNBC
Author: Davis Giangiulio
Published: 2026-05-27
HN activity: 44 points · 16 comments
Length: 535 words (~3 min read)
Language: en

Signage at the Situation Room by Polymarket pop-up bar in Washington, DC, US, on Friday, March 20, 2026.

Graeme Sloan | Bloomberg | Getty Images

Federal prosecutors charged a Google employee with fraud on Wednesday, alleging that he made $1.2 million off of bets using insider information on Polymarket.

Prosecutors claim that Michele Spagnuolo, a staff information security engineer at Google, used confidential information to place trades correctly betting that singer d4vd would be Google's most searched person in 2025.

Spagnuolo has been charged with money laundering, commodities fraud and wire fraud. The complaint, filed in the Southern District of New York, was unsealed on Wednesday.

ABC News first reported on the complaint. Spagnuolo was arrested Wednesday morning in New York, ABC reported.

"Spagnuolo had access to Google's internal data systems, including a particular Google internal software tool that provided him access to confidential, nonpublic Year in Search data," the prosecutors said in their complaint.

Some observers of the Polymarket platform flagged the user "AlphaRaccoon" back in December for suspicious trades on the most searched person contracts. The complaint Wednesday said that Spagnuolo was the person behind that account.

"Google officially and publicly announced its Year in Search 2025 results on or about December 4, 2025. Soon after it did so, Spagnuolo's AlphaRaccoon account, profited approximately $1.2 million on his Google Year in Search 2025-related bets," the complaint said.

Spagnuolo appeared before a federal magistrate judge Wednesday, He did not enter a plea and was released on a $2.25 million bond, ABC reported.

"We're working with law enforcement on their investigation," Google said in a statement. "The employee accessed our marketing material using a tool available to all employees, but using such confidential information to place bets is a serious breach of our policies."

"We've placed the employee on leave and will take the appropriate action," the company added.

"Polymarket worked closely with the U.S. Attorney's Office for the Southern District of New York and the CFTC, and is the only prediction platform to date whose cooperation has led to insider trading charges in the United States," a Polymarket spokesperson said in a statement. "We are committed to maintaining accurate, fair, and transparent markets as well as enforcing our rules and working with our regulators and law enforcement."

Spagnuolo is also facing a civil case from the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, where he's charged with insider trading. The complaint detailed that Spagnuolo correctly predicted the outcomes of a slew of other search markets, including contracts like "Will Zohran Mamdani rank in the Top 5 most searched" and "Will Squid Game be the #1 searched TV show."

"Spagnuolo misappropriated the material Confidential Information by knowingly or recklessly using it to trade the 2025 Year in Search List Contracts in breach of his duties of trust and confidentiality," the CFTC complaint alleged.

The federal complaint marks the second high-profile insider trading case on Polymarket in just over a month.

In April, then-active U.S. Army Special Forces master sergeant Gannon Ken Van Dyke was arrested over charges that he used classified information to bet on contracts related to the U.S. operation to capture Venezuela President Nicolás Maduro. Prosecutors said Van Dyke made more than $400,000 off his trades.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

18. Gemini, Gophers, and Fingers. Oh My Alternative Internets Beyond HTTPS

Source: https://brennan.day/gemini-gophers-and-fingers-oh-my-alternative-internets-beyond-https/
Site: brennan.day
Author: Brennan Kenneth Brown
Published: 2026-05-26
HN activity: 97 points · 48 comments
Length: 2.6K words (~12 min read)
Language: en

In my last post, I announced that I created a bash tool for easier blogging in the terminal, inspired by the tildeverse. Today, I want to continue my discussion on visions of alternative Internets that are already being created.

I want to talk about Uniform Resource Identifier (URI) schemes.

Sounds boring, right? Or at least complicated, but it really isn't. URIs are just the protocols set for browsing the Internet. There are many, some official (as per the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority) and some unofficial.

One of the biggest draws of the IndieWeb for me is the decentralization of the Internet. The entire point is to stop the erosion of the Internet from being a handful of bad-faith, extractive corporate social media platforms.

But at the end of the day, we're still all using the same Internet, aren't we? The same handful of browsers, the same frameworks and engines. We can take this a step further, and we can interface with the Internet in ways that don't involve going to websites that start with https://

The Colour of What We Call the Internet

Chrome alone controls roughly 73% of global desktop browser market share. If you add in Edge, Brave, Opera, Vivaldi, which all are built on Google's Chromium engine, that accounts for over 80% of desktop browsing worldwide. Mozilla, which still maintains one of the only independent rendering engines (Gecko), is the only viable competitor. Everything else is Blink and Google.

More and more, the webdevs of the world test and develop for Chrome only. Agriculture teaches us how dangerous and fragile monocultures like this are.

It doesn't need to be this way. https:// is not the only way to connect and interface with the Internet. Some that you may know are ftp:// for file transfers, mailto: for email composition, ssh:// for secure shell access, irc:// for Internet Relay Chat, or magnet: for peer-to-peer downloads. The majority of Internet browsers do not play nicely even with these protocols, handing them off to other applications.

But what I want to write about today are three protocols that have their own ecosystems, their own communities, and their own aesthetics. finger://, gopher://, and gemini://. Two predate the World Wide Web entirely, but one was created in 2019, the same year the first black hole photograph circled the planet. None of them require a GUI. None of them require JavaScript. All three of them run in a terminal.

Finger (1971)

Let me start with the deep past, when the ARPANET was less than two years old. In 1971, users wanted to know who else was logged into their small networks, and where they were. The existing tool, called WHO, gave a list of user IDs and terminal line numbers which was cryptic, technical, readable only if you already knew what you were looking at. Researcher Les Earnest at the Stanford Artificial Intelligence Laboratory watched people literally run their fingers down the WHO printout, scanning for recognizable names. He named his new program after that gesture.

The finger daemon runs on TCP port 79, serving a small, human-readable file about you. Your name. Your email. Whether you're logged in. And the contents of two files: .plan and .project.

The .plan file was originally meant to contain a user's current and future plans, a professional status update before status updates existed. But as the informal culture of the early Internet evolved, .plan files became random musings, personal manifestos, and links to things you were thinking about. A broadcast of who you were to anyone who cared to ask. In ways, it was the first social media profile.

I have a .plan file in my tilde home directory right now. I'm not going to tell you what it says, for the point is you have to go looking. finger brennan@omg.lol and you'll find out what I'm working on right now. And yes, of course the verb "to finger someone," is designed to make you snicker.

It's opt-in, low-infrastructure presence. A plain text file and a TCP connection.

Bombadillo, the terminal-based non-web browser I'll mention more below, supports Finger natively alongside Gopher and Gemini. You can run your own finger server on any Linux machine. The protocol is so simple it fits in your head.

Gopher (1991)

Now let's move forward twenty years, to another problem at another university.

In 1991, the University of Minnesota wanted a campus-wide information system. The project became, as these things do, a design-by-committee monstrosity. A group of programmers, Mark McCahill, Farhad Anklesaria, Paul Lindner, Daniel Torrey, and Bob Alberti, decided to go around the committee entirely and built something themselves on personal computers rather than a mainframe, and see if they could have a working prototype done before the next meeting. They released the code without official approval. The committee initially rejected it, and then the rest of the Internet found it.

Paul Lindner, dubbed the Gopher Dude for his evangelism, long metal-head hair and all—signed his emails with Babes in Toyland lyrics. Programmer Robert Alberti later recalled that "[Gopher] was the first viral software. All these people started calling the University and pestering the president and other administrators, saying, 'This Gopher thing is great, when are you going to release a new version?' And the administrators said, 'What are you talking about?'" The administration unsurprisingly reversed their decision and gave the project their blessing shortly after.

The name is a triple pun. The University of Minnesota's mascot is the Golden Gopher; "gopher" evokes the act of burrowing; and it's a play on "go-fer," an errand-runner who fetches things on request. The protocol is a hierarchical menu system, you navigate a tree of directories and documents. It's faster and more simple than FTP. For a moment in 1991 and 1992, Gopher and the World Wide Web competed as genuine equals. Two totally different visions of how to organize human knowledge on a global network.

Gopher lost. In 1993, the University of Minnesota announced it would start charging a licensing fee to commercial users. Tim Berners-Lee had declared HTTP and HTML completely free and open, with no licensing attached, ever. The press started describing Gopher as an obsolete predecessor rather than a living alternative. Within a couple of years, the race was over because of one institutional decision about money.

But, Gopher isn't actually dead. It got turned into a newt, but then got better! Here are the stats over the past twenty years, as per Veronica2 Gopher search index:

Index Date Gopher Servers Unique Selectors
19 March 2007 86 740,000
3 January 2008 148 1,220,665
2012 approx. 160 approx. 2,500,000
November 2014 144 approx. 3,000,000
15 October 2015 144 3,314,158
25 April 2016 137 4,396,061
15 August 2017 146 5,176,602
May 2018 260 approx. 3,700,000
10 December 2018 297 3,946,750
May 2019 320 approx. 4,200,000
January 2020 395 approx. 4,500,000
18 November 2020 358 5,973,552
18 October 2021 343 5,294,599
11 October 2022 333 5,098,733
17 February 2024 323 5,113,957
19 June 2025 296 5,113,382
29 August 2025 432 5,254,158
28 January 2026 411 5,856,111

In January 2026, there were 411 active Gopher servers serving nearly six million unique selectors. Gopher is maintained by people who choose it, not being propped up by corporate interest backing whatsoever.

I maintain my own gopherhole manually with a shell script, gopher-build.sh, that lives in my bin/ directory. Navigating it in a terminal feels like handling a card catalogue.

Gemini (2019)

Project Gemini was started in June 2019 by a pseudonymous developer known as Solderpunk. The name is a reference to NASA's Project Gemini, the human spaceflight program conducted between 1964 and 1966, and the protocol runs on port 1965 to honour that.

It has nothing to do with Google's AI, or the cryptocurrency exchange. It's named after part of the space program between Mercury and Apollo, the middle step, the bridge. What made the moon landing possible.

Solderpunk designed Gemini as a direct response to watching more and more people rediscover Gopher, finding a refuge from what the web had become. But Gopher, with its age, has a significant problem: no encryption. Particularly after Edward Snowden's 2013 revelations about mass surveillance, running an unencrypted protocol started to feel more and more like bad practice. Gemini's answer is to make TLS encryption mandatory for all Gemini capsules.

The Gemini specification fits in a few pages. Requests are a single URL terminated by a line break. Responses include a two-digit status code, a content type, and the data. That's it. There are no cookies, no tracking pixels, no third-party resources, no behavioral analytics. A Gemini capsule cannot phone home and surveil you. There's no JavaScript or cookies or tracking pixels or 3rd-party resources or any other bullshit.

Gemtext, Gemini's native document format, is line-oriented. The first three characters of a line determine its type: a heading, a link, a list item, a quote, a preformatted block, or body text. There's no nesting, inline formatting or images.

You can't use bold for emphasis or italicize a word for tone. Writing is stripped down to its skeleton, and I think that forces you to be a better writer.

I've been using Gemini for a while through Smol Pub, a brutally simple blogging platform which publishes your posts at both https:// and gemini:// simultaneously. For only $5, you have a lifetime license to the platform, which I think is an amazing deal! The math of the small web is different from the math of the attention economy.

Because I work primarily in Markdown, I built a Markdown to Gemtext converter, which is a great way to get started. You can read my write-up about the project on my smol pub.

Blogging? More Like Gemlogs and Phlogs!

As I wrote about in my previous post, ttbp, the tilde.town blogging platform, nicknamed FEELS is one of my favourite ways to blog. You run it in the terminal, opening your text editor of choice to a plain text file. You write, then save and quit. The entry propagates automatically to a global feels list, and publishes to both HTML and Gopher simultaneously.

I have a public_gopher/feels directory right now that's synced to my gopherhole. I think the naming is important, as this isn't content or articles, they're called feels. It's people writing mundane journal entries, poetry, and reflections. Emotional and human. Electric intimacy of strangers sharing inner lives with anyone patient enough to look.

A phlog (a portmanteau of "Gopher" and "blog") is a blog maintained in Gopherspace, updated via a gophermap. A gemlog is the same thing for Gemini. My gemlogs/ directory has its own feed and indexor.

Gemlogs follow the Gemini subscription convention, which means it's designed to be subscribable without needing RSS or Atom. Each entry is formatted as:

=> /posts/YYYY-MM-DD-title.gmi YYYY-MM-DD Post title

The date format (YYYY-MM-DD) at the start of the link label allows Gemini clients to automatically detect and subscribe to new posts. The simple, human-readable format works great for this kind of small-scale personal publishing.

A Gift to Old Hardware

Something important about these protocols that I think is underlooked is that, due to their simplicity, all you need is the terminal to access and create on them, no GUI needed at all. This vastly lowers the hardware requirements compared to the mainstream Internet browser.

Loading a modern website built with React (or any of its cousins) requires your browser to download a JavaScript bundle, parse it, execute it, render a virtual DOM, reconcile that DOM with the real one, and then do it all again whenever state changes.

A modern Chromium-based browser uses ~2 GB of RAM in normal operation. NASA's Gemini Guidance Computer had 20kb. The machines required to run these browsers have only been getting more expensive and more energy-intensive to manufacture every year.

On the other hand, a Gemini capsule in Bombadillo requires a terminal emulator, a network connection, and a TLS library. The entire browser is a few megabytes. This will run on a machine from 2005.

This is important for the mountain of electronics we have landfilled. A laptop from 2008 no longer able to run Chrome can run Bombadillo, accessing the six million documents in Gopherspace and browsing thousands of Gemini capsules.

These protocols can run on virtually anything, they meet you where you are.

Who gets to participate in an Internet that requires an increasingly expensive, frequently-replaced device to use in any meaningful way? You still need a network connection and terminal, sure, but the hardware threshold drops dramatically.

The Small Web and Solarpunk

Solderpunk's pseudonym instantly reminded me of Solarpunk, a speculative fiction genre and a real-world political and aesthetic movement. Cyberpunk imagines a future of neon-soaked corporate dystopia and steampunk looks backward to industrial romanticism, but solarpunk imagines forward—toward decentralized communities, renewable energy, mutual aid, technology that serves life rather than exploiting. The symbol is a half-gear for technology compatible with nature, and a sun for the infinite potential of the open imagination. The movement began in sci-fi and migrated into architecture, gardening, political organizing, and Internet culture.

Solarpunk doesn't worship technology, nor demonize it. Rather, solarpunk asks how we can use technology to improve humanity. It's interested in decentralized infrastructure, community engagement, and a DIY attitude. It distrusts monocultures, suspicious of scale for scale's sake, asking: who benefits from technology, and at what expense?

This is what the small web asks. Gemini was created by someone who named themselves after the act of soldering—the work of connection with heat and metal. Bombadillo was developed by sloum on tildegit, a fellow tildeverse resident. The tildeverse itself runs on the philosophy that public-access Unix servers are a commons you can have a home on the Internet without paying a corporation. Without surrendering your data or being the product.

I have a .botany/ directory on tilde.town, a terminal plant-growing game. A small, shared, pixelated garden where tilde.town residents tend to ASCII plants, growing when you're logged in and paying attention.

It's stuff like that, you know?

The alternative Internet is not separate from the struggle for a better world. We learn to build intentionally, creating for people. Not for social currency or scale or profit. For care. There's no way to have a pipeline for data harvesting or intrusive advertising on these alternative protocols.

The only way any of these projects continue being maintained and grow is by us using them and contributing to their developers. I believe that now more than ever we need to be imaginative and play with the Internet. There are so many different ways to use our connection to the entire world we haven't even thought about yet.

Want to get started? For a catalog of Gemini clients, servers, and tools across every programming language, the awesome-gemini list on GitHub is great.

For accessing these protocols, Bombadillo is a versatile terminal option, handling Gopher, Gemini, and Finger in a single interface with Vim-style keybindings.

Offpunk is another excellent, offline-first command-line browser worth knowing about. It handles the Web, Gemini, Gopher, and RSS feeds all from your terminal, with a focus on working offline and syncing content for later reading. Thanks to Candy for the tip on that one!

For a GUI browser, Lagrange is my personal favourite.

If you want to browse Gemini from a web browser first, proxies at portal.mozz.us and proxy.vulpes.one will translate Gemini capsules into HTTP. My own Markdown to Gemtext converter is free to use if you want to bring existing writing into Geminispace easily.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

19. Canada to order military plane fleet from Sweden in shift from US suppliers

Source: https://www.theguardian.com/world/2026/may/27/canada-sweden-saab-globaleye-aircraft
Site: The Guardian
Author: Guardian staff reporter
Published: 2026-05-27
HN activity: 440 points · 319 comments
Length: 405 words (~2 min read)
Language: en

Canada has announced plans to buy a fleet of early warning planes from Sweden’s Saab rather than a competing option from Boeing, as the country seeks to reduce reliance on US defense firms.

Mark Carney, the prime minister, said on Wednesday that Canada would opt for Saab’s GlobalEye, which is based on Bombardier’s Global 6500 jet. Boeing’s E-7 Wedgetail plane – which has suffered from delays and cost overruns – had also been in contention.

“With a suite of advanced sensors and mission systems, Saab’s GlobalEye will be a key resource for the Canadian armed forces to detect and deter threats across the Arctic,” Carney told a defense conference in Ottawa.

The prime minister pledged in March that Canada would take full responsibility for protecting its vast Arctic territory, after relying on decades on a partnership with the US to monitor its more than 4.4m sq km (1.7m sq miles) of land and sea, a territory larger than India.

In a statement, Saab said it planned to invest in research and development work in Canada as part of any deal.

Although Carney did not give details of the fleet size or the cost of a potential contract, military officials had earlier said they were looking to buy six early warning aircraft.

Philippe Lagasse, associate director of international affairs at Ottawa’s Carleton University, said Canada’s decision to buy the GlobalEye planes was “an important test case for the Carney government’s policy of pivoting away from American military capability”.

He said in a statement that the decision confirmed Canada’s relationship with Sweden, a new Nato ally that had also been keen to strengthen its ties to the Canadian military.

Canada has previously said it is keen to work more closely with the Nordic countries in the Arctic on defense and other issues, in a global environment where the US has become a less reliable partner.

“GlobalEye is already creating jobs in Canada, and working with the Canadian supply chain. This decision ties our two nations even closer together,” the Swedish prime minister, Ulf Kristersson, said in a social media post.

Saab is also in the running to sell Canada some of its Gripen fighters. Canada has a deal to buy 88 F-35 jets from Lockheed-Martin, but last year, after the US slapped tariffs on key Canadian imports, Carney asked the military to investigate whether it could cut back the order and buy some planes from another manufacturer.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

20. Mini Micro Fantasy Computer

Source: https://miniscript.org/MiniMicro/index.html#about
Site: miniscript.org
Submitter: nicoloren (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-27 09:56 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 236 points · 80 comments
Length: 8 words (~1 min read)
Language: en

About
Download
Play Now
Learn
Games/Apps

Learn

Documentation...

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

21. Last.fm is now independent

Source: https://support.last.fm/t/last-fm-is-now-independent/118591
Site: Last.fm Support Community
Submitter: twistslider (Hacker News)
Published: 2026-05-27
HN activity: 658 points · 181 comments
Language: en

No extractable content.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

22. On Labubu and the Hyperreal

Source: https://2earth.github.io/website/20260525.html
Site: 2earth.github.io
Submitter: 2earth (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-27 19:31 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 73 points · 82 comments
Length: 2.9K words (~13 min read)

Sometime last year I saw a man in his young to mid-twenties with a fluffy toy grinning cheekily out at the world from a clip on his belt. The contrast between his masculine-expressing clothing and the plushie jarred. It was some sort of statement, but I didn't know how to interpret it and I couldn’t forget it. That was my introduction to Labubu.

Meeting Labubu and Pop Mart

Labubu is a small fluffy toy with stubby arms, rabbit eats, a round body and large head filled with huge doe-eyes and a wide "snaggletoothed" grin. Created in 2015 by artist-designer Kasing Lung for a picture book series, Labubu and her magical elven companions - each imbued with unique characteristics - are inspired by Nordic mythology and dubbed “The Monsters”. These whimsical and curious (female) elves have lived out their carefree lives in the forest for millenia; at least, until 2019 when POP MART acquired exclusive rights to the Labubu IP.

POP MART is, in their own words, “a rising global force in pop culture and entertainment”, with “over 500 stores in 30+ countries and regions, more than 2,300 ROBOSHOPS and e-commerce." (A ROBOSHOP, for the uninitiated, is a vending machine for toys.)

Labubu may be POP MART’s biggest draw, but the brand sells numerous other characters made by different “artists”. There's Molly, Dimoo, Pucky, skullpanda, crybaby and others, each designed by different artists. Each character has pages of plushies, figures, charms, phone cases and bags. There are crossovers between characters and other brands, like coca-cola, Disney, even UEFA.

Labubu is cute. But why is it so successful, so suddenly? Why are adults wearing them on their belts?

Escaping adulthood and loneliness

Labubu has to be viewed with reference to the Coronavirus pandemic that coincides with her POP MART launch in 2019 and rise to fame in 2024 after promotion by K-pop idol Lisa (which was not an official endorsement).

While experiences during the pandemic were not homogeneous, many younger people experienced a specific sort of hardship - missing a part of their youth. Forced into isolation, young adults missing out on social engagement and opportunities to make friends and social networks, learn social skills and explore behavioural boundaries. In this regard, Labubu seems to have proven very effective at acting as an avatar and companion.

Above: A reddit user shares details on how to give Labubus a BBL

In the years following the pandemic many of us, across all ages, embraced nostalgia - a yearning for either true or imagined pasts – comforting associations which offer us an imaginary respite from the complexities, threats and uncertainties in the present day.

But it's not just the pandemic that might have nudged people towards plushies - we are in a period of unprecedented institutional weakness without real trust in the possibility for things to improve. Affordable housing and stable careers are no longer even expectations. In the West, economic decline, intractable political fragmentation and conflict are the stable elements of reality.

Above: A reddit user shares that his Labubu gives him joy

There is no doubt that Labubu and plushies in general find favour among those simply seeking comfort, the cute and the soft – the ‘kidults’ and the ‘disney adults’. Associated cultural movements like Kawaii and K-Pop, especially relevant because of K-Pop star Lisa’s endorsement of Labubu, promote childish behaviour and aesthetics. The name itself, Labubu, is obviously chosen for babyish associations. Labubu herself is designed using the “baby schema”.

But while nostalgia and a rejection of ageing and adulthood is part of Labubu’s appeal it isn’t the full story. While reminiscent of plushies of bygone times – think beanie babies, furby, build-a-bear, even jellycat – Labubu was, to most people, a new character when they encountered her in 2024 or 2025.

Much more important is the social role Labubu can play for those, especially Gen Z, affected by both loneliness and pervasive use of social-media.

In the UK, 33% of those between 16 and 29 report being lonely "often, always or some of the time". This age group spends less time with others than previous generations and role-play with toys provides a space in which to play out or simulate adult social interactions.

Above: A reddit user shares an image of plushies buying coffee with a friend

Countless posts on social media platforms show Labubus sweetly performing mundane discretised activities familiar to our daily lives; taking the bus, taking selfies, eating, drinking coffee with a friend, getting married. This role-playing simulates, rehearses (or perhaps substitutes for) real behaviours that the owner might want to or actually engage in.

Many of those roles are not speculative, though, but show Labubu accompanying owners in their daily lives or at special events, performing mirror-activities like an avatar.

Above: A reddit user shares an image of Labubu accompanying them in their work van Above: A reddit user shares an image of Labubus dressed for, and attending a wedding

Social consumption

How do I know about this role-playing function, though?

Labubu exists as much on social media as she does in the real world and by doing so she takes on numerous roles aside toy. In addition to Labubus simply posed in cute scenarios, owners post images and videos of unboxings, collections, rare Labubus, fake Labubus (Lafufus) and Labubus in the real world.

Labubu’s teeth and her name were chosen to be memorable and to stand out against other plushies. But early on in Labubu’s rise to fame, Lung noticed they took on a social role:

“In the past, before the keychain plush dolls were released, people would bring the larger vinyl dolls with them on vacation, in cafés and restaurants. I saw a lot of this on Instagram.” (source)

This usage shaped the product, leading to introduction of the smaller, portable keychain Labubu and becoming an important marketing focus for POP MART, whose own marketing materials depict Labubu taking selfies and making and sharing digital content.

Above: POP MART advert depicting Labubu taking selfies and editing a social media video

By sharing images of Labubus, the social opportunities multiply.

A photo of Labubu could simply announce oneself and that you are culturally relevant, part of the group and up-to-date on busy social media.

The quantity or rarity of Labubus in a collection (exoticism and conspicuous consumption) showcases the owner’s economic ability. Especially for the genuinely wealthy, Labubu is often pictured alongside expensive fashion items like bags, clothing, watches, jewellery.

Beyond that comes the ability to communicate more nuanced, personal and self-aware statements by dressing and customising Labubu. Sharing images of Labubu posed and role-playing signals offers a chance to leave a statement or joke.

Above: A reddit user who has styled their Labubu wearing a cute Fuck Donald Trump T-shirt, softening the political message

Sharing images of Labubu in physical places or with meaningful contents communicates the owner’s activities, perhaps in a more self-aware way than a selfie.

Above: A reddit user shares an image of their Labubus joining them at the gym Above: A reddit user announces their new romantic partner through the eyes of Labubu

Shared via social media Labubu is not a static or simple sign but one which can be configured endlessly to communicate - belonging, uniqueness, exoticism, wealth, eliteness.

When I saw Labubu hanging from that young man’s belt, he was (ostentatiously) extending Labubu’s poignancy, incubated on social media, into the real world.

He signals his cultural relevance, age, belonging and perhaps something of his own values or alignments according to which Labubu and how it was styled. Through all this he is aiming for connection with others, perhaps especially women his age (who buy 80% of Labubus). Does he play with Labubu at home? I highly doubt it.

Labubu is thus an accessory, with similarities to jewellery but carrying potential for more nuanced statements and individual modification. Like jewellery, a worn Labubu can be taken off, as context requires. You might not wear a Labubu in front of parents or in a work context, not wanting to emphasise your youth.

Social media consumption

Social media, then, doesn’t just provide “free advertising” for POP MART, but creates much of Labubu’s cultural value.

When people affirm the value of the product on social media viewers are encouraged to join in or miss out; an immediate and self-strengthening engine which propels the product’s demand.

For the consumer, participation – whether genuine or not - can result in gaining genuine social capital (the process of simulation, according to Baudrillard and others, wherein emulation becomes indistinguishable from the real, to the extent that the difference is irrelevant). Once a product, initially without sign value, gains a socially-determined value, that value becomes real (and sellable).

Yet the value is fragile – as soon as Labubu’s cultural relevance wanes, its use as a signifier collapses, even inverts as a sign of outdatedness.

But for Labubu this process is turbocharged by its relationship with social media - as a social media object, the value of Labubu is centered not in the physical object but in its relationship to social media, to the posting of images of videos, and therefore even its real-world value returns to social media. Social media is not just part of Labubu's appeal but is the essential sustaining engine which sets Labubu apart from other toys and powers Labubu’s value.

Above: Labubu's size is displayed in relation to an iPhone for reference

The object cannot be interpreted totally without association with social media - In this Baudrillardian hyperreality, where the real and the imaginary are interspersed and interrelate endlessly, it’s unclear whether a Labubu in social media communicates about the real-life worth of the individual, or whether a Labubu in real life communicates about the social-media worth of the individual. It’s not even clear which of the two value systems leads which. The medium is totally dispersed into reality.

Gambling and addiction:

With Labubu, POP MART have – I argue intentionally – created an addictive product-consumption cycle.

Addiction forms through repeated actions that may result in an exciting or rewarding experience, but also often result in feelings of loss or shame. The quicker and easier the action-reward cycle the easier it is to reinforce the cycle. Being around others with a shared addiction can encourage an attraction to the activity. We are all most susceptible to the lure of addictions during low points in life. (source)

The way Labubus are sold is consciously designed to produce this cycle. They are sold online (note that researchers have found that isolated teenagers pursue short-term rewards more than when they are in a social group), from sealed boxes or from dispensers - and purchasers have taken to sharing their unboxing on social media, which provides a strengthening of the reward loop (feeling second-hand reward), encourages premeditating a future purchase (visualising yourself) and offers social reinforcement of the addictive activity (they're doing it too). The childish nature of the toys also encourages adults with disposable income to adopt a childish desire – without self-control or inhibition.

I encourage you to go and search for "LABUBU Unboxing" to understand what I mean.

An unknown Labubu in a package, shared over social media or with friends in real life is the vehicle for the excitement. The attention from others, in real life or by likes and comments, is the reward, and reifies the value of the experience. Of course, many of these unboxing videos are insincere, and all of them are performative and staged. Incredibly, the genuineness of their emotions doesn’t seem important - FOMO is (re)generated either way.

As a UX, er, sychofantic grifter (I couldn't make out their actual role) gushes on LinkedIn:

[Labubu was] sold in mystery boxes (which made it addictive)...

That uncertainty? It’s intentional.

This taps into:

Variable rewards, the same psychology behind slot machines and social media likes.

This isn’t just marketing. It’s UX-led FOMO.

Surprise and scarcity drive habit loops.

Labubu and other Pop Mart are always released in limited quantities, in seasons and trends. There's a very real likelihood that you can't have the exact one that you want. Online, sold-out models haunt page after page of products. Queues and sold-out stores further buttress the perceived importance of buying the products while you can.

This type of behaviour seems to be a genuine cultural trend – a tightening of our response to scarcity after the pandemic and the Ever Given supply shortages. Prime drinks offer a mirror example in the same time period.

Collecting taps into a desire to hold onto things and hoard, especially during tumultuous times of change when we feel little control. It seems to me that the drivers for this response are still in place - high cost of living, job insecurity and massive changes in the world of work as a result of AI. The acceptance of the mystery box method ironically leads to this uncertainty being folded uncritically back into the fabric of society and social relations.

Above: A reddit user compares their partner to a lucky Labubu unboxing

Needless to say, the relief provided by a consumption-based addiction is, at best, a mirage. Yet the cost is real - money, time and waste.

Incidentally, the blind box mechanism seems extremely close to the UK's legal definition of a lottery – which is defined as having three elements: (1) payment is required to participate; (2) one or more prizes are awarded; (3) those prizes are awarded by chance.

And indeed, for many who have become addicted to buying Labubus and other mystery box items, the financial losses are easily compared to gambling.

I think there's a common self-consciousness around addiction, but which views it as an inevitability. It's widely acknowledged that social media addiction affects nearly all of us to some extent - indeed in March 2026 Meta and Google were found guilty of intentionally designing addictive platforms - yet relatively few of us take serious steps to curb social media addiction, at least not with the sort of framing we might approach smoking or gambling with. Culturally we are therefore primed to accept addictions as real and widespread but not necessarily undesirable, perhaps even something to enter into happily.

Above: Examples of self-conscious and ambivalent attitude to addiction

I think the snaggletooth Gremlin represents this very well; she’s conscious of her own mischief. She is comfortable with this ambivalence and resigned acknowledgement of addiction. She might say "I'm soo addicted to buying plushies, I have an actual problem (haha)". In POP MART’s own telling, she “always wants to help, but often accidentally achieves the opposite”.

Labubu: Social product design and object fetishism

Labubu demonstrates the complex social functions that objects can fulfil for us. Once reified by a critical mass of people (accelerated, perhaps, through social media) objects in modern capitalism can function as near pure signs, shedding all but the faintest reminder of their use value.

Marx identified “private property” as a fetish object, providing the example of the “sensuous glitter” of metal money, creating a fascination in the mind of the obsessor. Later sociologists, especially Baudrillard, realised that this process is endemic in modern, mainly Western, patterns of consumption and culture.

According to Baudrillard objects are fetishised though actions including “sharing of the value of the object … expressing desire for and approval of the object and its capacities, celebrating the object, revering it, setting it apart, displaying it, extolling and exalting its capacities, eulogising it [and] enthusiastic use of it”.

For Labubu’s fans, every single one of those practices apply. Yet however arbitrary or contrived the object itself, once fans attribute values to Labubu, through ritualised worship and social reification, those very values are manifested - “the specialness with which the object is treated makes it special” (my italics).

Obviously, that specialness does not extend to those of us who see no value in Labubu. Yet the more culturally established signs and symbols we do imbue value into, such as jewellery, clothing styles, tattoos, hair style, art, home decoration – are also socially determined, just perhaps over a longer period of time and having greater association with use value.

Baudrillard saw another role for constructed imaginaries as both defending the individual from reality (escapism) and defending reality from being unmasked as itself being fictional. He provides the example of Disneyland, where the "effect of the imaginary [conceals] that reality no more exists outside than inside the limits of the artificial perimeter".

In the same way, Labubu acts to defend reality and the roles we play in it (more specifically - the social constructs, behaviour patterns, expectations, hierarchies and economic frameworks which we accept as given) by providing a clearly fictional counterexample of roleplay. Labubus going to work are engaged in imaginary play. Yet so often in the same imaginary/real scenario we feel as though we are acting, wearing a mask, role playing - imitating a rehearsed behavior with cultural expectations, meanings and delineations.

I wonder if Labubu acts similarly on our perception of consumption and capitalism itself - the pointless purchase of Labubu(s!) is so clearly impulsive, addictive, wasteful and alienated from the processes of making that it conceals that the same applies to nearly all consumption today.

I've been reading:

Simulacra and Simulation, Jean Baudrillard (1981) [download]

Fetishism and the social value of objects, Tim Dant (1996) [download]

Thanks for reading! If you enjoyed this and would like to stay in touch, consider subscribing to this blog - you'll receive an email whenever I next add an entry. Cheers!

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

23. Show HN: Open-Source AI Racing Harness

Source: https://www.elodin.systems/post/elodin-ai-grand-prix-race-sim-harness
Site: elodin.systems
Submitter: danAtElodin (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-27 20:37 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 20 points · 4 comments
Length: 1.0K words (~5 min read)
Language: en

‍

Overview

‍

Today we're open-sourcing a practice rig for Anduril's AI Grand Prix (a $500K autonomous drone-race competition) so contestants and anyone else curious can start writing autopilot code against a working stack now, before the official Virtual Qualifier 1 simulator drops: github.com/elodin-sys/ai-grand-prix. It's open source, runs on macOS and Linux, and the whole setup is uv sync plus a 5-minute Betaflight build. (WSL should be workable too)

‍

The Elodin Journey

‍

The path here was longer than we expected. I came into this from the games side. One of my earlier jobs was working on The Sims 4, which (whatever else you think of it) does a serious amount of simulation under the hood: emergent behavior, deterministic-ish replay, content pipelines, an editor good enough to ship to gamers, i.e. non-engineers. That polish and joy of use was missing in aerospace tooling, where most teams I talked to were stitching together MATLAB/Simulink + Gazebo + a homegrown Python harness and praying it held together. We started Elodin a few years ago thinking we could close some of that gap, and it turned out to be a much bigger job than any of us understood at the time. Most of the last couple of years has been us sitting next to customers (drone, satellite, missiles, etc), grounding the simulator in real flight data, finding the missing 20% of features that turn a demo into something a flight-software team relies on, and slowly converging on a stack that gets a useful sim up in hours instead of weeks.

‍

- traditional quadcopter simulation development in MathWorks Simulink

‍

What we ended up with, roughly, is a Rust ECS + JIT-compiled physics core (nox) with Python bindings, a 3D editor that connects to a time-series telemetry DB (elodin-db) over TCP and live-binds GLB models, plots, and camera feeds to ECS components, and a small process runner (s10) so the same Python entry point can spawn whatever else the sim needs (flight controller, render server, external estimator). The interesting bit is that the physics is plain JAX-style code, @el.map functions over typed components, so things like Monte Carlo runs, GPU acceleration, and bit-for-bit deterministic replays fall out naturally. The engine and editor live at github.com/elodin-sys/elodin under Apache-2.0.

‍

The Challenge

‍

When the AI Grand Prix was announced earlier this year it landed almost exactly on top of the workflow we'd been refining: physics at one cadence, a real flight controller at its native PID rate, an FPV camera on top, and a single contestant-authored Python function in the middle. Standing up a race-from-scratch program is itself a big undertaking, and as the expected drop date for the official Virtual Qualifier 1 simulator came and went we figured the friendliest thing to do was publish the representative rig we had been building internally, so other teams can start iterating now rather than wait for the starting gunshot in silence.

‍

‍

Concretely, the practice rig wires three things together with one post-step callback. Elodin runs the 6-DOF rigid-body physics, motor dynamics, drag, ground constraint, multi-rate IMU/baro/mag sensors, and a GPU-rendered 640×360 forward camera tilted +20° to match the published VADR-TS-002 spec. Betaflight runs as its real SITL build (master, with ENABLE_SIMULATOR_GYROPID_SYNC so its PID loop blocks on each FDM packet) and handles RC, mixing, and PID exactly the way it does on a real airframe. An ~80-line bridge serializes FDM/RC/PWM packets over UDP and steps both sides in lockstep at 1 kHz, so when you tune a controller against this rig you're tuning against the same Betaflight that will run on the metal. Contestants only edit solver/, which holds a single autopilot(update: SensorUpdate) -> RCCommand function. It gets called every tick with body-frame IMU, world pose, baro, mag, and an optional fresh RGBA camera frame. No GPS, no depth, no motor RPM, matching the official sim's published telemetry contract. We ship a deliberately unimpressive baseline solver (a small altitude/position PID over a hard-coded gate list) so you have something that takes off and clears gates on day one.

‍

A few caveats up front. On the wire we use Betaflight's UDP packets rather than MAVLink, so anything you build here will need a thin shim to talk to the real qualifier sim once it ships. We currently expose ENU world state to the solver where the spec says NED, and atmospheric effects are a single drag coefficient (no turbulence, no ground effect, no battery sag). The spec also has a small internal inconsistency around the camera FoV (it states VFoV = 90° but its own intrinsics imply VFoV ≈ 58.72° and HFoV = 90°) and we follow the intrinsics, on the bet that the official sim's renderer will too. The repo's ARCHITECTURE.md has a long "Opportunities for improvement" section that is more or less our own todo list, and PRs against any of it are welcome.

‍

The Result

‍

To try out, you need uv, git, git lfs, and a C toolchain (build-essential + clang-18 on Ubuntu, Xcode CLT on macOS). After that:

‍

bash scripts/install_elodin.sh # installs the Elodin CLI + DB
uv sync
git submodule update --init --recursive --depth 1 betaflight
bash scripts/build_betaflight.sh
elodin editor sim/main.py

‍

You should see SUCCESS: SITL integration working! Drone took off! and a [RACE] summary in the terminal. The editor opens to a chase cam and FPV viewport you can scrub on the timeline. The whole schematic is plain KDL embedded in sim/main.py, so changing the layout is straightforward. See the KDL API spec here: https://docs.elodin.systems/reference/schematic/

‍

‍

We'd love to hear from people who have built sims for hard-real-time control, anyone planning to enter the AGP (or already in it), and anyone with opinions on the ergonomics of solver/api.py or on lockstep flight-controller integration in general. We're also interested in where this approach falls apart: where the game-engine intuitions stop helping, where Python-as-the-glue hits a wall, where deterministic replay leaks too much abstraction. Happy to go deep on any layer of the stack in the comments.

‍

Thanks for reading; hopefully you find it a useful primer for the competition.

Good luck, see you out there!

‍

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

24. Stress disrupts hippocampal integration of overlapping events, memory inference

Source: https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/sciadv.aea5496?user_id=66c4bf745d78644b3aa57b08
Site: science.org
Submitter: gmays (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-27 16:26 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 84 points · 13 comments

Scrape failed: http 403

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

25. Human Bottlenecks

Source: https://borretti.me/article/human-bottlenecks
Site: Fernando Borretti
Author: Fernando Borretti
Published: 2026-05-18
HN activity: 88 points · 26 comments
Length: 1.6K words (~7 min read)
Language: en

AI models are very capable and get more capable each year. So naturally people feel they’re underusing them. There’s a tweet that goes like: your laptop has a 100M USD startup in it, you just have to figure the right sequence of words to get it out. And beyond money, people imagine AI could boost them in every area of life. Thus all these perennial ideas: of an AI executive assistant, an AI tutor, an AI that curates your “digital garden”, an AI that (sigh) writes flashcards for you.

The general template is: if only I could wire up the right prompts and the right tools in the right harness, I could have an agent that would boost my productivity 10x, or fix my problems with therapy, or make me more social, or more knowledgeable. This was, curiously, the ambition of a lot of early computing pioneers: Augmenting Human Intellect, Man-Computer Symbiosis. Engelbart’s lab was called the Augmentation Research Center! And more recently, people used to complain about how everyone has the Library of Alexandria in their pocket, and yet, we are not all genius polymaths.

And these ideas are perennial because they never seem to happen. It’s like the Solow paradox on an individual level. Why? I think there are two reasons: first, most people lack what Andy Matuschak calls a “serious context of use” (AI doesn’t move the needle because there’s no needle to move); second, most people are bottlenecked by internal factors where AI (or anything external, for that matter) can’t move the needle.

The Serious Context of Use

I have heard so many people, online and in real life, tell me some variation of: “I want to [use|build] an app that uses AI to write flashcards”. How many of those people do you think have ever written a flashcard? How many of them use Anki every day? Have ever used Anki? The people who want an AI that writes flashcards for them don’t use flashcards. They have no reason to. Dually, the people who use flashcards would benefit little from AI writing their flashcards.

Analogously with “AI tutors”. If you had the ghost of John von Neumann in your laptop, what would you have him teach you? Let’s be honest. You’d go through chapter one of some math topic you’re vaguely curious about and then forget about it. And that would probably be the rational move! Most people are not autodidacts because most people have no material reason to learn a specific topic (i.e. their job does not require it) and the problem with learning for the sake of learning is opportunity cost: there is no a priori reason to learn one thing over another, so better to do nothing and wait for something to appear which actually grabs your interest. Again, this is likely rational! Could you imagine if you found everything interesting? You’d spend years living in a basement curating a wiki of late Soviet military hardware or something. So, even if you had John von Neumann in your pocket, it probably wouldn’t move the needle.

Would an “AI executive assistant” actually boost your productivity? What would it do, other than tell you to do the things you already know you have to do? With these ideas that are so attractive in the abstract, the way you deflate them is you interrogate the concrete, fine-grained details. Take a day at work, and ask: what exact actions could an AI looking over my shoulder have taken, that would have made a difference?

Finally there’s the tools-for-thought/notetaking people. God save us. It’s always the same thing. Your folder with notes—pardon me, your “second brain”—plus an AI agent that writes, edits, synthesizes information, answers queries. You could build this in an afternoon, and it won’t move the needle in your life, for the same reason that building the second brain in the first place didn’t make a difference.

See, most of us, unless we are students, we really don’t have cause to take notes on anything. If you’re a student, you take notes from the textbook. I keep a journal, which is occasionally useful. At some jobs I’ve kept a work journal, this has also been useful. If I stopped, probably, not much would change.

The notetaking people—and I say this with all the love in the world—are never, like, a researcher at the cutting edge of their field, building this vast cathedral of knowledge, note-by-note, so they can derive new insights. Never a historian who has to read tens of millions of words across thousands of sources to synthesize the life of some historical person. It’s never someone doing something hard. It’s always some blogger. Their “digital garden” is about how to keep a digital garden. It’s very solipsistic: there’s no output, no deliverables. The deliverable is you take a screenshot of your Obsidian graph and tweet about it to show off how much it looks like an incomprehensible ball of twine.

So, what difference is the AI going to make? “It’s going to write my notes”. About what? “It’s going to read articles for me and summarize them and add them to the digital garden”. For what purpose? “It’s going to find connections between my ideas!” What ideas? It’s going to pull an unfinished list of bulletpoints for an eventual draft of an essay on some inane thing, plus a bunch of PDFs you haven’t read, and combine them together and make, what? Another project you’re not going to do? The AI is going to do that?

Again, I say this with all the love in the world. I used to be a tools-for-thought guy. I hoard PDFs. But we have to be honest with ourselves. Sometimes, tools don’t move the needle because there’s no needle to move. Because the “needle” is not a concrete, realizable material need but a vague, aspirational idea about who we are as people.

Internal Limiting Factors

So, the idea of using computers to augment human capabilities is basically: you take the human, and you build a scaffold around them, but the human stays the same. The scaffold can be classical software, or AI, but the human remains a black box. And the hope is: I just prompt my swarm of AI agents and become 100x more effective, like Manfred in Accelerando.

Why wouldn’t this work? I think most people are bottlenecked by internal factors that are difficult to change. Mental energy, motivation, executive function, not to mention more fundamental traits like intelligence and conscientiousness. So, external scaffolding, either with classical software or AI, might help somewhat, but it won’t be transformative.

Consider executive function. My own experience of managing ADHD is the external scaffolding helps (todo lists, calendars, timers, a million little ways to trick myself into working) gets me from zero to “kind of functional”. But it saturates there. Stimulants fix the original, internal bottleneck, which is my neurochemistry. And then I can accomplish my goals (c.f. Liebig’s law of the minimum). All the pomodoros in the world are as nothing to a little molecule diffusing through my brain tissue, binding to NET and DAT. And what scaffolding is useful is just classical software: Todoist and calendars. Is an agent going to match the effectiveness of methylphenidate in ADHD? I doubt it.

Consider intelligence. Can AI augment human intelligence? What does that look like? Consider how AI agents only became useful when the models crossed a particular capability threshold, i.e., you can’t put GPT-2 into a harness and get GPT-5 outcomes out of it. Can you put a human in an AI scaffold and give them +30 effective IQ? I doubt it, unless the AI is doing all the thinking, at which point, what use is the human? The limiting factor in the human-AI centaur is the human! So intelligence is fixed until we get very advanced biotechnology.

Knowledge is another limiting factor. I find that even very educated people tend to underrate the importance of knowledge. A lot of people have this attitude that you can just Google everything just-in-time as it comes up. Like Babbage, I can’t rightly apprehend the confusion of ideas that would lead someone to think this. Maybe it’s downstream of the lack of a serious context of use. Everything you do, every action and idle thought, draws on this vast (implicit, unseen) trove of knowledge. Claude Shannon invented digital computing because he remembered this then-obscure branch of mathematical logic called Boolean algebra and saw that it could be realized in hardware. A trillion-dollar industry, conjured out of some old tomes.

The reason knowledge is still a bottleneck, in the AI era, is not: “if you don’t have the knowledge, you can’t write the prompt”. Rather: if you don’t have the knowledge, you don’t understand the question, or why it matters, or how to judge the answers, and you won’t ever think to ask. You’re in a completely different continent from “writing the prompt”. And because long-term memory is private and internal, AI can’t boost it. It can, maybe, with judicious use, help in the acquisition of new knowledge.

So: executive function, intelligence, and knowledge are huge bottlenecks to what you can do, and because they are internal to the brain, AI can’t touch them until we have far more advanced biotechnology. Corollary: contrary to the popular view of human capital is becoming worthless, the returns to education are now higher, because intelligent, educated people with working reward circuitry stand to gain more from AI.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

26. Tech CEOs are apparently suffering from AI psychosis

Source: https://techcrunch.com/2026/05/27/tech-ceos-are-apparently-suffering-from-ai-psychosis/
Site: TechCrunch
Author: Julie Bort
Published: 2026-05-27
HN activity: 602 points · 297 comments
Length: 870 words (~4 min read)
Language: en-US

There is a certain wildness in the tech industry these days that both mimics previous eras of large changes, like cloud computing (runaway costs in the early days), and is like nothing we’ve ever seen before (record revenues accompanied by mass layoffs).

One possible explanation: Tech executives, especially CEOs, are collectively suffering from delusions of AI grandeur. And at least one tech CEO has said as much out loud: Box founder Aaron Levie.

“CEOs are uniquely prone to AI psychosis because they’re sufficiently distant from the last mile of work that still has to happen to generate most value with AI,” Levie wrote on X.

CEOs “play with AI,” develop a prototype, or generate a contract, to use Levie’s examples, and then make the leap to believing agents can do the work.

But these top-level executives aren’t the people who have to review code, discover bugs, and identify calls to hallucinated libraries before software is deployed. They aren’t responsible for training AI models on a company’s idiosyncratic contract terms, nor do they have to spend days combing through contracts to find sneaky terms, as Levie indicates.

In other words, Levie’s theory posits, CEOs don’t really understand processes well enough to know what really can and can’t be automated. But that lack of knowledge doesn’t stop them from acting on their beliefs.

It’s important to note that Levie is not an AI hater. Quite the opposite. He mostly posts AI positivity on X to his 2.7 million followers, writing blogs titled “Headless software is the future” on how software built for AI agents is the way forward. He also puts his money where his mouth is, backing AI startups as an active angel investor.

So what are CEOs to do instead? Levie advises CEOs to use AI “a ton” to really see what it can and can’t do, “and come out the other side with an appreciation for both the upside and the real work.”

CEOs are uniquely prone to AI psychosis because they’re sufficiently distant from the last mile of work that still has to happen to generate most value with AI.

So when they play with AI, they see the happy path results, often not considering the next 10 or 20 things that have… https://t.co/ne5mvJ4Rgx— Aaron Levie (@levie) May 24, 2026

I have enough faith in humanity to believe that there are CEOs out there attempting to do just that, but right now, they seem to be in the minority.

In just the first five months of 2026, the tech industry has had nearly as many layoffs as in all of 2025: 115,430 people have been fired from 152 tech companies so far in 2026, compared to 124,636 people let go by 275 companies in 2025, according to industry layoff tracker Layoffs.fyi.

And the bulk of companies have pointed to AI as a reason for cutting these jobs. Many argue that the biggest tech companies are AI washing, or crediting AI productivity gains in the past or future, when other business decisions and metrics are really driving the cuts.

Still, some of these stories are surprising. Zeb Evans, the CEO of project management and productivity software startup ClickUp, proudly declared on X that he had laid off almost a quarter of his employees — 22% — after rolling out about 3,000 AI agents to do internal work.

Evans swore this wasn’t done to reduce costs. Instead, he wants a workforce composed of people who run AI agents and spend their days quickly reviewing the agents’ work. He believes this will create a “100x org,” as he calls it.

While AI can be a very useful tool, the data on AI and productivity doesn’t support such assumptions. By miles.

A meta-analysis of other research published in October in UC Berkeley’s California Management Review found “no robust relationship between AI adoption and aggregate productivity gain.”

Research published in March by the National Bureau of Economic Research did conclude that AI adoption improved productivity but noted “a productivity paradox, in which perceived productivity gains are larger than measured productivity gains.”

After creating thousands of agents to work on tasks, researchers at MIT concluded that agents just aren’t doing human-quality work yet in many cases. They predict at the current rate of LLM improvement, models will “be able to complete most text-related tasks with success rates of, on average, 80%–95% by 2029 at a minimally sufficient quality level.”

In other words, AI is on track to perform at base competence on most tasks in about three years. These researchers believe agents will need another few years to outperform humans.

Meanwhile, research published in the Harvard Business Review showed that when everyone is using AI to produce more stuff, the bottleneck simply shifts to executives. Their work awaits the people who must authorize all the stuff everyone is producing. If everyone is empowered to act, then from what OpenAI experienced last year, we can tell that things may get out of control.

Are CEOs ready for that? If not, the most certain outcome of the ongoing CEO AI psychosis will simply be organizational chaos.

When you purchase through links in our articles, we may earn a small commission. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

27. All of human cooking compressed into 2 megabytes

Source: https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.22391
Site: arXiv.org
Author: [Submitted on 21 May 2026]
Submitted: 2026-05-27 08:14 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 373 points · 153 comments
Length: 144 words (~1 min read)
Language: en

View PDF HTML (experimental)

Abstract:We present Epicure, a family of three sibling skip-gram ingredient embeddings retrained from scratch on a multilingual recipe corpus. We aggregate 4.14M recipes from 11 sources spanning seven languages, English, Chinese, Russian, Vietnamese, Spanish, Turkish, Indonesian, German, and Indian-English, and normalise the raw ingredient strings to 1,790 canonical entries via an LLM-augmented pipeline. A 203,508-edge ingredient-ingredient NPMI graph and an 80,019-edge typed FlavorDB ingredient-compound graph, 2,247 typed compound nodes across 15 categories, seed three Metapath2Vec variants that share architecture and hyperparameters and differ only in the random-walk schema: Cooc walks the co-occurrence graph only, Chem walks the typed compound metapaths only, and Core blends both via injected ingredient-ingredient walks at controlled mixing, placing each model at a distinct point on the chemistry-vs-recipe-context spectrum.

Submission history

From: Josef Liyanjun Chen [view email]
[v1] Thu, 21 May 2026 12:23:38 UTC (6,566 KB)

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

28. Private equity bought America's essential services

Source: https://rubbishtalk.com/economy/how-private-equity-bought-americas-essential-services/
Site: rubbishtalk.com
Submitter: NoRagrets (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-27 12:00 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 460 points · 503 comments
Length: 2.1K words (~9 min read)
Language: en-US

When a fire truck fails to deploy in a burning building and four people die, the cause isn’t just mechanical failure. It’s a business model.

On the night of June 26, 2025, firefighters on Tower Ladder 14 raced to a Chicago apartment building where an arsonist had poured gasoline on both stairwells. When they arrived, the aerial ladder would not go up. The crew had to shut the rig off entirely and restart it. The delay lasted approximately one minute. Four people died that night — including a pregnant woman, her five-year-old son, and her sister, who threw her own child from a third-floor window before perishing herself.

Nobody told the surviving family about the ladder malfunction. They found out from journalists.

That malfunctioning truck is a thread. Pull it, and what unravels is one of the clearest illustrations of how private equity — the $9.4 trillion industry that quietly controls roughly 11,500 American companies and 11 million jobs — turns essential public infrastructure into profit extraction machines, often at lethal cost.

The Business Model: Brilliant for Investors, Brutal for Everyone Else

Private equity is not a mystery. The mechanics are straightforward, the incentives are transparent, and the outcomes are predictable once you understand how the machine works.

A private equity firm raises a fund — typically from pension funds, sovereign wealth funds, endowments, and wealthy individuals. It then acquires companies, usually through a leveraged buyout (LBO): a structure where 50 to 90 percent of the purchase price is financed by debt, and that debt is loaded onto the balance sheet of the acquired company, not the firm making the acquisition. The firm then charges the fund a management fee — historically 2 percent of assets annually — plus carried interest: a 20 percent cut of any profits, taxed at the long-term capital gains rate of 20 percent rather than the ordinary income rate of 37 percent. Critics have long called this a tax loophole. Congress has debated closing it for two decades and has not.

US private equity AUM reached $3.128 trillion in 2024 alone, according to S&P Global. Total private markets AUM globally sits at approximately $15 trillion.

The model works when applied to underperforming businesses that genuinely need restructuring. PE firms can bring operational discipline, growth capital, and strategic focus. That is the affirmative case, and it is real.

The problem emerges when the model is applied to essential services with inelastic demand — industries where the customer has no choice but to pay, where quality degradation is hard to measure until catastrophe strikes, and where the typical PE timeline of 3-to-7 years before exit creates incentives to strip value rather than build it.

The Senate Joint Economic Committee’s July 2024 report described this as a “buy, strip and flip” business model: PE firms load acquired companies with debt, cut costs aggressively, then resell at a profit — often at the direct expense of workers, communities, and the services those companies provide. Public companies acquired by PE are approximately ten times more likely to go bankrupt than a comparable control group subject to the same market forces, the report found.

The Fire Truck Racket: A Case Study in Manufactured Scarcity

The fire truck industry is the sharpest and most documented example of what PE consolidation does to essential services.

Two decades ago, more than two dozen independent manufacturers competed to build America’s fire apparatus. Today, three companies control approximately 80 percent of the market: REV Group, Pierce Manufacturing (owned by Oshkosh Corporation), and Rosenbauer. This concentration was not an accident of market forces. It was engineered.

REV Group is the centrepiece of the story. The company — owned by private equity firm American Industrial Partners — systematically acquired formerly independent manufacturers including E-One, Ferrara, KME, Ladder Tower, and Spartan. The old nameplates still exist as brand names. But behind them sits a single PE-backed conglomerate controlling a massive share of the supply chain for emergency vehicles that every American city depends on.

The result is a backlog that reads like a financial opportunity in earnings calls and a crisis in every fire station in the country. As of 2025, REV Group’s backlog stands at $4.5 billion. Wait times for a custom fire truck run to four years. Prices have doubled in a decade: a pumper truck now costs around $1 million; a ladder truck runs over $2 million. Profit margins in the industry have tripled — from the historic 4-to-5 percent range to over 13 percent.

“Our $4.5 billion backlog is attractive among industrial manufacturers, is largely backed by municipal tax receipts, and offers significant value accretion opportunity, providing a pathway for growth and margin expansion over the next several years.”

— Mark Skonieczny, CEO, REV Group, 2025 investor earnings call

Note what Skonieczny is telling investors: the backlog is not a problem to be solved. It is an asset. The customers — fire departments serving American cities — are locked in because they have no alternative. Their orders, backed by tax receipts, are guaranteed revenue. The company’s incentive is to maintain the backlog, not eliminate it.

The Senate heard this clearly. At a September 10, 2025 hearing, Senator Josh Hawley (R-MO) put it bluntly to the manufacturers:

“This didn’t just happen to you accidentally. This is a business decision, isn’t it? You keep these backlogs like this. […] Another word for this would be a heist. This sounds to me like private equity came in; bought up all of these small companies; combined them; shut down their production; rolled up a huge backlog; massive profits; stiffed these guys; and now you’re making out like bandits.”

— Sen. Josh Hawley, US Senate Subcommittee on Disaster Management, September 10, 2025

The production data supports Hawley’s characterisation. REV Group closed multiple production facilities in Pennsylvania and Virginia even as its backlog grew. The company simultaneously spent $530 million on stock buybacks and dividend payments, including a $180 million special dividend paid directly to private equity owners just before the company went public. The CEO earns $6 million annually.

The competitive market is gone. The Fire Apparatus Manufacturers Association — the industry trade group — holds annual meetings where members share “economic data, fire market trends, and apparatus sales and order statistics.” Antitrust attorney Basel Musharbash testified to Congress that the conglomerates “appear to have transformed a once vibrant industry into a racket.” Four cities — Los Angeles County, Green Bay, Allentown, and others — have filed federal antitrust lawsuits. The Texas Attorney General opened a price-fixing investigation. The defendants deny all wrongdoing.

Meanwhile, Ed Kelly, president of the International Association of Fire Fighters, told the Senate: “Sometimes we have firefighters responding in pickup trucks, like a painting crew with ground ladders on it.”

This Is a Pattern, Not an Anomaly

The fire truck industry is the most publicly documented case, but the underlying playbook — acquire, consolidate, reduce supply, extract margin — appears across essential sectors with alarming consistency.

Ambulances

Private equity’s grip on emergency medical services follows the same arc. KKR controls significant ambulance market share through Envision Healthcare and Global Medical Response (parent of Rural/Metro). As PE’s market share in air ambulance grew, the median charge for a transport increased over 60 percent between 2012 and 2017, according to research cited in Senate testimony. The predictable endpoint: Envision Healthcare filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy in 2023 under the weight of debt it was saddled with after its PE acquisition — leaving contracts cancelled, response times degraded, and in at least one documented case, a delayed ambulance arrival that may have contributed to a death.

Nursing Homes

PE investment in nursing homes grew from $5 billion in 2000 to $104 billion in 2024. More than 1,500 facilities now operate under PE control. The documented outcomes are not ambiguous: PE-owned nursing homes show more care deficiencies, significantly reduced staffing hours, higher hospitalisation rates, and increased mortality. People undergoing surgery at PE-acquired hospitals faced a 17 percent higher probability of dying within 90 days than patients at non-acquired centres, according to peer-reviewed research. At least two PE-owned nursing home chains filed for bankruptcy in 2024 alone — LaVie Care Centers (backed by Formation Capital) and Goldner Capital Management — leaving residents displaced and staff unpaid.

Housing

Institutional investors — many PE-backed — own more than 500,000 single-family rental homes and are projected to control 40 percent of the US single-family rental market by 2030. The DOJ opened a criminal investigation in 2024 into RealPage, a property-management software firm used by major landlords, over allegations that its algorithmic pricing system enabled coordinated rent increases across competing landlords — effectively automating what antitrust law would otherwise prohibit. The Senate passed a bipartisan housing bill in March 2026 targeting large investors, though its scope remains limited.

Local Newspapers

Alden Global Capital — a hedge fund with tactics indistinguishable from PE — systematically acquired local newspapers and gutted them, cutting newsrooms faster than any other owner in the country. The 2019 Gannett-GateHouse merger, backed by New Media Investment Group (a hedge fund), put one in five US daily newspapers under financial-engineer control. Academic research found that when a PE firm acquires a newspaper, the newsroom shrinks by an average of nine reporters and editors — around 14 percent of staff — not because the papers aren’t profitable, but because the model demands margin extraction. The effect is the destruction of local democratic accountability infrastructure.

The Structural Problem Nobody Is Naming

The mainstream coverage of PE tends to focus on individual cases: a hospital that went bankrupt, a nursing home with code violations, a city that can’t get a fire truck for four years. The stories are compelling. What they often miss is the systemic architecture that makes these outcomes not bugs but features.

PE’s structural incentive is to maximise returns over a 3-to-7 year investment horizon. When applied to genuinely competitive industries with multiple players, this can drive efficiency. When applied to essential services — particularly after roll-up acquisitions that eliminate competition — it creates something more troubling: a model that profits from degradation of the very services the public cannot opt out of.

The debt loading mechanism is key and underreported. When a PE firm acquires a nursing home chain or an ambulance company via LBO, the debt doesn’t sit on the PE firm’s balance sheet. It sits on the acquired company’s balance sheet. The firm has already extracted its management fees. If the company eventually files for bankruptcy, the PE firm has typically already received dividends and fees that exceed its equity contribution. The losses fall on creditors, workers, pension funds, and — in the case of essential services — the communities that depended on those services.

REV Group’s $180 million special dividend to PE owners before IPO is a textbook example. The money was extracted before the market ever had a chance to price in the risk. The fire departments who need the trucks have no equivalent exit option.

What Comes Next

Four cities have now sued the major fire truck manufacturers. The IAFF has formally asked the FTC to investigate antitrust violations. The Senate held a bipartisan hearing — notable for its rarity — in which senators from both parties used words like “heist” and “racket” without the manufacturers offering a credible rebuttal.

The broader PE reform debate has gained ground. The Stop Wall Street Looting Act, introduced in Congress, would make PE firms liable for the debts of their portfolio companies, close the carried interest tax loophole, restrict dividend recapitalisation (the practice of loading debt to pay PE owners before exit), and give workers a priority claim in bankruptcy. It has not passed.

The harder question — one that the antitrust suits and Senate hearings won’t fully resolve — is whether essential infrastructure should be subject to the same financial-engineering logic as any other investable asset class. The market answer is: whatever generates return is fair game. The public service answer is: some industries exist to serve communities, and the cost of making them pure profit vehicles is paid in delayed ambulances, unmaintained fire trucks, and bodies in burned apartments.

The fire in Chicago is not a metaphor. It is a consequence. And it will keep happening until the structural incentives that produced it are addressed — not case by case, but at the level of the model itself.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

29. Matrix Multiplications on GPUs Run Faster When Given “Predictable” Data (2024)

Source: https://www.thonking.ai/p/strangely-matrix-multiplications
Site: Thonk From First Principles
Author: Horace He
Published: 2024-04-29
HN activity: 157 points · 45 comments
Length: 1.8K words (~8 min read)
Language: en

It’s 2022. I check out this cool new project, CUTLASS, with very fast matmuls. I take a large matmul, 8192 x 8192 x 8192, and benchmark it in PyTorch, which calls CuBLAS.

python mm_bench.py
> CuBLAS: 258 Teraflops

Not bad, 83% flop utilization. Now let’s check out Cutlass’s performance using their profiler.

./cutlass_profiler --operation=Gemm --m=8192 --n=8192 --k=8192
> CUTLASS: 288  Teraflops

!!! 10% higher perf? That’s incredible. CuBLAS is highly optimized for large compute-bound matmuls, and somehow CUTLASS + autotuning is outperforming it by 10%? We gotta start using these matmuls yesterday.

The next step is to bind the CUTLASS kernels into Python and compare against CuBLAS using my previous script.

python cutlass_mm_bench.py
> CuBLAS: 258 Teraflops
> CUTLASS: 257 Teraflops

Somehow, in the light of Python, all of CUTLASS’s performance gains disappear. This in of itself is not shocking - it’s notoriously difficult to ensure consistent benchmarking across setups.

I tediously ablate the two benchmark scripts, until finally, I find that CUTLASS’s profiler, by default, actually initializes the values in a fairly strange way - it only initializes the inputs with integers. Confused about whether this matters, I try:

zero_inputs = torch.zeros(N, N)
randn_inputs = torch.randn(N, N)
benchmark(zero_inputs) # 295 Teraflops
benchmark(randn_inputs) # 257 Teraflops

What? How could the values of the matrix affect the runtime of the model? I know Nvidia has some weird data compression thing on A100s, but I wouldn’t have expected that to be on in matmuls. Let’s try some other data distributions, like an uniform distribution [0,1].

This was … confusing, to say the least. Somehow, the actual content of the tensors being multiplied is leading to different matmul performance.

There certainly are cases where the runtime depends on the content of the tensor — indirect indexing (e.g. A[b]), or things like sparsity.

But matrix multiplications have nothing like that at all! No matter what the contents of the matrix contain, the matrix multiplication kernel will 1. perform the same number of computations, 2. perform the same computations in the same order, 3. access the same memory addresses, and 4. access the same memory addresses in the same order.

Nowhere did my mental model of matrix multiplications and GPU hardware allow for the values in the matrix to influence matmul performance. And yet, here we are.

As it turns out, the culprit is ……. dynamic/switching power in semiconductors!

An Nvidia A100 GPU has a power limit of 400W1. However, as the phrase “power limit” may hint, the GPU doesn’t always use all 400W. For example, when the GPU is fully idle, nvidia-smi tells me that it’s only pulling 88W of power.

But when the GPU is running under load, that power usage will spike considerably, typically to around the power limit.

In order to stay under the power limit, a piece on the chip called the Voltage Regulator Module reduces the voltage supplied to the GPU, — throttling the clock frequency and reducing its performance.

In other words, if our GPU ends up using enough power to hit the power limit, our performance will become capped.

Most of us take it for granted that “GPU does something, power consumption goes up”. But there are actually two distinct mechanisms through which power gets consumed.
Dynamic/switching power on the left, static/leakage power on the right. Taken from https://semiengineering.com/knowledge_centers/low-power/low-power-design/power-consumption/

The first one is static/leakage power. You can think of this as the power that inevitably gets lost by just flowing power through your circuits. The amount of static power used is proportional the amount of silicon that is powered. As GPUs don’t do much power gating, this is essentially the amount of power used at idle (88W in the above photo).

However, the second one, dynamic (or switching) power, is the culprit. Specifically, a small amount of power is consumed whenever a transistor switches states. If the transistor never needs to switch states, it doesn’t consume any extra power. On the other hand, if it’s rapidly flipping, then it consumes a ton of dynamic/switching power. Multiply that by the billions of transistors in your GPU, and you get the overall increase in power consumption.

In other words, the reason why matrix multiplications are faster when passed zeros is that this reduces the “flipping” of enough transistors in the chip to stay under the power limit!

So, this (mostly) explains what we saw previously2. All zeros are probably the fastest since every single bit of each computation is a zero and the accumulator remains at zero. All ones is probably still quite fast since every single tensor-core instruction results in exactly the same values. The uniform distribution probably is a little bit faster than the normal distribution since the accumulator never needs to flip-flop between positive and negative. The normal distribution probably has the worst performance since it leads to pretty high randomness among all transistors involved in the computation(?).

Here’s the results on a number of fun distributions I tried:

Randn: Normally distributed

Checkerboard: Normal distribution, but we have zeros in a checkerboard shape.

Rand: Uniform distribution

Sparse: Normal distribution, but a (random) 75% of the elements are masked.

Ternary: Every value is 1, -1, or 0.

One Bit: Only one bit set in every single value (the 4th bit)

All Pies: Every single value is the mathematical constant PI.

Twos: Every value in the matrices are 2

Zeros: Every value in the matrices are 0

Who says unstructured sparsity isn’t efficient with tensor-cores? :)

Here’s another piece of evidence that dynamic/switching power is responsible.

Roughly, the power we’re using is proportional to the clock speed multiplied by amount of transistor flips we’re doing.

power ~= clock speed * “transistor flips per clock”.

We run into throttling when the power we use surpasses the power limit we’ve set. Thus:

If we reduce our power limit we exacerbate this effect.

If we reduce the clock speed we reduce this effect.

Let’s show that in action! To do so, I’ll compare the relative performance of a very predictable input (zeros) vs a very unpredictable input (randn).

As expected, we see that as the power limit decreases from 330W down to 100W (the minimum), the relevant performance improvement from using predictable inputs increases. Interestingly, at the lowest power limit (100W), the trend reverses. I’m guessing that the GPU is so power constrained that even using all zeros still results in too much power usage. [Uma Kelkar in the comments suggests that this is because throttling the power limit also just directly throttles the clock speeds]. Remember that the switching power is coming from every transistor in the GPU, not just the ones holding data! So that includes the transistors for say, keeping track of the current program counter, keeping track of how many loop iterations you need to perform, the ones signaling other transistors to perform operations, pretty much everything that a GPU can possibly be doing.

Now, to test the effect of GPU clocks on using predictable vs. unpredictable inputs, I’ll use a a power limit of 200 and vary the GPU clock limit.

We see that at the top range of the clock frequency, there is nearly no change in the ratio, as presumably even with predictable inputs, we’re still getting throttled. Then, as we decrease the clock speed, the relative gap shrinks as predictable inputs are affected by the clock speed limit, but not unpredictable inputs. Finally, at the very left of the chart, both using predictable and unpredictable inputs have identical performance, as both become completely limited by our manual clock speed limit and don’t do any power throttling.

Another interesting thing we can test is, for a given input and power limit, what is the maximum clock speed the GPU can sustain for a matmul?

This observation that GPUs are unable to sustain their peak clock speed due to power throttling is one of the primary factors that separates “real” matmul performance from Nvidia’s marketed specs.

The figure that Nvidia provides for marketing is:

\(\text{FLOPS} = \text{Tensor Cores on GPU} \cdot \text{Max Clock Speed} \cdot \text{FLOP per Tensor Core Instruction}\)

For example, on an H100, there are 528 tensor cores per GPU (4 per SM), the max clock speed for these is 1.830 Ghz, and the FLOP per tensor-core instruction is 1024. Thus, we have 1.830e9 * 528 * 1024 = 989 TFLOPS, exactly Nvidia’s listed number.

However, you can only achieve this number by sustaining 1.83 Ghz clocks, and as we’ve seen above, the GPU just doesn’t have enough power to do that!

Do note that in both of these cases, the GPUs have a higher power limit than I can test (400W on A100 and 700W on H100 respectively), so it’s able to sustain a higher clock speed than what’s charted here. But we can see that, especially on the H100, the max sustainable clock speed is much lower than the theoretical one! In other words, matmuls on the H100 are primarily not compute or bandwidth limited, they are power limited.

As many have noted, power is increasingly a crucial constraint. So, although the H100 theoretically had 3x more FLOPS than the A100, its “real” performance has usually been closer to 2x due to the power throttling we’ve been discussing, and its “flops per watt” is even less than that.

Update (6/25): Nvidia recently released their MLPerf submission which largely confirms the hypothesis in this blog post. Thanks Sophia Wisdom for the pointer!

This leads to high Tensor Core utilization and can result in scenarios where Tensor Core throughput is constrained by the power available to the GPU.

In the submission with 512 H100 GPUs, we improved end-to-end performance by redirecting power from the L2 cache memory on each H100 GPU to the streaming multiprocessor (SM), which houses, among other units, NVIDIA Hopper fourth-generation Tensor Cores.

All of this should make you exceedingly curious to see the actual performance improvement on the B100, which has a 1.75x theoretical increase in FLOPS with the same power usage as the H100. I have a Manifold market about guessing the max FLOPS utilization on a B100.

I’ll leave you with a slightly modified version of this tweet from roon.

Thanks to Sophia Wisdom, Vijay Thakkar, Philippe Tillet, Dylan Patel, and Natalia Gimelshein who have helped me understand this phenomenon.

Also, be aware that you need to set the `scale` parameter on the CUTLASS profiler if you wanna compare its FLOPS numbers to other benchmarks!

1

The A100 GPU I’m testing this on happens to have a power limit of 330W.

2

It’s hard for me to say for sure, since I can’t count how many times each individual transistor flips :)

No posts

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

30. What Is a Direct Attach Copper (DAC) Cable? (2021)

Source: https://www.servethehome.com/what-is-a-direct-attach-copper-dac-cable/
Site: ServeTheHome
Author: Rohit Kumar
Published: 2021-10-09
HN activity: 99 points · 82 comments
Length: 1.3K words (~6 min read)
Language: en-US

40Gb_QSFP+_copper_twinax_cable

At STH, we use the term “DAC” to reference Direct Attach Copper cabling dozens of times each year. Almost every time we use the term, someone asks the question, “What is a DAC?” Since at STH we believe it is important to help impart knowledge, even if many readers already know the answer, we felt like it was time for a quick guide.

In simple terms, a DAC has modules at either end of a ~26-28 AWG twinax copper cable that allows direct communication between devices over copper wire. Both ends have specific connectors and the cable length is fixed. Electromagnetic shielding around the copper cable increases as the speeds increase to keep communication reliable.

In this example, we have two QSFP+ connectors on either end. There is then a fixed cable that goes between the two ends allowing devices to communicate. This cable, unlike optical transceivers, is usually a fixed length and limited in maximum length by signal integrity.
40Gb_QSFP+_copper_twinax_cable

As part of our fiber optic guide series, we are mostly focusing on optics. Optical communication is essential for the long-range transmission of data. As networks get faster, and we push into the 400GbE era and beyond, the distance that copper communication can reliably and practically travel at those speeds is limited. For the next few years, we are still likely to see copper DACs between devices in a single rack, but going forward, most rack-to-rack and beyond connectivity will happen via optical communication.

What is a Breakout DAC Cable?

We are going to note that you may see one other important type of DAC cable, the breakout DAC. With modules such as QSFP+ for 40GbE networking and QSFP28 for 100GbE networking the “Q” stands for Quad. As a result, one way to conceptualize the QSFP+ connector above is that it is carrying four (quad) SFP+ channels. SFP+ is 10Gbps, QSFP+ is 40Gbps, four (quad) 10Gbps links give us 40Gbps of bandwidth. The same conceptual model holds for SFP28 and QSFP28. As a result, a somewhat common practice is to use the higher-density QSFP+/ QSFP28 form factors and split them to connect to 2-4 lower-speed devices. Here is an example with four SFP+ ends on one side and a single QSFP+ side on the other:
QSFP+ To SFP+ Breakout DAC

We are going to quickly note that while conceptually this works, not all switches, routers, NICs, servers, storage, and other components support breakout. These days, most do, but there are still quite a few exceptions where they do not. There are even NICs like the HPE 620QSFP28 4x 25GbE Single QSFP28 Port Ethernet Adapter, that are intended to have a QSFP28/ QSFP+ port used with DACs or as four separate connections.
HPE 620QSFP28 Quad 25GbE Qlogic Adapter In 1x QSFP28 Port

Although you can see one physical port above, you can see the NIC as four separate 25GbE devices not just a 100GbE device:
HPE 620QSFP28 Quad 25GbE Qlogic NIC Lshw

The important thing here is that DACs and this breakout DAC cable model is so prevalent that we even see specific cards using breakout DACs just to increase port density.

We will quickly note that you can get QSFP+ to 1x SFP+ or QSFP28 to 1x SFP28 DACs that perform a similar function to what we covered in our piece Using a 40GbE (QSFP+) NIC with a 10GbE Switch (SFP+).

How Far Do DACs Reach?

This is a bit dependent on the type of DAC, and the vendor. Generally speaking, we are moving into an era as we move above 100GbE speeds where DACs will be limited to 5m runs and shorter runs.

One other small note, and one that is important, is that as DACs move to higher speed, they also require more shielding. More shielding leads to a bigger cable. This in turn means that higher speed DACs are less flexible than lower speed DACs. If you look at a typical QSFP+ 40GbE DAC versus a QSFP28 100GbE DAC, you will see the one used in 100GbE networking is thicker and stiffer. That means that routing DAC cables in a rack is more challenging than it had been previously. One nice thing with DACs, unlike fiber cables, is that they are a lot less sensitive to the bend radius of the cable.

There are also two main types of DACs, active and passive. Passive use less power. Active use more power but gain a bit more distance. Still, even active DAC cables do not reach the same distances as optical connections. We will quickly note here that there are Active Optical Cables that are somewhat like DACs as being pre-assembled fixed-length solutions. They can, however, reach further distances since they use optical communication.

Why Not Just Use Optics Instead of DACs?

Perhaps the key reason is simply cost. There are really two kinds of costs that can be involved: hardware and operating costs. To get into why let us look at a conceptual model of both.
QSFP28 100GbE DAC V Fiber Optic Server To Switch Conceptual Model

Here we are representing copper/ electrical communication with orange and the fiber is blue. Using DACs, the transition between the modules (here QSFP28) and the chips in the larger systems is copper to copper.

For optics, we must convert electrical signaling on one side to optical to transmit information over optics. We then need to have a receiving side to pick up the light patterns and convert that to electrical signaling. That conversion needs to happen in both directions.

As a result, optics tend to cost more due to their complexity, and they also tend to use more power. Additional hardware costs and power costs once deployed are the key drivers to continue using DACs within racks. Also, DACs due to their simplicity are considered very reliable.

What Kind of DAC Should You Look For?

There are two big items we would suggest looking for. The first is the speed. For Ethernet, here is the common set:

10GbE/ 40GbE Generation

10GbE to 10GbE: SFP+ to SFP+
40GbE to 40GbE: QSFP+ to QSFP+
40GbE to 4x 10GbE: QSFP+ to 4x SFP+
40GbE to 1x 10GbE: QSFP+ to SFP+

25GbE/ 50GbE/ 100GbE Generation

25GbE to 25GbE: SFP28 to SFP28
50GbE to 50GbE: QSFP28 to QSFP28
100GbE to 100GbE: QSFP28 to QSFP28
100GbE to 4x 25GbE: QSFP28 to 4x SFP28
100GbE to 2x 50GbE: QSFP28 to 2x QSFP28
100GbE to 1x 25GbE: QSFP28 to 1x SFP28
100GbE to 1x 50GbE: QSFP28 to 2x QSFP28

That should be most of the conversions you need to know. This model will work for generations such as QSFP56 and QSFP-DD and beyond as well.

The second item is vendor compatibility. Many switch, router, server, storage, and NIC vendors lock optics in switches to only be compatible with the vendor’s more expensive validated optics. One could connect a Cisco router to a HPE switch, for example, by placing a Cisco QSFP28 optic in the Cisco switch and a HPE QSFP28 optic in the HPE switch. Then one can run a cable between them. With DACs, it is trickier since both ends are fixed to a cable. As a result, devices can still be picky about which DACs are used, but it is not uncommon that we see devices less constraining when using DACs versus optics. Still, this is something to keep in mind when looking for cables.

Final Words

Even though we are doing a massive fiber-optic series, DACs are still extremely useful. They help cut costs significantly to the point that they are essential data center gear. Hopefully, this guide helped you understand what a direct attach copper cable is, why they are used, and what to look for.

