Hacker News Top 30 — 2026-06-06

Generated on 2026-06-06 03:02 UTC

1. The intracies of modern camera lens repair (2024)

Source: https://salvagedcircuitry.com/sigma-45mm.html
Site: salvagedcircuitry.com
Author: Anthony Kouttron
Submitted: 2026-06-06 00:33 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 74 points · 15 comments
Length: 3.4K words (~15 min read)
Language: en-US

Sigma 45mm f/2.8 Lens Repair & Analysis

[05.12.24]

I have a camera gear collection problem and as part of my personal 12 step plan, I restrict myself from purchasing functioning lenses. This sounds illogical, and it frankly is, but it's very hard for me to resist heavily discounted lenses. To keep my hat, I tend to only bid on lenses that are less than 1/4 of the going used sale prices and have little to no mechanical damage. In this case I've been eyeing the recently produced sigma I-series lenses that feature mostly aluminum construction. A broken 45mm f/2.8 lens popped up on ebay in January for a song and a dance, and I simply could not resist.

The auction was listed by an ebay seller that tends to have regular inventory of broken modern camera gear which is great from a repair perspective. Occasionally the seller will teardown equipment and sell parts, leaving me a bit uneasy about the internal state of the listed items for sale, but I took a chance and went with it.

Arrival

The lens came well packaged and on initial inspection, featured zero mechanical flaws. No scratches on the barrel or lens elements whatsoever. To properly inspect the outer lens elements, I use my oil free air compressor and thoroughly blow off any debris from the lens and properly clean both front and rear element with a kimwipe and lens cleaning solution. Eye glasses cleaner from the drug store is adequate for most external lenses. Isopropyl alcohol is another good alternative, but don't use on plastic lenses.

This is broken???

I mounted the lens to my Lumix S5 and with seemingly too much force, it clicked into place. The camera booted up fine and even displayed a live image, but no electronic controls worked whatsoever. None of the dials or switches on the lens responded to user input. The control dials on the camera did not register movement. Clearly, there was something electrically wrong with the lens. The control PCB is usually found on the rear of the lens nearest to the rear lens contact block. It would also provide a good time to investigate the very stiff lens mount.

Tools

The barriers to entry on this repair are low. Most of these tools are pretty standard and generic at this point. The biggest expense besides the lens is filtered air, but even a compressed air duster can suffice. Note: Since most of the camera industry design folks are centered in Japan, the JIS screw is standard. Using a Phillips will work but it tends to wear down the heads on the JIS screws faster. Here are some of my go-to tools:

Kimwipes / lint-free lens cleaning wipes
Spray Isopropyl Alcohol (ipa)
Eye glass cleaner
Microfiber cloth
Nitrile gloves
Highly filtered shop air / oil free compressor
Tape
Sharpie
Scalpel
Plastic Spudger
Magnifier / optic
JIS x 2.5mm / Philips #00 screwdriver
JIS x 3.0mm / Philips #0 screwdriver

Disassembly

For disassembly, I orient the lens with the aperture mark facing me and the table front edge. The rear plastic beauty spacer around the rear element is removed first along with (3) black machine screws. Following, the two nickel plated screws that fixture the side of the plastic lens block terminal interface to the metal lens mount are removed. The screws are placed on double sided tape in an orientation that matches the lens orientation. This makes future reassemble substantially easier.

Next order of business, the lens mount bayonet and shims. The orientation and order of these shims matter so they deserve their own bit of tape. This lens had trouble mounting to a camera body so I thoroughly inspected the shims, bayonet mount back and the lens body for imperfections and surface contamination. I cleaned all surfaces with ipa and moved on. Note: be extra careful when handling the lens contact block flex cable.

At this point in the disassembly, the lens contact block can be freely removed from the control PCB. The contact block for L-mount features 10 terminals that connect to the control PCB via a flexible polyimide cable. This flex cable has a tendency to tear easily, especially if not handled carefully. Before continuing further with the teardown, take a multimeter and check the continuity of each trace. If there are visible tears in the flex cable, repair that first before continuing to diagnose any problems. I have another guide on how to make your own flex cables here. The flex cable metered out to be flawless, so I proceeded the teardown.

The rear CNC machined aluminum shell of the lens is up next. Two grounding straps are fixtured to the rear shell using nickel plated machine screws. The straps are oriented around the 2pm and 7pm clock position. A push-in switch flex connector is positioned around the 11pm position that can be wiggled out using a pair of tweezers. There are (4) black oxide self tapping screws that mate the shell to the center plastic lens module. The rear shell can now be safely lifted up and set aside, with the aperture mark positioned toward the table edge.

The control PCB and remainder of the flex cables are now easily accessible. Three black self tapping screws mate the PCB to the plastic lens module at the 2pm, 7pm, and 10pm clock position, respectively. Once the flex cables are wiggled loose, the control PCB can be freed from the lens body and more closely scrutinized.

PCB Analysis

The C-shaped PCB looks right at home with the dozens of other lens control PCBs I've analyzed. There's a main microcontroller, DC-DC controller, motor controller, crystal oscillator, and a slew of passives.

The reverse side is adorned with FPC (Flexible Printed Circuit) connectors, test points and an 8-pin SPI flash package directly below the main microcontroller.

Inspecting any unknown PCB for faults can be quite intimidating, but I find it easiest to start with tracing the input power lines first. Where is this board supposed to receive power from? Where do the V+ and Gnd traces first begin on the PCB? What is the first component that receives power on the board? PCBs can be a very complicated mess of layers and jumped traces, so feel free to write down simplified schematic notes on scrap paper to keep a simple PCB power order-of-operations.

To start, trace the input power from the lens terminal block. The thicker flex PCB traces are most definitely V+ and Gnd. Follow those traces on the PCB and use the continuity mode of your multimeter to find out where the power traces on the PCB lead to. In this case, tracing the input power is tricky because the large traces associated with the flex cable are hidden beneath the FPC connector and passed through the PCB to the opposite side through vias. The power traces were then fed to a small square black chip, a staple in small scale electronics: the DC-DC converter.

A telltale sign of a DC-DC controller is the presence of an adjacently placed properly-chunky tan, beige or black colored block that dwarfs the size of the power controller. The photo below indicates a circled "2R2" or a 2.2 uH (micro Henry) inductor. This close proximity inductor arrangement is universally recommended by semiconductor manufacturers in effort to reduce radiated emissions / noise.

In this case, the 16-VQFN package TI TPS62140RGTR Buck converter, labeled as "PA71 TI 18i" is used in this sigma lens PCB. The layout engineer heeded the advice of the TI datasheet and implemented a very similar layout but added a few components to keep things spicy. Looking over the layout recommendation, "C1" connects Vin to Gnd, and serves as the main input filter capacitor for the dc-dc converter. Inquisitive minds can easily determine that the unknown "N" labeled package adjacent to C1 on the input voltage rail is indeed a fuse to protect the dc-dc from damage. A quick check with the multimeter confirms that the fuse was open, so it took one for the team and saved the DC-DC from destruction.

Searching online for an "N" labeled fuse does not lead to many promising search results but it did bring up a suggested 2a rated smt fuse on aliexpress. The TI TPS62140RGTR datasheet quotes a 2a output current, and while there's operational quiescent current, 2a is likely an appropriate value. Being familiar with the Panasonic Semi smt fuses used all throughout the Lumix camera line, I picked up a 2amp 32v fast blow fuse part# ERB-RE2R00V. The lumix gh3, gh4 and gh5 cameras use a mixture of 32v 2.5a and 1.5a fuses, so I knew I was in the right ballpark. I have found that in camera electronics, 2 terminal resistor-looking packages with arbitrary single letter notation tend to be smt fuses. They sometimes have scalloped terminals.

The fuse implemented was sized as 0603, making repair possible with less expensive and precise equipment. 0402 and even 0201 fuses very much exist. The layout engineer also left space beside the fuse for ease of access with repair tools. There have been many times when a fuse was put in a pocket or crowded section of a PCB requiring a nearby component desoldering to gain access to the failed component. An example is the Lumix GH3 / GH4 mainboard that features the battery input fuse sandwiched between an SD card slot and a protruding battery connector. SMT tweezers make this repair a breeze, but wielding two soldering irons also works in a pinch. Desolder the failed fuse, clean the pads, position the new fuse, hold down the fuse and solder one terminal at a time.

Fuse Investigation

As to why the fuse failed, I have not discovered a specific failure point. Certain conclusions can be arrived at, such as specific edge cases where someone leaves the lens in AFC mode (auto focus continuous) and sets the camera to hunt for focus for hours / days on end. It's possible the lens was never designed to be used 24/7 for racking focus and caused the buck converter to pull more current than than 2a fuse could sustain, causing it to open.

An interesting operational condition in the TI datasheet may provide clues to the failure point. On page 11 it states: "The output current of the device is limited by the current limit (see Section 7.5). Due to internal propagation delay, the actual current can exceed the static current limit during that time." "ILIMF is the static current limit. ILIMF = High-side MOSFET forward current limit. Test conditions: VIN = 12 V, TA = 25°C. Min:2.45A Typ:3A Max:3.5A." Thus in over current situations, due to internal propagation delay, the actual current consumed can exceed the static current limit for a very short amount of time. If the lens control PCB designers implemented a 2a fast-acting smt fuse as estimated, the dc-dc controller would have been operating outside the 2a fuse specification. This is speculation at this point, but failure point analysis is certainly interesting.

Did the repair work?

What's the TLDR? Does she chooch? Most certainly! This is the lens in action. AFC performance is not lightning fast, but I don't expect it to be! The manual focus dial works wonders and has just the right amount of dampening to make it enjoyable to use. The aperture ring feels like a close cousin to the Lumix LX100, which is nothing short of excellent.

Further Troubleshooting

If the fuse was continuous, the next target for inspection would be the output voltage on the dc-dc. Is the output within operational specifications? Is it below or exceeding the power requirements of the main microcontroller? The main micro on this PCB is labeled as a "341Fy 551486" but it is really a Toshiba TMPM341FYXBG. This is a 32bit Arm M3 micro with plenty of features, I/O peripheral support and motor control communication protocols. A microcontroller chip serves as the main communication hub on the control PCB. Dedicated microcontrollers require accurate clock signals to speak with other micros and peripherals in circuit, thus if you find a dedicated crystal oscillator on a PCB, there's a good chance there's a microcontroller nearby!

Traditional quartz crystal oscillators vary in operational frequency and are sealed in metal packages silver in luster. They are commonly found in surface mount or through hole packages in many shapes and sizes. MEMS crystal oscillators are a possibility but they are slightly more expensive and thus not as common. MEMS oscillators are usually a very tiny square reflective chip-scale / flip-chip package. Some microcontrollers feature on-chip oscillators but they are not as consistent as external crystals, thus external crystals are still preferred.

Building on previous troubleshooting, the TMPM341FYXBG needs to be checked for input power. Failure of any components between the output rail of the dc-dc controller and the power input of the TMPM341FYXBG can cause the main micro to malfunction. The TMPM341FYXBG is a 0.5mm pitch 6x6mm 113 ball P-TFBGA113 BGA package, meaning there is no easy probing of Vin and gnd. The nearby circuit will have to be investigated. Working with what we know, the main micro is a Arm M3, meaning it's a 3.3v component. The Toshiba datasheet quotes an operational voltage range of 2.7 to 3.6V. If input power to the micro is not within that range, or if there's a short between Vin and ground near the micro, that's definitely a red flag.

The easiest way to probe for voltages live is to install the lens contact flex back into the control PCB and 3D print a fake lens as a jig in order to get the lens PCB in contact with a camera body on hand. Surprisingly, this is an easier feat than expected since sigma uploaded nearly all of their camera bodies and accessories on grabcad for free. Step files for all y'all. Hats off to sigma for uploading these, most camera companies do not do this. Once the lens control PCB is in position and mounted to the camera, probing can begin. Power traces are conventionally wider than signal traces, so one can go about probing wide traces near the TMPM341FYXBG for 3.3v.

If the microcontroller is receiving power within specification, an additional range of troubleshooting would be necessary to diagnose the lens PCB failure. Luckily, there are circular test pads near the main micro, indicating these control PCBs were programmed and tested on a bed-of-nails jig before assembly. Unfortunately, these test pads are not labeled so finding the correct ones becomes a game of trial and error. A logic analyzer would be needed to probe the test points near the microcontroller. If UART can be discovered on any of the test pins, the logic analyzer can help provide input on whether the microcontroller is booting correctly by deciphering the boot-up bit sequence.

Depending on how far down the rabbit hole you want to go, there is an 8 pin SPI flash package labeled "GD V4CE 2030" which is likely a 8-32mbit nor package that is commonly used with ARM microcontrollers to extend program memory space. While I do not have the exact datasheet for this package, I was able to determine it was indeed flash because "GD" is the designated company prefix for "GigaDevice" a known memory package manufacturer and 8 pin packages are a staple in small sized external flash packages. In this case, the package measures a very small 3*2mm XY footprint and closely matches the USON8 LGA8 packages offered in the GigaDevice datasheet (page 29). The flash chip can be desoldered and the contents can be read / cloned onto another flash package if there was an inkling that the flash package might have failed. The analysis of the flash package exceeds the context of this repair, but it is interesting to investigate the extent of failure analysis.

If the main microcontroller seems to be working correctly, there would likely be some input values displayed on the camera LCD when the lens control PCB is installed, such as aperture or focus distance information. The values may be incorrect but some values should be displayed on the camera display from the lens controller micro. Continuing down the line, the next target would be the motor controller IC. In this case, the "U24020 202184" package is a Rohm BU24020GU motor controller configured as an SPI peripheral. SPI is a synchronous form of communication and requires a clock signal between the master controller and slave device.

Looking at the PCB macro shot, the BU24020GU has plenty of surrounding passive components but has an unpopulated 4 pin package that was likely intended for a 4 terminal slot-style Photointerrupter but was abandoned later in the development cycle. This is the kind of simplistic sensor that is positioned around a coded rotating disc to log positioning information. Looking over the Rohm datasheet, this is another 3.3v part. Just as before, thou shall check voltages! If the part is not receiving the 2.7 --> 3.6v input range, the chip's not going to work properly. This is unfortunately another BGA component, so probing is going to be challenging. However, physics never left your side, and there's mobile electrons on this here highway. Thicker traces = more electrons!

Looking around the U24020 chip, you can see a pattern in series of three - three arrangements of two capacitors tied to ground. These two capacitors are decoupling capacitors, sized "big" and "small." The big decoupling capacitor is usually between 0.1uf and 1uf while the small capacitor is in the nanofarad range. This arrangement of capacitors is very common and is designed to reduce noise at different frequencies. The datasheet tells us this is a four channel motor controller, and the capacitor arrangement tells us that power to all channels has been laid out on the PCB. Thus, a measurement between any of highlighted power pairs will provide all you need to know. The datasheet lists Vin = DVDD, MVCC12, MVCC34 while Gnd = DVSS, MGND12 MGND34. Vin and gnd are highlighted in the traditional color scheme, red for Vin, black for gnd.

If the motor controller is receiving 3.3v but the lens focus motor is not moving when a focus pull is triggered, make sure to optically inspect the lens focus flex cable. Flex cables tend to fatigue and break if the flex radius is compressed too small. Fatiguing cables can be problematic because depending on the movement of the cable, the focus mechanism can begin to temporarily work again, but it's a false positive as the next flex may kill lens communication.

Other Lens PCB Tidbits

Looking over the lens PCB macro shots, there are a slew of tiny holes scattered throughout the board. These tiny holes are through hole vias and a large number of them are drilled into the green top layer ground pour. These vias serve as return paths for noisy components on the PCB and connect the outer layer ground pour to inner ground layers. You may have wondered why there are such large clusters of vias in certain parts of the board but not in others. Clusters of vias, or via stitching, is used to provide a low-impedance path for the return current induced by a particularly noisy component. By surrounding a noisy component or region of the PCB, stitching vias can block propagation of electromagnetic waves up to some maximum frequency. The stitching vias implemented here do not fully enclose any trace or specific component, so they do not work as a Faraday cage or as a guard ring, but they do provide noise return paths to help lower radiated EMI during the final design process.

Conclusion

I completed this repair about 2 months ago, just in time for spring's first blooms in the north eastern United States. The 45mm lens has been working a treat in and around the garden and for documenting other electronics projects. I added some sample photos in the behind-the-scenes photoset to show this lens in action. It's amazing that a tiny 0603 component can keep a good lens down and I'm glad I was able to thoroughly document the repair process for others to learn from. All in all, the complete lens teardown and fuse swap took less than an hour! In comparison, this writeup easily exceeded an order of magnitude more time to complete than the repair. Would I do it all again? Most certainly!

Thanks for Reading!

Want more? Here's a behind the scenes look at my workspace and some of the images that did not make the cut to be included in the write-up:

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

2. pg_durable: Microsoft open sources in-database durable execution

Source: https://github.com/microsoft/pg_durable
Site: GitHub
Submitter: coffeemug (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-05 15:59 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 342 points · 80 comments
Length: 1.8K words (~9 min read)
Language: en

Long-running, fault-tolerant SQL functions for teams that already keep their state in Postgres and want to stop stitching together cron jobs, workers, queues, and status tables to make background work reliable. Define the workflow in SQL, let pg_durable checkpoint each step, and resume after crashes, restarts, or failed steps.

Durable execution is now a standard industry pattern, and pg_durable brings it inside Postgres with no extra service infrastructure required. Part of our mission to bring compute close to data.

Try pg_durable now in Azure HorizonDB, Microsoft's new PostgreSQL cloud service engineered for performance and built with pg_durable inside

Is this for me?

Who it's for

Backend and data engineers who want workflows to live next to the data they touch.
DBAs and SREs automating runbooks that must survive restarts and be auditable in SQL.
Teams building data or AI pipelines that need durable execution per row, document, or batch.

The core idea

A pg_durable function is a graph of SQL steps that PostgreSQL executes and checkpoints as it goes. If the database crashes, restarts, or a step fails, execution resumes from the last durable checkpoint instead of making you reconstruct state by hand.

Workloads this is useful for

Vector embedding pipelines: chunk, call an embedding API, and upsert into pgvector.
Ingest pipelines: stage, deduplicate, transform, and publish large batches.
Scheduled maintenance: detect bloat, notify, wait for approval, then run the next action.
Fan-out aggregation: run independent queries in parallel, then join the results.
External API workflows: enrichment, classification, and webhook-style calls from SQL.

What you're probably doing today instead

pg_cron plus a jobs table, status columns, retry counters, and a polling worker.
An external orchestrator such as Airflow, Temporal, Step Functions, or Argo calling back into Postgres.
A queue plus workers plus a separate state table to coordinate retries and partial completion.
A plpgsql procedure that works until a crash or long-running transaction forces you to start over.

Pain points it addresses

A restart in the middle of a long job means rerunning work that already succeeded.
One failed row or one failed API call turns into manual cleanup and uncertain replay.
Long transactions hold locks, grow WAL, and make batch jobs fragile at larger scale.
Parallel work in the app tier creates more places for partial-failure bugs and drift.
The workflow logic ends up spread across SQL, workers, queues, dashboards, and status tables.

What changes in your architecture

The workflow definition moves into SQL and starts with df.start(...).
Retry state, progress tracking, and checkpointing move into Postgres instead of bespoke app code.
Some app-tier workers, queue consumers, or scheduler glue can disappear entirely.
Operational visibility comes from Postgres tables such as df.instances, using the same auth and backup model as your data.

When not to use it

The job is already a single INSERT ... SELECT or one ordinary SQL statement.
You need sub-millisecond synchronous request handling rather than durable background execution.
You cannot install extensions or run a background worker in your Postgres environment.
The workflow mostly lives outside Postgres and spans many heterogeneous systems.
You need arbitrary application logic that does not map cleanly to SQL steps, branching, loops, or HTTP calls.

How it works

Define a workflow in SQL using composable operators such as ~> and |=>.
Start it with df.start() and get back an instance ID.
Let the runtime execute each step durably with checkpointing between steps.
Query status and results from PostgreSQL while the workflow runs or after it completes.

Limitations

The model is intentionally SQL-shaped. If a step needs arbitrary code, a non-HTTP SDK, or rich in-memory control flow, you may need to wrap that logic in a SQL function, expose it behind an HTTP endpoint for df.http(), or use a general-purpose orchestrator for that part of the system.

Features

Durable — Function state persists to PostgreSQL. Survives crashes, restarts, and failovers.
SQL-native — Define functions in SQL using composable operators.
Database-aware — First-class primitives for scheduling, conditions, and parallel execution.
Zero infrastructure — Runs as a PostgreSQL extension. No Redis, no Temporal, no external services.

Quick Example

-- A durable function that processes data in steps
SELECT df.start(
    'SELECT id FROM documents WHERE processed = false LIMIT 100' |=> 'batch'
    ~> 'UPDATE documents SET processed = true WHERE id = ANY($batch)'
);

Packages

Tagged releases publish Debian packages for PostgreSQL 17 and 18 on amd64 from the GitHub release assets. Packages are named pg-durable-postgresql-<PG major>_<pg_durable version>-1_<arch>.deb and install the extension library, control file, and SQL upgrade files into the matching PostgreSQL installation directories.

After installing a package, add pg_durable to shared_preload_libraries, restart PostgreSQL, and create the extension in the configured pg_durable database:

CREATE EXTENSION pg_durable;

The default pg_durable database is postgres; see User Guide for background worker configuration and privilege setup.

Release assets also include source archives for building from source.

Development Installation

Prerequisites

PostgreSQL 17 or 18
Rust (nightly)
cargo-pgrx 0.16.1

GitHub Codespace

The main branch prebuild installs PostgreSQL 17, builds pg_durable, and prepares a local cluster under ~/.pgrx with the extension ready. PostgreSQL is not left running, so start it when you begin working.

# Start PostgreSQL
./scripts/pg-start.sh

# Connect
~/.pgrx/17.*/pgrx-install/bin/psql -h localhost -p 28817 -d postgres

On a branch without a ready prebuild, run pg-start.sh — it will build and install the extension on first run (expect a few minutes):

./scripts/pg-start.sh

Other environments

Local and Dev Container

A VS Code Dev Container (.devcontainer/) provides Rust, cargo-pgrx, and PostgreSQL 17 pre-installed. For a bare local machine, install the toolchain first by following the steps in .devcontainer/onCreateCommand.sh.

# Build, initialize PostgreSQL, and install the extension
# This takes a while - go do something else
./scripts/pg-start.sh

# Connect to the local pgrx PostgreSQL instance
~/.pgrx/17.*/pgrx-install/bin/psql -h localhost -p 28817 -d postgres

pg-start.sh bootstraps new local data directories with a postgres superuser and also creates a matching superuser role for the current OS user, so default local psql usage continues to work. Use -U postgres if you want to force the canonical bootstrap role explicitly.

Docker

# Build and test
./scripts/test-e2e-docker.sh --rebuild

# Optional: Deploy to ACR (for custom PG17 image with pg_durable baked-in)
./scripts/deploy-acr.sh

Multi-User Setup

CREATE EXTENSION pg_durable does not grant any privileges to PUBLIC. After installing the extension, the admin must explicitly grant access to application roles. Row-level security (RLS) ensures each user can only see and manage their own durable function instances and nodes.

Grant privileges to an application role:

-- Grant to specific roles after CREATE EXTENSION
SELECT df.grant_usage('app_role');

Alternatively, create an indirection role and grant membership to application roles:

-- Create a shared role for pg_durable access
CREATE ROLE pg_durable_user NOLOGIN;
SELECT df.grant_usage('pg_durable_user');

-- Grant membership to application roles
GRANT pg_durable_user TO app_backend, etl_service;

See the User Guide — Privilege Grants section for the full list of individual grants, revoking access, and hardening upgraded installs.

Note: GRANT EXECUTE ON ALL FUNCTIONS only applies to functions that exist when the grant runs. After upgrading pg_durable with ALTER EXTENSION pg_durable UPDATE, re-run df.grant_usage('role') (or re-issue the manual grants) so new functions are accessible.

Key points:

The background worker role (pg_durable.worker_role GUC, default: postgres) must be a superuser — it bypasses RLS to manage all users' instances
Users get SELECT + INSERT on df.instances / df.nodes, column-level UPDATE (status, updated_at) on instances for df.cancel()
Identity column (submitted_by) cannot be modified by users
df.vars uses per-user scoping — each user has their own variable namespace via an owner column and RLS. Superusers bypass RLS but DSL functions still scope to the calling user via explicit filters. Avoid storing secrets in plain text

Continuous Integration

All pull requests must pass the following checks before merging:

Format Check — cargo fmt --check
Clippy & Tests — cargo clippy, unit tests (cargo pgrx test pg17), pg_regress tests, and E2E tests

The CI workflow is defined in .github/workflows/ci.yml. It uses pgrx to download and manage PostgreSQL.

Testing

pg_durable has two test suites:

pg_regress Tests (Standard PostgreSQL Regression Tests)

Fast, deterministic tests for core DSL functionality using PostgreSQL's standard testing framework. Test SQL lives in sql/, expected output in expected/, and PGXS is configured in the root Makefile.

make test-regress          # full reset + run
make installcheck          # run only (PostgreSQL must already be running)

E2E Tests (Comprehensive Scenario Tests)

Complex local integration tests with pgrx PostgreSQL:

./scripts/test-e2e-local.sh                                                  # All local SQL E2E tests, including special restart/config phases
./scripts/test-e2e-local.sh 04_parallel                                      # Specific test
./scripts/test-e2e-local.sh --default-build-phases                            # Only the default-build phase group

See tests/e2e/ for details.

Documentation

User Guide — Complete usage guide with examples
MVP Guide — Implementation details and internals
Examples — Example conventions and smoke-check guidance

Architecture

pg_durable is a PostgreSQL extension (built with pgrx) — everything runs inside the PostgreSQL server, no external services. The extension exposes a SQL DSL for building function graphs and registers a background worker that executes them durably on top of two lower-level Rust libraries:

duroxide — a durable task framework providing the orchestration runtime (deterministic replay, checkpoints, sub-orchestrations, timers).
duroxide-pg — a PostgreSQL-backed state provider for duroxide. It persists runtime state (instances, history, work queues) in a dedicated duroxide.* schema owned by the extension.

┌────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│                             PostgreSQL                             │
│                                                                    │
│  ┌──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐  │
│  │                 pg_durable extension (pgrx)                  │  │
│  │                                                              │  │
│  │  SQL DSL     'sql' |=> 'name' ~> 'sql2'                      │  │
│  │              df.if() | df.join() | df.loop()                 │  │
│  │                                                              │  │
│  │  Background worker (hosts the duroxide runtime in-process)   │  │
│  │  ┌────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐  │  │
│  │  │  duroxide        (orchestration runtime)               │  │  │
│  │  │  ┌──────────────────────────────────────────────────┐  │  │  │
│  │  │  │  duroxide-pg   (PostgreSQL state provider)       │  │  │  │
│  │  │  └──────────────────────────────────────────────────┘  │  │  │
│  │  └────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘  │  │
│  └──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘  │
│                                                                    │
│  Schemas                                                           │
│    df.*         DSL graphs (nodes, instances, vars)                │
│    duroxide.*   runtime state (owned by duroxide-pg)               │
└────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘


If you'd rather author durable functions in Rust, Python, or Node while still persisting state in PostgreSQL, you can use duroxide and duroxide-pg directly from your host language — pg_durable is what you'd build on top of that pair when you'd prefer authoring in SQL.

Status

Preview - This project is currently in preview.

Support

Use GitHub Issues for bug reports and feature requests. Do not report security vulnerabilities through public GitHub issues; follow the instructions in SECURITY.md instead.

Code of Conduct

This project has adopted the Microsoft Open Source Code of Conduct. For more information, see the Code of Conduct FAQ or contact opencode@microsoft.com with questions or comments.

Security

Microsoft takes the security of our software products and services seriously. Please do not report security vulnerabilities through public GitHub issues. See SECURITY.md for security reporting instructions.

Privacy and Telemetry

pg_durable does not send telemetry to Microsoft.

Trademarks

This project may contain trademarks or logos for projects, products, or services. Authorized use of Microsoft trademarks or logos is subject to and must follow Microsoft's Trademark & Brand Guidelines. Use of Microsoft trademarks or logos in modified versions of this project must not cause confusion or imply Microsoft sponsorship. Any use of third-party trademarks or logos is subject to those third-party policies.

License

PostgreSQL License

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

3. Astronauts told to return to ISS after sheltering over air leak repairs

Source: https://www.bbc.com/news/live/c4g44ew3g1kt
Site: BBC News
Author: BBC News
Published: 2026-06-05
HN activity: 364 points · 238 comments
Length: 453 words (~2 min read)
Language: en-GB

The seven men and women aboard the ISSpublished at 16:35 BST 5 June

Pallab Ghosh
Science correspondent

Image source, Anadolu via Getty Images
Image caption,

Crew-12 mission astronauts Jack Hathaway, Andrey Fedyaev, Jessica Meir and Sophie Adenot preparing to launch to the ISS from Florida

The seven crew members currently aboard the International Space Station represent five countries and a remarkable range of backgrounds.

Jessica Meir, 48, commands the Crew-12 mission. Born in Caribou, Maine, to Israeli and Swedish immigrant parents, she holds a doctorate in marine biology and once studied how emperor penguins hold their breath in Antarctica. She made history in 2019 as part of the first all-female spacewalk. She is a mother and a private pilot, and is conversational in both Swedish and Russian.

Jack Hathaway, 44, is Crew-12's pilot and a US Navy Commander from South Windsor, Connecticut. He trained as a test pilot at the Empire Test Pilots' School in the UK before being selected by NASA in 2021.

Sophie Adenot, 43, is a French colonel, helicopter test pilot and the second French woman ever to reach space, inspired as a teenager by watching Claudie Haigneré launch to the Mir space station. She speaks four languages, is a certified yoga teacher and a trained skydiver.

Chris Williams, 42, is a Nasa physicist and former cancer researcher at Harvard Medical School and Brigham and Women's Hospital who pivoted from studying the early universe for his MIT doctorate to treating tumours before becoming an astronaut. He also volunteered as a firefighter and EMT.

Sergey Kud-Sverchkov, 42, the station commander, is a rocket engineer born in Baikonur — the very city from which so many space missions have launched. He graduated with honours from Moscow State Technical University and worked as an engineer at RSC Energia before being selected as a cosmonaut in 2010. He was awarded the Hero of the Russian Federation after his first ISS mission in 2020. He has also trained in underground cave systems in Sardinia and studied planetary geology in the Dolomites as part of ESA's astronaut preparation programmes.

Sergei Mikaev, 39, is on his first spaceflight. Born in Irkutsk in Siberia, he rose to Major and commander of a military aviation unit in Primorsky Territory — Russia's remote far east, bordering China — before being selected as a cosmonaut in 2018. He is married with two children.

Andrey Fedyaev, 45, is a Russian cosmonaut and former Air Force major from Serov in the Ural mountains, on his second spaceflight. When he flew on Crew-6 in 2023, he became only the second Russian cosmonaut ever to launch aboard an American commercial spacecraft. He is now on his second mission, again flying alongside Nasa colleagues aboard Dragon.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

4. How LLMs Work

Source: https://www.0xkato.xyz/how-llms-actually-work/
Site: 0xkato
Author: 0xkato
Published: 2026-06-01
HN activity: 10 points · 1 comments
Length: 4.7K words (~21 min read)
Language: en

Home
Blog
Research
About
Portfolio

Monday. June 01, 2026 - 26 mins

This post is a walkthrough of how LLMs work. Modern LLMs are mostly built by stacking transformer blocks over and over, so understanding the transformer machinery gets you most of the way there.

I’ll cover the core mechanisms inside modern transformer-based LLMs, without all that sticky math stuff. Don’t get me wrong, you should learn the math, but this can serve as an introduction.

Most modern LLMs share the same transformer-family skeleton. The differences come from what each one was trained on, the scale and configuration choices, and the post-training done on top. By the end, you should be able to read many modern LLM papers or model cards and know which piece of the architecture each section is talking about.

Here’s the path:

Tokens, how a string of text becomes a sequence of integers
Embeddings, how those integers get meaning
Positional encoding, how the model knows what order the tokens came in
Attention, how tokens share information with each other
Multi-head attention, how the model tracks many kinds of relationships at once
The feed-forward network, where a large share of the model’s stored structure lives
The residual stream and layer normalization, what makes deep stacks trainable
Predicting the next token, what the model actually outputs and how the generation loop works
Architecture vs trained weights, what’s broadly shared across modern LLMs, and what’s different

Tiny explainers appear throughout so anyone can follow along, regardless of background.

Tokenization

Models don’t read text directly. They read integer IDs. The step that converts your prompt into a sequence of those integers.

That conversion step is called tokenization. A tokenizer takes a string and produces a sequence of integers, where each integer points to an entry in a fixed vocabulary. Modern LLM vocabularies usually contain tens of thousands to a few hundred thousand entries.

Tiny explainer: token ID
A token ID is the integer the model uses for one vocabulary entry. The model works with the number, not the written word itself.

Tokens aren’t usually whole words. They’re usually subword pieces. The word “tokenization” might split into [“token”, “ization”]. The word “running” might split into [“run”, “ning”]. The reason is efficiency. Whole-word vocabularies are too big and don’t generalize to new words. Character-level vocabularies are too small and force the model to learn even the simplest patterns from scratch. Subword tokenization sits in the middle. The most common pieces become single tokens, and rare or novel words get composed from smaller pieces.

Tiny explainer: vocabulary
The vocabulary is the tokenizer’s fixed list of pieces. Each piece has an ID, and the model can only directly receive IDs from that list.

The trade-off shows up in places people don’t expect. The classic example: ask an LLM how many R’s are in “strawberry.” LLMs used to get it wrong. That’s not the model failing at counting. It’s the model not operating on letters directly, only token IDs that happen to spell out a word a human would split letter by letter.

Different model families use different tokenizers. GPT models use Byte Pair Encoding variants. SentencePiece is common in LLaMA-style models. The choice matters for compute (fewer tokens means less work) and for things like multilingual coverage, but the basic shape is the same. Text in, integers out.

Now that the prompt is a sequence of integers, the next step is to give those integers meaning.

Embeddings

A token ID like 1024 is just a row index. It doesn’t mean anything by itself. The thing that gives it meaning is a giant table called the embedding matrix.

Every model has one. It has one row per entry in the vocabulary, and each row is a long vector of numbers. The length of each row is the model’s hidden size. In many 7B-class models, that means 4,096 numbers per token. Larger models usually use wider vectors.

Tiny explainer: vector
A vector is a list of numbers. In a transformer, each token becomes a vector so the model can do math with it.

When the tokenizer hands the model an integer, the model looks up that row and uses the vector instead. That vector is the token’s embedding. It’s the model’s representation of what that token “means,” learned during training.

Tiny explainer: embedding matrix
The embedding matrix is a lookup table. Token ID in, learned vector out.

The interesting property of these embeddings is that semantically similar tokens end up with similar vectors. The vector for “king” is close in space to the vector for “queen,” and the vector for “Paris” is close to “France.” None of this is hard-coded. It emerges from training on enough text, and the model learns these positions because they let it predict text well.

You can do arithmetic on embeddings and it sometimes works. The famous example is king − man + woman ≈ queen. The geometry of embedding space carries real semantic structure, even though nobody told the model to build it that way.

Worth being clear on: at this stage every token has been replaced by its embedding, but the embedding alone says nothing about where the token sits in the sequence. The vector for “dog” is the same vector whether “dog” is the first word in your prompt or the fifth. That’s a problem.

That’s the gap positional encoding fills.

Positional encoding

Plain self-attention doesn’t have a built-in representation of word order. Without some positional signal, it has no direct way to know that “dog” came before “bites” instead of after it.

Word order changes meaning. So the model needs another piece. It needs a way to inject the position of each token into the math.

Tiny explainer: positional encoding
Positional encoding is how the model gets order information. It tells the model where each token sits in the sequence.

The original transformer paper (Vaswani et al. 2017) did this by giving each position its own pattern of numbers and adding it directly to each token’s embedding before any other processing. Position 1 had one pattern, position 5 had a different pattern, position 100 had another. The patterns came from sine and cosine waves at different frequencies. Now the embedding for “dog” at position 1 was different from the embedding for “dog” at position 5, just because the position pattern added to it was different.

That worked, and sinusoidal encodings were chosen partly because they can extrapolate beyond the exact sequence lengths seen during training. But additive position schemes still had two problems that became important as models scaled up.

First, the embedding had to carry both meaning and position in the same set of numbers. There’s only so much you can pack in.

Second, learned absolute position embeddings in particular don’t generalize cleanly. If you trained on prompts up to 2,048 tokens long, the model never saw position 5,000 during training, and the embedding for that position was not learned in the same way.

Modern models mostly use a different scheme called Rotary Position Embeddings (RoPE), introduced by Su et al. in 2021 and now used in LLaMA, Mistral, Gemma, Qwen, and most other open-weight families. The intuition: instead of adding position info to each token’s vector, RoPE rotates the vector by an angle that depends on its position. A token at position 1 gets a small turn, a token at position 100 gets a bigger turn. When two tokens are later compared during attention, what matters is the difference between their rotations, which encodes how far apart they are.

Tiny explainer: RoPE
RoPE stands for Rotary Position Embeddings. Instead of adding a position vector, it rotates token vectors so relative distance shows up during attention.

The practical advantages are real. RoPE encodes relative position naturally (which is closer to what attention actually wants). It generalizes better to longer contexts. And it doesn’t add new parameters to the model.

Even with good positional encoding, modern LLMs have a documented “lost in the middle” problem (Liu et al. 2023). They use information at the start and end of long prompts more reliably than information buried in the middle. That’s why prompt engineering tips like “put important context first” or “repeat key info at the end” actually help. The model isn’t using every part of your prompt equally well.

With token meaning and position both encoded, the next question is how do tokens actually exchange information?

Attention

This is the mechanism that gave the architecture its name. Attention.

Inside every transformer layer, attention does one thing. It lets each token look at the other tokens it is allowed to see and decide which ones matter for what comes next.

It does this by giving each token three roles at once. Each token gets transformed into three new vectors, called Query, Key, and Value (Q, K, V).

Tiny explainer: Q, K, V
Query means “what am I looking for,” Key means “what do I match with,” and Value is the information that gets copied when the match is strong.

The Query asks, “what am I looking for from other tokens?”
The Key says, “this is what I offer to tokens looking at me.”
The Value carries, “this is what gets passed along when a match happens.”

The same token plays all three roles at the same time. The Q, K, V transformations are learned matrices, so the model figures out during training what each token should look for and what it should offer.

Matching happens through a similarity score. Each token’s Query is compared against the Key of each token it is allowed to see, using a scaled dot product. Intuitively, this measures how much the two vectors line up. The scaling keeps the numbers stable before softmax.

Tiny explainer: dot product
A dot product is a simple way to score how aligned two vectors are. Higher alignment means a stronger match.

The match scores then get turned into weights using softmax. Softmax takes any set of numbers and turns them into a probability-like distribution that sums to 1. Tokens with higher match scores get higher weights, and the weights are then used to take a weighted average of the value vectors.

Tiny explainer: softmax
Softmax turns raw scores into weights that add up to 1. Big scores get big weights, small scores get small weights.

An example. Consider the sentence “The cat that I saw yesterday was sleeping.” When the model processes “was,” it needs to figure out what’s doing the sleeping. The Query vector for “was” gets compared against the Key vectors of the tokens it is allowed to see. The dot product with “cat” is high, because the model has learned that verbs like “was” need a subject and that subjects like “cat” produce Key vectors that line up well. The dot product with “yesterday” is low. Softmax turns those scores into weights, “cat” gets a high weight, “yesterday” gets a low one. The model then takes a weighted sum of the corresponding value vectors, so the value for “cat” dominates the result. The new representation of “was” is now mostly shaped by the value of “cat.” That’s how a token several positions back becomes the referent.

There’s a constraint specific to GPT-style language models, which is that they generate text left to right. A token at position 5 is only allowed to attend to positions 1 through 5. It cannot attend to tokens at positions 6, 7, 8, because those haven’t been generated yet. This is called causal masking. The implementation is simple: future tokens get match scores so low they end up with effectively zero weight after softmax.

Tiny explainer: causal masking
Causal masking hides future tokens. It keeps a decoder-only language model from looking ahead while predicting the next token.

One of the most interesting findings in interpretability research is about specialized attention heads called induction heads, found by Anthropic in 2022. These heads learn to spot patterns of the form “A B … A” in the prompt and predict that B comes next. When the model sees “A” the second time, the induction head looks back to where “A” appeared before, sees what came after, and copies that. They’re one of the clearest known mechanisms behind in-context learning, the ability of an LLM to pick up a pattern from your prompt and continue it.

Tiny explainer: induction head
An induction head is an attention head that notices repeated patterns in the prompt and helps continue them.

Attention has one big cost. In full attention, each token compares against all the tokens it is allowed to see, so doubling the prompt length roughly quadruples the work. This is why long prompts are expensive to run, and why a lot of recent research is about making attention more efficient (FlashAttention, sparse attention, linear attention).

But one attention head only gives the model one learned view of those relationships.

Multi-head attention

A single attention pass gives the model one way of deciding which tokens matter to which other tokens. That’s not enough. Language has many relationships happening at the same time. Subject and verb agreement. Pronouns and the names they refer to. Long-range references between sentences. Word order and local phrases.

Multi-head attention solves this by running attention many times in parallel, with each parallel pass operating in its own smaller space. Each parallel pass is called a head.

Tiny explainer: attention head
An attention head is one independent attention pass with its own learned projections.

The part that’s often described wrong, including in plenty of tutorials. Each head doesn’t get a literal slice of the original token vector. Each head has its own learned projection matrices that map the full token vector down to its own smaller Q, K, and V vectors. So if a model has 4,096 numbers per token and 32 heads, each head usually works in a 128-dimensional space, but those 128 numbers are a learned projection of the full 4,096, not a fixed slice. Different “views” of the same token, not different chunks of it.

Each head runs its attention pass independently. Then the outputs of all the heads get concatenated and passed through a final linear layer that mixes them back into one full-size vector. The model learns that final mixing too.

What makes this interesting is that different heads often end up partially specialized. The model is never told what each head should do. Specialization emerges naturally during training. Researchers have found heads that track grammar (linking verbs to their objects, articles to their nouns), heads that figure out which pronoun refers to which name, heads that track positional patterns, induction heads, and many more. A single transformer layer might have 32 heads. A modern frontier model has dozens of layers. So a typical LLM has thousands of attention heads in total, each adding its own learned view.

There’s a practical cost concern that drove a recent architectural change. Each head needs to keep its Key and Value vectors in memory for all the tokens already generated, so that when a new token gets generated the model doesn’t have to recompute everything from scratch. This is called the KV cache, and it’s the main memory cost of running an LLM at long context lengths.

Tiny explainer: KV cache
The KV cache stores old Key and Value vectors during generation. It saves the model from recomputing the whole prompt every time it adds a token.

Modern decoder-only LLMs mostly use a variant called Grouped-Query Attention (GQA). Instead of every head having its own keys and values, groups of heads share the same key and value heads. LLaMA-2 70B has 64 query heads but only 8 key/value heads. Mistral 7B has 32 query heads and 8 key/value heads. The result is nearly the same accuracy as full multi-head attention but with much less memory pressure and inference cost.

Tiny explainer: GQA
Grouped-Query Attention lets multiple query heads share fewer key/value heads. That cuts KV-cache memory while keeping many query views.

Feed-forward network

After attention finishes mixing information between tokens, every layer has a second step that nobody talks about as much. The feed-forward network.

Where attention is about tokens talking to each other, the feed-forward network is about each token, on its own, doing more processing. It runs on every token’s vector independently, with no cross-token mixing.

The feed-forward network does three things in order:

Expand the token’s vector to a larger size (the original transformer used 4x, while modern SwiGLU models often use different expansion sizes).
Apply a non-linear function.
Compress the vector back down to its original size.

That non-linear step in the middle is doing something specific that’s worth understanding. A non-linearity is a function that bends its input. The simplest one, ReLU, outputs zero for any negative number and passes positive numbers through unchanged.

Tiny explainer: non-linearity
A non-linearity is a function that prevents the network from collapsing into one big linear transformation.

Without it, the FFN would just be two linear layers stacked together, and stacking pure linear math collapses. Two linear layers in a row are mathematically equivalent to a single linear layer, and a hundred linear layers in a row are still equivalent to one. The non-linearity is what stops that collapse, and it’s the reason the FFN can do something richer than a single matrix multiplication.

The original transformer used ReLU. GPT and BERT moved to GELU. Modern models like LLaMA, Mistral, and PaLM use SwiGLU. The expand-then-compress structure stayed the same. The non-linearity itself is what’s been iterated on.

Most of the parameters in a dense transformer model live in the FFN, not in attention. A large share of the weights sit in feed-forward layers.

And those parameters aren’t generic. They’re where much of the model’s stored factual and semantic structure lives. Researchers have found that some neurons inside the FFN are strongly associated with specific concepts or facts. One neuron might activate strongly on Eiffel-Tower-related text. Another on programming languages. Another on past-tense verbs. When a model “knows” that Paris is the capital of France, that fact is represented across FFN weights and activations in specific layers.

This stored-memory property has an interesting consequence. Researchers have figured out how to directly edit some facts in a trained model without retraining it. Methods like ROME (Rank-One Model Editing) can change “the Eiffel Tower is in Paris” to “the Eiffel Tower is in Rome” by making a targeted low-rank edit to a specific FFN weight matrix. The model then tends to generate text consistent with the edited association.

Some modern frontier models have started replacing the dense FFN with something called Mixture of Experts (MoE). Instead of one feed-forward network per layer, the model has many parallel FFNs (called experts) and a tiny router network that picks which experts process each token. Mixtral 8x7B has 8 experts per layer; only 2 are activated for any given token. The total parameter count goes up substantially, but the compute per token grows much more slowly because only a few experts run. That’s how you scale parameter count without scaling inference cost in proportion.

Tiny explainer: MoE
Mixture of Experts means the model has several feed-forward networks and routes each token through only a few of them.

Mixtral 8x7B has 46.7 billion total parameters but uses about 12.9 billion per token. This has become a common option for very large models because it lets you keep growing the parameter count without making inference cost grow in proportion.

Residual stream and layer normalization

The residual stream is what makes the model “additive” instead of “replacing.” After attention runs, or after the feed-forward network runs, the result usually doesn’t replace the token’s vector. It gets added to it. Position by position. The new vector equals the old vector plus the sub-block’s output.

Tiny explainer: residual connection
A residual connection adds a block’s output back to the vector it started from. It gives information and gradients a shortcut through the network.

Across thirty or fifty or a hundred layers, each layer’s contribution accumulates instead of simply overwriting the previous vector. That running sum is called the residual stream, and it has a strange property. The original input embeddings still have a direct additive path into late layers, mixed together with every sub-block’s contribution along the way.

Residual connections weren’t invented for transformers. They came from ResNet (He et al. 2015), originally for image recognition. The motivation was that deep networks were impossible to train. The training signal got too weak (or sometimes too strong) by the time it traveled back through many layers. The model couldn’t actually learn from its own mistakes. Adding a shortcut path let the signal flow directly back from the output to the input. Suddenly you could train networks with hundreds of layers. Transformers inherited the same trick.

In modern interpretability research, the residual stream has become the central object. Every component, every attention head, every feed-forward network, even the unembedding step at the end, reads from the residual stream and writes back to it.

The second piece, layer normalization, exists for a much more practical reason. Without it, the residual stream would not stay stable. Numbers flowing through dozens of additions tend to either explode upward or collapse toward zero. Either way, training fails. Layer normalization rescales each token’s vector back into a controlled range between sub-blocks.

Tiny explainer: layer normalization
Layer normalization rescales a token vector so its numbers stay in a stable range while the model trains.

The original 2017 transformer applied normalization AFTER each sub-block (post-norm). This worked for shallow models but became harder to train reliably as depth increased. Modern transformers (GPT-2 onward, LLaMA, Mistral) commonly apply normalization BEFORE each sub-block (pre-norm). That’s one of the changes that made very deep transformers easier to train.

The function itself has also changed. Many modern open models (LLaMA, Mistral, Gemma, Phi) use a simpler variant called RMSNorm. The original layer normalization did two things at once: shift each vector toward zero, then rescale the size of the numbers. RMSNorm drops the shift step and keeps only the rescaling. Empirically, the rescaling carries most of the benefit while being cheaper to compute.

Tiny explainer: RMSNorm
RMSNorm is a cheaper normalization method that rescales vector size without subtracting the mean first.

So that’s the unglamorous machinery. Without residual connections, very deep models become much harder to train. Without layer normalization, the running sum can blow up or collapse. With both, you get models hundreds of layers deep.

Next-token prediction

After all the layers of attention and feed-forward processing finish, the model has a vector for each token in the sequence. During generation, to predict the next word, it takes the final vector of the last token only.

That last vector gets converted into one number per possible next token. If the vocabulary has 100,000 tokens, that’s 100,000 numbers. These numbers are called logits. They aren’t probabilities yet. They can be any size, positive or negative.

Tiny explainer: logits
Logits are raw scores for each possible next token. They become probabilities only after softmax.

A softmax turns those logits into the model’s probability distribution over possible next tokens. Same operation as before, different place in the model.

The model usually does not just pick the highest-probability token every time. Decoding settings control how deterministic or varied the output is. Temperature changes how sharp the distribution is. Top-k and top-p limit the choices to the most plausible next tokens. That is why the same model can feel precise in one setting and more creative in another.

Tiny explainer: temperature
Temperature controls randomness during sampling. Low temperature makes the model more conservative; high temperature makes it more varied.

Once a token is picked, it gets added to the input. The model runs the next step on the longer sequence, usually reusing the KV cache so it doesn’t recompute the whole prefix from scratch. New attention for the new token. New feed-forward. New final vector. New prediction. The loop continues until the model emits an end-of-sequence token or hits a length limit. A whole paragraph is just this loop, one token at a time.

This single objective, predicting the next token, is the core training signal for a base LLM. The base model isn’t trained on factual accuracy, conversational ability, reasoning, or coding directly. It’s trained to predict the next token in massive amounts of text. Later post-training can then tune the model for instruction following, preference, safety, and conversational behavior.

There’s been a major efficiency innovation worth knowing about. It’s called speculative decoding. A small fast model proposes several tokens ahead. The big model verifies them in parallel. If the proposed tokens are accepted under the big model’s probabilities, accept them. If not, fall back to the big model. Done correctly, the output distribution matches running the big model alone, but the loop can run much faster.

Tiny explainer: speculative decoding
Speculative decoding uses a small draft model to guess ahead, then asks the larger model to verify several guessed tokens at once.

The next-token prediction loop is the simplest part of the architecture, but it’s what makes the whole thing work.

Architecture vs trained weights

We’ve gone through the core mechanisms: tokens, embeddings, positional encoding, attention, multi-head attention, the feed-forward network, the residual stream and normalization, and the next-token loop on the output side. That’s the basic architecture in one pass.

So what’s actually different between GPT and Claude and Gemini and LLaMA? Public details vary, and the proprietary models do not publish every architectural choice. But at the level this post is covering, they broadly sit in the same transformer-family design space.

Most modern transformer-based LLMs use the same broad structure: tokenization, embeddings, positional encoding, stacked transformer layers (each with multi-head attention and a feed-forward network), residual streams, layer normalization, and next-token prediction.

What changes between models is:

The trained weights themselves, learned from different training data at different scales.
The configuration: number of layers, vocabulary size, head count, parameter count, MoE or dense.
The post-training: instruction tuning, learning from human feedback, safety controls applied on top of the base model.

Tiny explainer: weights
Weights are the learned numbers inside the model. Training changes those numbers until the model predicts text well.

The 2023-2025 “modern transformer” stack converged on a common set of choices across many serious frontier and open-weight models, even though different teams arrived at them independently. Pre-norm placement. RMSNorm. RoPE. SwiGLU. Grouped-Query Attention. Mixture of Experts in some of the largest models. None of these were invented at once. They accumulated over about five years of refinement on top of the original 2017 design.

Where this is going

The convergence around transformer-family architectures is unusual in machine learning history. For most of the field’s life, every problem had its own specialized network. Image recognition used one kind. Language used another. Audio used a third. Vision and language teams barely shared methods.

Now transformer-style models show up across language, vision, audio, and multimodal systems. The transformer absorbed a huge part of the field.

That could change. Mamba and other state-space models are credible alternatives, especially for very long sequences. Hybrid architectures are being explored. Mixture-of-experts has already shifted what “the architecture” means at the frontier in ways that would have been considered exotic five years ago.

But the core mechanisms in this post (tokens, embeddings, positional encoding, attention, the feed-forward network, the residual stream and normalization, and next-token prediction) are the durable parts. Even when the architecture changes, these are the problems any sequence model has to solve in some form.

If you’ve made it this far, you can read many modern transformer papers or model cards and know which piece each section is talking about. That’s the goal.

Feedback is extremely welcome. If any of this interests you, please reach out on X. I love making new friends.

Feedback is extremely welcome. If any of this interests you, please reach out on X. I love making new friends.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

5. New method turns ocean water into drinking water, without waste

Source: https://www.rochester.edu/newscenter/what-is-desalination-definition-ocean-water-704732/
Site: News Center
Author: Luke Auburn
Published: 2026-05-27
HN activity: 277 points · 121 comments
Length: 958 words (~5 min read)
Language: en-US

The energy-efficient desalination system produces fresh water without chemical additives and transforms leftover salts into useful materials.

The United Nations estimates that 2.2 billion people lack safely managed drinking water, and communities from California to the Middle East rely on desalination plants to convert ocean water to fresh water. Common desalination techniques, such as reverse osmosis and thermal distillation, are energy-intensive, require pre- and post-water treatment, and leave behind a concentrated saltwater byproduct called brine. The brine byproduct wreaks havoc on sea life when it’s deposited back into the ocean by raising the salt level and lowering oxygen in the water.

But a novel approach developed at the University of Rochester offers a way to overcome these drawbacks. Researchers at URochester’s Institute of Optics developed a new solar-thermal desalination process to produce fresh water in an energy-efficient way that does not leave behind brine and requires no chemical additives to pre-treat the water. A team led by Chunlei Guo, a professor of optics and of physics and a senior scientist at URochester’s Laboratory for Laser Energetics, describes their method in a paper published in Light: Science & Applications.
SUN-POWERED SOLUTION: Researchers developed a solar-powered desalination device featuring laser-etched superwicking black metal (right). Unlike existing solar desalination systems (left), Professor Chunlei Guo’s design prevents salt and mineral buildup from clogging the surface. (University of Rochester photo / J. Adam Fenster)

The technology uses solar panels made of black metal etched with femtosecond lasers to make the surface super light-absorbing and superwicking—or extremely attractive to water. The panels have a laser-treated active region that pulls a thin layer of water across the surface, absorbs nearly all solar radiation, distills the water, and deposits the leftover salts and minerals into the panel’s untreated sides or “passive” region so that the salt does not clog the active region and disrupt continuous desalination.

Leveraging the ‘coffee ring’ effect

Guo says other researchers have developed solar-thermal desalination techniques that work well in lab experiments using simulated seawater made of only water and sodium chloride. As the water evaporates, the sodium chloride crystallizes in a grainy and porous fashion allowing water to pass through to dissolve the salt. The solar panels, meanwhile, can be easily cleaned.

But real ocean has a much more complex composition, and these systems tend to encounter issues when tested in the field. Unlike sodium chloride, many other components in seawater, such as magnesium- and calcium-based materials, crystallize in a crusty and non-porous fashion on the solar panel’s surface, clogging it. Eventually, water can no longer seep through. This is the same phenomenon as your shower head clogging over time or your teapot lined with scales, except that seawater contains hundreds of times more salts than your tap water.

“Mining lithium from the earth has proven to be very taxing from an energy and environmental standpoint, so pulling lithium directly from saltwater could be a very important future route.”

To keep their solar panel surface from gumming up similarly, Guo’s team precisely etched the black metal’s grooves so the various salts and minerals in ocean water would simply slough off. They also leveraged a physical phenomenon that has plagued clumsy javaphiles for centuries: the coffee ring effect.

“If you drop coffee on a surface, eventually the water evaporates, and there’s a ring left at the outer edge that is the concentrated coffee particles,” says Guo. “We use that same principle to advance the salts to the passive region.”

Testing their solar-thermal desalination technique using samples of water from the Pacific, Atlantic, and Indian Oceans, Guo and his team were able to make the surface self-cleaning. In other words, it extracted freshwater and directed the remaining salts to the passive region where they could be later collected without reducing the panel’s efficiency.
WATER, TRANSFORMED: Vials of seawater, Great Salt Lake water, nickel sulfate, copper chloride wastewater, and desalinated water, along with recovered salts show how a new approach developed by URochester researchers turns natural and industrial waters into fresh water and reusable minerals. (University of Rochester photo / J. Adam Fenster)

Turning waste into resources

One of the new desalination method’s distinct advantages is that instead of leaving behind brine that must be disposed of or processed, it extracts nearly 100 percent of the salts in solid form. This could not only produce an abundant supply of table salt, but it could also be used to extract more precious minerals, including lithium, which is used in the lithium-ion batteries that power electric vehicles and other electronics.

In a related paper in the Journal of Materials Chemistry A, Guo and his colleagues show how they can use the same superwicking solar panels to separate lithium from the rest of other salts in desalination. Embedding nanoparticles made of hydrogen titanate in the tiny grooves of the black metal surface isolates the lithium from other salts and minerals.

“Mining lithium from the earth has proven to be very taxing from an energy and environmental standpoint, so pulling lithium directly from saltwater could be a very important future route,” says Guo.

Using water samples from Great Salt Lake, the researchers extracted about 50 percent of the lithium from the salts left behind by the desalination process.

Guo says now that the superwicking desalination technology has been demonstrated in proofs of concept on small-scale devices, he sees the technology inherently scalable, capable of improving global access to drinking water and building more sustainable supply chains for precious minerals.

The National Science Foundation, the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, and Worldwide Universities Network supported this research. Guo’s colleagues from the Institute of Optics who contributed to the research include Senior Scientist Subash Singh, alumnus Ran Wei ’24 (PhD), PhD students Luheng Tang and Tainshu Xu, and Mingjiang Ma.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

6. Gemma 4 QAT models: Optimizing compression for mobile and laptop efficiency

Source: https://blog.google/innovation-and-ai/technology/developers-tools/quantization-aware-training-gemma-4/
Site: Google
Author: Olivier Lacombe
Published: 2026-06-05
HN activity: 286 points · 89 comments
Length: 709 words (~4 min read)
Language: en-us

Listen to article

This content is generated by Google AI. Generative AI is experimental

[[duration]] minutes

Since releasing Gemma 4 two months ago, we've been continuously working to expand its capabilities. First, we introduced Multi-Token Prediction (MTP) to accelerate inference, and just a couple of days ago, we released a 12B model to bridge the gap between our E4B and 26B MOE models.

Today, we are releasing new checkpoints optimized with Quantization-Aware Training (QAT) to make Gemma 4 even more efficient, so you can run models locally on everyday edge devices and consumer GPUs.

By simulating quantization during training, QAT minimizes quality loss when the model is compressed. This release includes QAT checkpoints for the popular Q4_0 quantization format as well as a novel quantization format specialized for mobile use cases. Using this mobile format, we’ve reduced the memory footprint of Gemma 4 E2B to 1GB. Together, these dramatically reduce memory requirements while preserving the capabilities and quality you expect from Gemma 4.

Keeping model quality while making them smaller

Quantization is a key technology to run models on consumer hardware by reducing their memory footprint while also accelerating decode speed. However, standard Post-Training Quantization (PTQ) often leads to performance degradation. Instead of simply quantizing the model after training, QAT integrates the quantization process directly into training. While PTQ is already effective at preserving quality, our QAT results yield even higher overall quality compared to standard PTQ baselines.

We applied this QAT recipe to the popular Q4_0 format to maximize performance for all the models. For the edge models (E2B and E4B), we rethought how we approach quantization with a special mobile-specialized quantization schema.

Saving on VRAM and Storage

Below are the approximate memory requirements indicating how much VRAM is required to load the models:

Optimizing for mobile devices under the hood

Standard compression formats are often hard for mobile processors to run efficiently. To ensure Gemma 4 performs smoothly on mobile, we engineered a custom mobile-quantization schema designed for edge hardware:

Static activations: Normally, models waste processing power calculating how to scale data on the fly. We pre-calculate these settings during training, which reduces workload on mobile chips and makes responses faster.
Channel-wise quantization: We structured the compressed data to fit the design of mobile accelerators. This allows the phone to run calculations natively without needing slow workarounds.
Targeted 2-bit quantization: We heavily compressed (to 2-bit) the specific parts of the model that generate tokens, while keeping the core reasoning layers at higher precision. This saves storage without making the model less smart.
Embedding and KV cache optimization: We focused compression on the model’s vocabulary list and its short-term memory. This drastically reduces the active memory footprint, letting you have long chats without running out of space.

Because our audio and vision encoders are not needed in many use cases, you can optimize your memory footprint even further by deploying only the modalities you need. For example, the Gemma 4 E2B text-only model (without Per-Layer Embeddings) requires less than 1 GB of memory.

Get started today

To make those models easily usable with your preferred workflow, we’ve partnered with popular developer tools across the ecosystem to seamlessly support the Gemma 4 QAT checkpoints starting today:

Download the weights: Access the Q4_0 and mobile model weights right now on Hugging Face. We've tailored the formats to fit your workflow: GGUF formats are ready for use with llama.cpp, and compressed tensors are provided for vLLM. For everything else, we share unquantized checkpoints that can be converted and quantized into formats supporting Q4_0.
Integrate & learn: Explore our documentation to learn how to best deploy the QAT checkpoints.
Try on your desktop: Easily download, manage, and run Gemma 4 QAT models locally on your desktop using user-friendly interfaces like llama.cpp, Ollama and LM Studio.
Deploy on-device: Use Google's lightweight LiteRT-LM runtime for optimized edge deployment or run the models directly on the web with Transformers.js
Use your favorite development tools: Serve larger models efficiently with SGLang and vLLM, optimize for Apple Silicon with MLX. Use the MTP QAT checkpoints to preserve the speedup of MTP while quantizing the models. Fine-tune weights directly using Hugging Face Transformers and Unsloth.

We can't wait to see what you build with Gemma 4 running locally!

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

7. Show HN: ABC Classic 100 Rankings visualised

Source: https://classic100.gotski.workers.dev/
Site: classic100.gotski.workers.dev
Submitter: gotski (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-06 01:32 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 16 points · 11 comments
Length: 197 words (~1 min read)

ABC Classic 100 Rankings: 2001 to 2021

Every year since 2001, ABC Classic FM has run a Classic 100 event, where listeners vote on their favourite pieces.

This page visualises the rankings for three different years:

The Original Classic 100 from 2001,
Classic 100 10 Years on from 2010, and
Music you can't live without from 2021

Each dot represents a piece of music.

The lines track how the rankings for that piece have changed between 2001 and 2021.

You can click or tap on a dot to highlight that piece and show detailed information.

Other pieces by the same composer will also highlight in a lighter shade.

My favourite observation from this visualisation is that 'The Lark Ascending' started high in the rankings (#2) in 2001, descended in 2010, before ascending again in 2021.

About me

My name is Alex and I live in Nipaluna / Hobart.

I don't often vote in the Classic 100, but if I did my favourite piece would probably be "La Follia", by Vivaldi. I don't take it personally that it didn't make it in to this dataset.

If you have any feedback on this piece, I'd love to hear it!

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

8. Mouseless – keyboard-driven control of macOS/Linux/Windows

Source: https://mouseless.click
Site: mouseless.click
Submitter: riddley (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-03 13:22 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 468 points · 198 comments
Language: en

No extractable content.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

9. Did Claude increase bugs in rsync?

Source: https://alexispurslane.github.io/rsync-analysis/
Site: alexispurslane.github.io
Submitter: logicprog (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-05 12:43 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 328 points · 336 comments
Length: 5.4K words (~24 min read)
Language: en

Data Analysis · June 2026

A simple distributional analysis of every rsync release with bug data. Nothing complicated, answers only one question: are the Claude-assisted releases unusually buggy?

Repository: RsyncProject/rsync
Method: severity-weighted bugs per 10 commits, exact permutation test

0 · Disclaimer: How AI Assistance Was Used

In order to avoid accuastions of this "just being Claude defending Claude," "AI slop," "probably all hallucinations," etc., I've decided it's probably worth explaining a few key points about how this report was created:

All metrics, methodology, and data sources were exclusively chosen by me, in consultation with my wife, who has a Master's Degree in Statistics from Penn State University.
The methodology is directly based on my wife's input: she was the one that pointed out that trying to just compare bugs per ten lines of code before and after would likely be too effected by noise because of the low number of post-Claude samples, and that, for similar reasons, trying to build some kind of linear regression model to ascertain the relative effects of different variables would probably also not work. She specifically told me that looking at where the post-Claude releases fall into the historical distribution, and how likely from the historical distribution we would be to get releases as "bad" or worse than the post-Claude releases, was probably the best that could be done.
I spent several days on this, two before even creating the GitHub repo and had at least one major total rewrite of the report to use a better methodology (given the feedback from my wife mentioned above). This was a lot of manual, cognitive effort on my end.
The scripts used to fetch the data, collate it into a DuckDB database file, construct the views on that DB, and then do the statistical analysis on that data, were indeed written by GLM 5.1, as was the HTML and much of the original prose for the final report webpage you're looking at right now.
Crucially, however, all numbers, statistics, cards, and graphs in this report are automatically templated in directly by the Python script that ran the statistical analysis, thus avoiding any possibility of hallucinations or inconsistencies in the numbers.
After posting this on Hacker News and recieving almost no substantive input, discussion, or response on the actual content of the article, I decided to rewrite all of the prose in my own voice. If anyone complains about my verbosity or sentence structure — as they usually do, which is the reason I originally let the AI write the prose, among other reasons obsoleted by templating — they can go fuck themselves.
If you want to replicate the data and results here, and inspect exactly how they were calculated, you can find the repository here. I have purposefully made it so that the pipeline can be run end to end completely from scratch, so you can see the entire pipeline end-to end, with no mysterious DB blobs forcing you to trust that I didn't doctor or screw up the data. If you want to be mad about the numbers, look there first.

1 · Background: The rsync Outrage

In late May 2026, rsync blew up. First, an evidence-free Mastodon post was made pointing to a spurious correlation between a regression that particular user experienced upon upgrading to a release, and that release having Claude commits in it. It was viewed an unknown number of times, but even likes and boosts passed the thousands mark handily, and it gained significant traction — as all spurious anti-AI hate does —, seeing 58 replies from 32 unique users. Someone rages about "cognitive surrender" with no evidence; another suggests adding rsync to the famous open-slopware blacklist. From there, it spread to Hacker News, with 81 comments, full of mixed dread, anger, and crowing about how this finally proves once and for all no one can use LLMs safely. Among all that was one particular comment which spurred further the view that the regressions and bugs were caused by Claude.

This On May 30, 2026, this burgeoning outrage emergently coalesced into a single focal point: a GitHub issue titled "Please Do Not Vibe Fuck Up This Software", opened against the rsync repository. It attached a screenshot of the Mastodon post criticizing the project's use of Claude. That's it. No bug report, no technical content, no attempt to actually ascertain if the concern was real or justified; just 350+ comments ranging from thoughtful concern to outright harassment (most of the most egregious, unreasonable, and outright violent comments have since been deleted; few thought to preserve them).
The GitHub issue that started it all. The original post was a screenshot of a Mastodon critique, no bug report, no technical content. It has since accumulated 329 comments.
The thread quickly escalated, from "the software is free, if you don't like it then fork it or fuck off" to: "just because you are giving free soup to the homeless, does not mean you can piss in it".

The thread did not stop at words. It eventually escalated to, at one point, visual depictions of fantasies of violence, when one user posted a now deleted comment including My Little Pony drawings of themselves strangling the "project janitor that pushed vibecoded commits":
A user posting drawings depicting violence against the rsync maintainer, one of several threats that escalated the issue from heated debate to harassment.

Completing the internet outrage cycle, this issue in turn spread to Hacker News, generating hundreds more comments. Some attempted to point at the number of regressions after the introduction of Claude — "The Linux Mint Timeshift tool has an issue open documenting a number of regressions that are currently open on the rsync issues page, that were only introduced post-vibecoding" — as evidence that it was worse. Others pointed out that those regressions were not caused by Claude, and in response, the goalposts were moved again. Over and over, the core theme was one central claim, repeated everywhere: Claude-assisted development introduced bugs into a previously stable tool. AI is cognitive surrender, is cocaine, is loss of craft, and the users are right to be angry as a result:

People are very justifiably angry that a very stable, well trusted tool, has started to immediately go downhill… all because the main dev is vibecoding that software. — fao_ on Hacker News

However, this isn't doesn't have to be a question solved only on the basis of — ironically — vibes. This is something that could be, at least to a degree, empirically tested. Some even pointed that out:

On Lobste.rs, in response to the Medium essay Tridge himself posted in response, finally some users like boramalper begin to actually ask for evidence one way or another:

It'd be interesting if someone actually did a timechart of regressions after each release (if at all possible) to see if the number actually went up recently or not. — boramalper on Lobsters

User bitshift replied: "I would also love to see such a chart. It wouldn't be completely informative… But at least it would be something objective we could measure."

This analysis is that chart. Or, well, as best as it can be made, given the limitations of the data (see the previous section).

2 · Executive Summary

36 releases with bug data, spanning v2.4.6 to v3.4.3
2 releases have Claude commits: v3.4.2 (9 Claude, 0.00 sev/10c) and v3.4.3 (28 Claude, 3.29 sev/10c)
The Claude releases bracket the IQR in opposite directions: v3.4.2 is below the IQR, v3.4.3 is above it. Neither is an outlier.
Exact permutation test p-value = 46%: pick any 2 releases at random, you'd score as bad or worse 46% of the time. This is the strongest available test and it finds nothing.
Fisher's exact test p-value = 74%: Claude releases are no more likely to fall above the historical median than any other releases (odds ratio 1.06).
The historical mean is 1.8× the Claude mean (2.95 vs 1.65 sev/10c)
v3.4.1 (59 bugs / 9 commits, no Claude) is an outlier but belongs in the baseline — it is a release, and the distribution already captures it

3 · The Metric

The analysis uses a single metric: severity-weighted bugs per 10 commits (sev/10c). Each bug is normalized to a 0–1 severity score (its LLM-assigned severity divided by 100), and those scores are summed per release instead of simply counting bugs. The raw bug count is also shown in the table for reference, but sev/10c drives all statistical tests.

sev/10c = (Σ severity/100 ÷ total_commits) × 10

How commits are assigned to releases

Every commit on the default branch was ordered by committer date to produce a sequential timeline. Each git tag points to a specific commit in this timeline. A release's range is all commits between the previous tag and its own tag. Pre-release tags ("pre", "rc") are skipped as boundaries and absorbed into their final release. Every commit belongs to exactly one release.

How bugs are found and assigned to releases

Bug reports come from three sources:

GitHub issues in the rsync repository (collated via the GitHub REST API),
the rsync Bugzilla instance (collected via the API),
and the rsync mailing list.

GitHub issues and mailing-list bugs are attributed to the most recent release that shipped before the bug was reported. For Bugzilla, each entry has a "Version" field that explicitly states which release the bug was reported against, and bugs are attributed to that release.

Severity scoring

To control for bug severity — so that, as someone on HN said, a typo in a button and a CVE aren't rated equally — every bug report was scored for severity on a 0–100 scale. The scorer is Qwen 3 35B, a small open-weight language model, prompted as a senior reliability engineer assessing real-world impact. Each bug report was given to the model as its title and body text (truncated to 3,000 characters), along with the following rubric:

Score	Category	Description
90–100	Data loss / corruption	Silent data corruption or data loss. The user's files or backups are wrong and they may not notice until it's too late. Security vulnerabilities that allow remote code execution or unauthorized access.
70–89	Crash / hang / broken backups	rsync crashes, hangs, or fails in a way that breaks automated backups or cron jobs. Data is not corrupted but backups are missed. High CPU or memory usage that makes rsync unusable in production. Build or compilation failures — if rsync cannot be built from source, users cannot install it at all. This is a blocking problem, not a minor inconvenience. Score these at least 70. Security vulnerabilities that expose sensitive data.
50–69	Feature regression	Feature regressed — something that used to work no longer works, but there's a workaround. Performance regressions large enough to disrupt production workflows. Incorrect output that is visible (errors, wrong filenames) but doesn't corrupt data.
30–49	Minor regression	Minor feature regression with easy workaround. Error messages are confusing but the operation still succeeds. Intermittent test failures. Portability issues on uncommon platforms.
10–29	Cosmetic / low impact	Cosmetic issues, documentation errors, minor UX annoyances. Test-only issues that don't affect users.
0	Feature request	If the issue is asking for a new feature, a change in default behavior, or a packaging suggestion — no matter how reasonable — it is NOT a bug. Score it 0.
0–9	Not a real bug	Spam, off-topic, duplicate. Issues that are clearly not about rsync or are empty/meaningless.

All three bug sources — GitHub issues, Bugzilla, and the rsync mailing list — were scored. Bugzilla and mailing list reports had only a title (no body), so the model scored those from the title alone. The model was instructed to fall back on the title and lean toward the middle of the range (40–60) when the body didn't provide enough information. The model was also told to output only a severity integer via structured output (JSON schema), so there were no free-text responses to parse. Scoring was done at temperature 0 for determinism — the same input always produces the same score.

Issues scored severity 0 — feature requests, spam, off-topic rants about AI, empty submissions — are excluded from bug counts by default. This matters because some releases attracted a lot of noise on GitHub. v3.4.2 had four issues filed; the model scored all four at severity 0 (a feature-request option, a missing tarball question, and two more feature requests).

Example scores from the database, one per tier:

Score	Release	Title
95	v3.4.1	Destination --chmod and --fake-super: chmod applied to fake-super, backup permissions lost
75	v3.4.3	error in rsync protocol data stream (code 12) at token.c(490) [sender=3.4.3]
55	v3.4.1	--dry-run doesn't work with --mkpath when copying files
35	v3.4.1	manpages not installed in out-of-tree builds
15	v3.4.1	Minor inconsistencies in options in manpage
0	v3.4.3	PAM Support - Open for Discussion

Why the release is the unit of analysis

Why group commits by release, bugs by release, and then ascertain the correlation — or lack thereof — between Claude commits and bugs through the intermediary of releases? This is for two reasons.

First, because the claim that the critics are making is also, itself, made in terms of releases: that having any Claude commits in a release makes the whole release more buggy as a whole in a noticeable way, not just that Claude-authored commits may introduce more bugs; the latter is a different metric, because later Claude- or human-authored commits could correct for those bugs within the same release, and nobody would then notice as part of the release, and overall it wouldn't matter to users; additionally, it's simply important, as stated elsewhere, to meet the claim of the critics where it's at. If this forces them to make their claims more nuanced — or otherwise move the goalposts — then mission accomplished.

Second, it's a problem of attribution: the vast, vast majority of bugs do not state exactly which commit caused them, because doing so would require extensive research and analysis that is often not worth it in favor of simply fixing-forward, and even if that analysis was done — via something like git bisect — it wouldn't necessarily result in anything useful, or anything at all. Many bugs can result from a combination of multiple commits, often separated significantly over time, where it's unclear whether one commit or the other really introduced the bug. Or, one commit can reveal several latent bugs introduced by other commits at once, and so on.

Why bugs and commits?

The critics' claim is simplistic, absolute, and universalistic: the rate of bugs in the Claude-exposed releases went up. Therefore, the simplest honest response is to analyize precisely what is being claimed: bugs, commits, releases, and Claude-exposed commits. If the Claude releases sit in the middle of the historical distribution, the burden shifts to the critics to explain why this particular middle is somehow worse than all the other middles that came before it. Even by weighting by severity, I feel that I am giving extensive generosity to the anti-AI point in all this, but enough of the more intelligent critics brought it up that I found it worth it.

Even if that results in is shifting the conversation toward a more nuanced discussion of the quality and type and user impact of the bugs in the releases, it will already have been a major win for the pro-AI crowd, and a shifting of the goalposts for the anti-AI crowd, and then we can do further analysis based on that. And the ball's in the anti-AI court for that game.

What this approach does not do

I'm aware that this metric does not control for commit complexity or security intensity. It is a blunt instrument. But the critics' accusation is also blunt: "Claude is making things worse." A blunt instrument is what is required in response. Blood begets blood.

4 · Results

Claude Releases

Before we jump into deeper analysis, let's just look at the two Claude releases themselves, to get a sense for them:

v3.4.2

0.00 sev/10c

0 bugs · 50 commits · 9 Claude

0th percentile (rank 0 of 35)

v3.4.3

3.29 sev/10c

17 bugs · 34 commits · 28 Claude

77th percentile (rank 27 of 35)

If that doesn't look like a red flag to you, you'd be right.

Exact Permutation Test

So the question is: are the Claude releases unusually buggy, or could you easily pull a group just as bad out of the historical distribution by dumb luck? The way you answer that question statistically is an exact permutation test, which just enumerates all pairs of two releases and asks: what fraction have a mean bug rate as bad or worse than the one we actually observed? That fraction is the p-value of the hypothesis under test.

46%

exact permutation test p-value (one-sided, H₁: Claude mean > historical)

272 of 595 possible groups of 2 historical releases have mean sev/10c ≥ 1.65. Nearly half. The Claude releases sit right in the middle of the permutation distribution — there is nothing extreme about them.

Test statistic: mean sev/10c per group · Claude group mean: 1.65 · Historical mean: 2.95

What this p-value tells us is that the hypothesis that Claude makes releases worse has, at least so far, about as much predictive power as a coin flip: if you closed your eyes and picked 2 releases at random, you'd do as bad or worse nearly half the time. There's nothing unusual about the Claude group.

Fisher's Exact Test

The permutation test asks: how likely is it that a random group of releases scores as badly as the Claude group? But there's another way to pose the question: are Claude releases more likely than non-Claude releases to fall above the historical median? That's a textbook 2×2 contingency table, and the standard test for it is Fisher's exact test.

≤ median > median
Non-Claude 18 17
Claude 1 1

74%

one-sided p-value (H₁: Claude more likely above median)

Fisher's exact test asks: if we split all releases at the historical median (0.74 sev/10c), are these Claude releases significantly buggy than previous releases (more likely to land above the median)? With a p-value of 74%, the answer is a decisive no. The odds ratio is 1.06 — essentially 1:1. Claude releases are no more likely to be above the median than any other releases.

Odds ratio: 1.06 · Median: 0.74 sev/10c

To emphasize, this does not mean that all Claude releases in the future will not be more buggy. We don't have nearly enough data to build a model and extrapolate out like that, and that's not what a Fisher's exact test is for. The point that's being made here is that these specific releases are not at all notable; if no one had known they were AI, no one would have cared or noticed anything out of the ordinary, and there is no evidence with which to conclude that Claude made anything worse yet, unlike the objective, absolutist, universal claims made by critics.

The Distribution

In case you're not convinced, here's a visual aid, showing where these releases fall in the distribution of all prior releases:

middle 50%

v3.4.2

v3.4.3

0.010.1110100

Historical Claude Middle 50% (IQR) Outside IQR

How to read this graph: Each dot is a release. The shaded green band is the interquartile range — the middle 50% of historical releases, from 0.29 to 2.59 sev/10c. The darker regions on either side are the lower and upper quarters.

This is another way of saying the same thing the previous two tests said, but more intuitively: the Claude releases (green dots) bracket the IQR in opposite directions. v3.4.2, with zero real bugs, sits just below the IQR; v3.4.3 sits just above it. They bracket the middle of the distribution in opposite directions. Neither is a negative outlier, and since they're on either side of the IQR, there's no evidence Claude usage bends releases in either direction.

Commit Rate

One possible objection I've seen is that while perhaps the defect rate of Claude-authored commits is not worse than human-authored ones, Claude sped up developmend so much — due to "vibe coding" perhaps — that the total number of bugs in each release got too high for comfort anyway, in which case it doesn't matter that the defect rate per commit isn't so bad, because that's not what downstream users experience. We can check this, though:

p=88%

exact permutation test: do Claude releases have more commits?

Claude releases averaged 42 commits; non-Claude releases averaged 185. If you pick any 2 releases at random, you'd see as many or more commits 88% of the time.

So it seems that Claude releases did not have meaningfully more commits. If anything, they had a lot fewer, but of course, the data is underpowered to say that for sure; just like the rest of this article, I'm only trying to show a startling lack of evidence for the supposed massive harms of using Claude, not trying to prove there must have been none, or that it was even "beneficial" in terms of focused releases.

But commit count is a blunt measure. A commit can be a one-line typo fix or a rewrite of the entire protocol handler. What about lines of code changed? GitHub's compare API gives us additions and deletions between each pair of consecutive tags:

p=5%

exact permutation test: do Claude releases have more lines changed?

Claude releases averaged 3756 lines changed; non-Claude releases averaged 696. If you pick any 2 releases at random, you'd see as many or more lines changed only 5% of the time. Claude releases were larger by this measure.

Lines changed went up by a lot. But did absolute bug numbers?

p=77%

exact permutation test: do Claude releases have more severity-weighted bugs?

Claude releases averaged 5.6 severity-weighted bugs; non-Claude releases averaged 14.9. If you pick any 2 releases at random, you'd see as many or more severity-weighted bugs 77% of the time. More lines changed, but not more bugs.

So: the Claude releases changed way more lines of code than historical ones, but didn't have more bugs. More code, same bugs. That's not what you'd expect if Claude were making things worse.

Regime Check

The obvious counterargument is that maybe earlier rsync releases were less in maintenence-mode, and so had more bugs, but recent rsync releases have been more stable, so comparing the two Claude-exposed releases to the full historical distribution is masking the fact that they're actually outliers for their regime. Luckily, there's a way to test this statistically.

Yes, the historical mean (2.95 sev/10c) was driven by a bimodal distribution: v2.x releases average 1.11 sev/10c; v3.x releases average 4.23. But even within the v3.x regime, the Claude releases sit in the middle of the pack or better:

middle 50%

v3.4.2

v3.4.3inside middle 50% ✓

0.010.1110100

v3.x historical Claude Middle 50% (IQR)

So the regime-shift argument doesn't just fail — it fails backwards. The v3.x era has a much higher mean sev/10c than v2.x. If you restrict the comparison to v3.x only, Claude releases don't stand out at all — and one of them is better than most. The only way to make Claude look like an outlier is to compare it against a quieter era and then blame the shift on Claude, when the data says the shift predates Claude entirely.

We can further test whether there are meaningfully different regimes in the version history, and thus whether using the full historical data is valid, by doing a runs test. If such regimes existed, the runs test would detect non-random clustering:

p=0.060

Wald–Wolfowitz runs test on 35 non-Claude releases

13 runs observed (expected 18.5 under randomness, z=-1.88). At p=0.060 this is marginal — not strong enough to reject randomness at the conventional 0.05 level, but close enough that it warrants the v3.x-only comparison above, which already accounts for the v2.x/v3.x difference. Using the full historical baseline is a conservative choice: it includes a noisier era, which makes it harder, not easier, to show that Claude releases are normal.

Observed runs: 13 · Expected: 18.5 · z=-1.88

The Pre-Claude Outlier

Here's my favorite part, though. Digging into the data, one of the first things that jumped out at me with blinding clarity was that the worst release, by far, in rsync history was entirely prior to the introduction of Claude:

39.39

bugs per 10 commits — v3.4.1, no Claude

The highest bug rate in the entire dataset. 59 bugs in 9 commits, a hotfix release the day after v3.4.0. It exceeds every other release by an order of magnitude.

And yet nobody noticed. There was no AI to blame so there was no GitHub issue with 300 comments, no death threats, no threats to fork or move to openrsync. A maintainer shipped a broken release and fixed it, just like normal. The only thing that made v3.4.3 special was the availability of an enemy everyone had already decided to hate.

All Releases (chronological)

Release Bugs Sev Commits Claude Bugs/10c Sev/10c ↕ Percentile
v2.4.6	2	1.2	13	0	1.54	0.92	54th percentile
v2.5.0	4	1.3	73	0	0.55	0.18	11th percentile
v2.5.1	4	1.8	69	0	0.58	0.26	20th percentile
v2.5.2	6	2.9	117	0	0.51	0.25	14th percentile
v2.5.4	5	3.5	21	0	2.38	1.64	69th percentile
v2.5.5	22	11.6	88	0	2.50	1.32	63rd percentile
v2.5.6	14	6.6	239	0	0.59	0.28	23rd percentile
v2.6.0	8	4.7	267	0	0.30	0.18	9th percentile
v2.6.1	5	3.3	444	0	0.11	0.08	0th percentile
v2.6.2	29	16.8	17	0	17.06	9.88	94th percentile
v2.6.3	49	22.7	381	0	1.29	0.59	34th percentile
v2.6.4	22	9.4	760	0	0.29	0.12	6th percentile
v2.6.5	16	7.1	146	0	1.10	0.49	31st percentile
v2.6.7	15	5.8	649	0	0.23	0.09	3rd percentile
v2.6.8	12	5.4	72	0	1.67	0.74	49th percentile
v2.6.9	53	18.8	261	0	2.03	0.72	43rd percentile
v3.0.0	64	27.9	909	0	0.70	0.31	26th percentile
v3.0.1	6	4.0	102	0	0.59	0.40	29th percentile
v3.0.2	10	4.1	9	0	11.11	4.56	80th percentile
v3.0.3	22	10.8	55	0	4.00	1.96	71st percentile
v3.1.0	170	52.4	571	0	2.98	0.92	51st percentile
v3.1.1	68	32.1	66	0	10.30	4.86	83rd percentile
v3.1.2	55	18.4	57	0	9.65	3.22	74th percentile
v3.1.3	85	30.9	61	0	13.93	5.07	86th percentile
v3.2.0	22	7.8	304	0	0.72	0.25	17th percentile
v3.2.1	7	4.5	63	0	1.11	0.72	46th percentile
v3.2.2	13	8.8	58	0	2.24	1.51	66th percentile
v3.2.3	95	55.3	157	0	6.05	3.52	77th percentile
v3.2.4	20	14.3	213	0	0.94	0.67	40th percentile
v3.2.5	9	5.5	53	0	1.70	1.04	57th percentile
v3.2.6	6	3.2	28	0	2.14	1.13	60th percentile
v3.2.7	88	52.4	60	0	14.67	8.73	91st percentile
v3.3.0	42	25.3	38	0	11.05	6.66	89th percentile
v3.4.0	6	4.0	60	0	1.00	0.66	37th percentile
v3.4.1	59	35.5	9	0	65.56	39.39	97th percentile
v3.4.2	0	0.0	50	9	0.00	0.00	0th percentile
v3.4.3	17	11.2	34	28	5.00	3.29	77th percentile

5 · What the Data Is Consistent And Inconsistent With

✓

"The Claude releases are statistically indistinguishable from historical releases"

One Claude release sits just below the IQR (v3.4.2, with zero real bugs), the other just above it. They bracket the middle of the distribution in opposite directions — neither is an outlier. The exact permutation test yields a p-value of 46% — pick any 2 releases at random and you'd do as bad or worse nearly half the time. There is no signal of abnormality.

✓

"The outrage selected on a single tail event and narrativized it"

A Mastodon user noticed a regression in v3.4.3, saw Claude commits, and concluded causation. But v3.4.3 at 3.29 sev/10c is at the 77th percentile — elevated but not extreme. 8 historical releases scored higher. The correlation is noise.

✗

"Claude clearly made things worse" &emdash; the main claim

The Claude releases bracket the IQR — one below, one above. Neither is an outlier. There is no distributional evidence of harm. The claim rests entirely on a post-hoc correlation observed by a social media user.

✗

"Claude commits (in general) do not and will not make things worse"

This is a common misrepresentation of my claims here. I am not trying to extrapolate out into the future, and say something like "in general, Claude won't make things worse" or "Claude will never make things worse." Instead, the point is this: there is no evidence of it having done so, and the two Claude releases we have currently are thoroughly unremarkable, so the outrage is totally unjustified.

✗

"The regressions speak for themselves"

v3.4.1 — a pre-Claude release — has the highest bug rate in the dataset (39.39 sev/10c). Nobody noticed, because there was no AI to be angry at. The regressions only "speak" when you ignore the historical distribution.

✗

"Just wait, more bugs will surface"

v3.4.3 has been out long enough that its rate (3.29) is already comparable to historical releases. The "wait and see" argument is an appeal to an unknowable future that shifts the burden of proof away from the critics. If more bugs surface, they will enter the distribution like every other release. There is no reason to expect a regime break.

Discussion, and Tridge's Response

So, why do people feel like they've been betrayed, and feel so sure that things have "clearly" gotten worse &emdash; that Claude "broke rsync" &emdash; when there is no evidence for this, and no data except two thoroughly unremarkable releases?

A lot of it is just sheer, blind outrage at the use of LLMs. However, there are some confounders that might have caused people to feel that way:

On the HN thread, user zos_kia pointed at the confound directly:

From a cursory look, it looks like a security fix in response to a CVE surfaced a coding error which has been present in the code since 2007. This is so banal that it's actually hilarious to see people lose their shit over it. — zos_kia on Hacker News

On Lobsters, user jbert spelled out the causal chain:

The trigger for the increased volume of changes (and hence increased number of regressions) was the influx of (mostly) LLM-enabled security issues. i.e. the causal chain was: LLMs → more known security issues → more changes needed than usual → more regressions than usual. — jbert on Lobsters

Essentially, this isn't a "Claude" problem, it's a "more security work" problem, something that Tridge himself confirmed in his response, describing how a flood of AI-generated CVE reports forced rapid, extensive changes to rsync's attack surface.

But, as with all things AI, it doesn't matter. In the end, the outrage isn't about whether rsync is worse or better now, it's about people not liking AI, and arguing from a priori definitions, not empirical results, to the desired conclusion: that AI is bad:

Like I said, the author "tried to balance security against feature regression." I don't dispute that he tried. I merely dispute that the chatbots are good at writing code; in fact, they are bad at writing code. If the author had approached these security bugs by hand with a mental model (a Naur theory!) which preserves their desired features and functionality then they would have caused fewer regressions... — Corbin on Lobste.rs

In response to this sweeping, absolute, causal claim made with no evidence — and in fact, counter to the evidence — based on an old philosophical claim about the epistemology of programming, it is perhaps best to leave the victim of this outrage himself with the final word:

…for the people saying things like "I'm a PhD from xyz uni and I'm telling you LLMs are just stochastic tools that make everything up and the world will fall apart if you use them", I'm here to tell you that you are out of date. The world of software engineering has changed dramatically in the last few months. The world of IT security and maintaining software in the face of the flood of reports has completely and utterly changed just in the last few weeks. Anything you learned about this stuff last year might as well be from another planet… Bottom line is I do know (well, roughly!) how LLMs work, but that doesn't make them not useful. It does mean you have to be cautious, but I am being cautious, or as cautious as I can be given my desire to be sailing and not dealing with a flood of gunk from so-called internet experts. — Andrew Tridgell

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

10. Europe's largest Copper Age tomb: children's bones show ancient health crisis

Source: https://phys.org/news/2026-05-europe-largest-copper-age-tomb.html
Site: phys.org
Submitter: gmays (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-04 13:17 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 15 points · 4 comments

Scrape failed: http 403

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

11. My Agent Skill for Test-Driven Development

Source: https://www.saturnci.com/my-agent-skill-for-test-driven-development.html
Site: SaturnCI
Author: by Jason Swett
Submitted: 2026-06-04 14:10 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 139 points · 56 comments
Length: 780 words (~4 min read)

AI agents tend to be, at least as of this writing (May 2026), lousy at writing tests. The tests they write are often vague, cryptic, overcomplicated, hacky, disorganized, tautological, performative, perfunctory and downright pointless.

Unfortunately, I don't expect uncoached agents to get much better at writing tests anytime soon, because the agents learned by human-written example, and the human-written examples out there are often, I'm sorry to say, just as bad. Not only are the tests written by "amateurs" often poor quality, but, sadly, the testing practices preached by teachers are often pretty bad as well. It's truly rough out there.

The good news is that I've found that, with a bit of guidance, agents are capable of following a rational TDD process and of writing clear, meaningful tests. What exactly is that guidance? The short answer, which can serve as a close enough approximation to the truth, is Kent Beck's Canon TDD. If you give your agent a skill that says nothing more than "Follow Kent Beck's Canon TDD" then I suspect you'll be a good 60% of the way there. The longer answer is what I've baked into my own personal TDD skill.

My TDD skill

Since it's a living document, I don't want to bake my TDD skill into this blog post and freeze it in time. Instead, you can see my TDD skill here on GitHub. Having said that, I can certainly share the essence of the skill here since I'm sure that that isn't going to change.

First I clue the agent in to what I call the specify-encode-fulfill loop, which is my personal alternative to red-green-refactor. Specify-encode-fulfill (SEF) goes like this:

Specify: Come up with the specifications for what you want to build
Encode: Encode those specifications as automated tests (executable specifications)
Fulfill: Write the code to fulfill the specifications

SEF is the high-level view of what, to me, TDD is all about. At a slightly lower level is Kent Beck's Canon TDD, which I've described below in my own words.

Write a list of the specifications within scope of the current TDD session
Encode each item in the list as an automated test
Change the code just barely enough to make the current test failure go away. Avoid "speculative coding" - if we write more code than necessary to make the current test failure go away, we risk having code never exercised by any test
Optionally refactor, but not before committing the behavior change. Never mix behavior changes with refactoring
Until the list is empty, go back to #2

My TDD skill contains a bit more detail but this is the essence of the process. This process doesn't have much influence over the design of the tests themselves, though, so I have a different skill for that, Test Design Review. Test Design Review spawns a separate agent (in an effort to avoid bias), looks for violations of design principles (such as case is where a test focusing on means rather than ends) and makes suggestions for fixes. Sometimes the "fixes" are dubious but usually they're on the mark. When I'm not satisfied with the way my agent has written a certain test, I run Test Design Review to try to let the agent catch its own mistakes.

General design review

Many test design violations are just violations of general software design principles, such as the principle of "call things what they are". In addition to feeding my tests through my Test Design Review skill, I like to feed them through my Software Design Review skill as well.

My agent surprises me sometimes. In my TDD skill I included an instruction, without much expectation that it would particularly be followed, that if it turns out to be hard to write the test we want to write, that might be a sign we need to "clean the kitchen before we make dinner". For whatever reason, Claude has really taken this to heart, and it pauses quite often to ask if perhaps we should clean the kitchen, and quite often it's the case that we should.

I haven't yet gotten my agents to write acceptable tests 100% of the time, not by a long shot, but my TDD skill has worked well enough for me that it has become my default way of making any change. It's not surprising to me that applying these TDD and test design principles yields such good results. In my judgment, the biggest AI productivity gains come from when AI is combined with timeless, immutable principles which were discovered decades ago, hold just as true today, and which, no matter what new technologies may arise, will never cease to be useful.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

12. The Quiet Numbers Station: Decoding Nineteen Years of GPS Cryptography

Source: https://www.benthamsgaze.org/2026/06/02/the-quiet-numbers-station-decoding-nineteen-years-of-gps-cryptography/
Site: Bentham’s Gaze
Author: Steven J. Murdoch
Published: 2026-06-02
HN activity: 70 points · 67 comments
Length: 782 words (~4 min read)
Language: en-GB

The Global Positioning System (GPS) relies on its primary L1 frequency to broadcast precise timing and orbital data, allowing receivers on Earth to calculate their exact location. Because the L1 C/A signal transmits at just fifty bits per second, every bit of this navigation data must earn its place. Yet, within this highly constrained signal, the standard sets aside Subframe 4, Page 17 – a 176-bit field broadcast every 12.5 minutes – for “special messages with the specific contents at the discretion of the Operating Command”. While the official specification suggests it carries readable text, the reality is entirely different. For nearly twenty years, this channel has acted as a global numbers station, broadcasting military ciphertext on a public signal to billions of receivers in plain sight.

Analysing a Nineteen-Year Archive

To understand what these broadcasts actually contain, we analysed an archive of 12.16 million observations collected between 2007 and early 2026. To make processing this massive dataset practical, we built a Julia pipeline to extract the bits directly into a DuckDB database. This setup allowed us to run queries across nineteen years of global ground-station data in milliseconds. The results are summarised below, and further details can be found in the May/June 2026 edition of Inside GNSS: The Empty Field That Wasn’t: GPS, OTAD and Two Decades of Encrypted Broadcasts.

Our first question was basic: is this field carrying text in an unusual format, or is it true ciphertext?. We calculated the marginal entropy of the payloads using a compression model trained on our data. The results matched a synthetic baseline of random noise almost perfectly. By every statistical measure, the GPS messages are indistinguishable from random data, but we found a few clear, structural exceptions.

First, we found intentional placeholders. Satellites frequently broadcast 22 bytes of 0xAA (the CP437 negation glyph ‘¬’). In binary, 0xAA is 10101010 – a standard test pattern used in hardware to check connections and frame alignment. A satellite sending this pattern is effectively stating that no operational payload is loaded.

Second, we found identical high-entropy text strings hidden inside otherwise unique messages. For example, the exact 9-byte sequence LY47IRP16 appeared in messages broadcast nine months apart. These shared strings are likely protocol headers that leak through the encryption, which, in theory, could allow an outside observer to fingerprint and track key-distribution events.

Finally, we observed coordinated fleet-wide changes. On 26 May 2011, all 31 active GPS satellites switched to the 0xAA placeholder within just a few hours. After this event, the network shifted from rotating messages every 3.7 days to a fast operational pace of roughly 1.8 days.

The Systemic Impact of Public Cryptography

This rapid daily change perfectly matches the operational rollout of the U.S. Over-the-Air Distribution (OTAD) network. Authorised military GPS receivers use a Secure Availability Anti-Spoofing Module (SAASM) to pick up jam-resistant signals. Historically, getting new cryptographic keys to these units meant physically plugging a loader device into each receiver. OTAD fixed this massive logistical headache by sending the “next black key” over the air via the L1 C/A signal.

The broader issue here is how this system interacts with civilian infrastructure. In May 2022, the satellite fleet suddenly slowed its rotation rate back to 3.8 days without any official public notice. Then, starting in December 2023 on satellite PRN 8, the broadcast format changed again. It began sending a literal four-byte prefix TEXT followed by 18 bytes of ciphertext payload. It remains to be seen for what purpose this new message format will be used.

Real-World Trade-Offs and Open Intelligence

We have documented the full technical breakdown, including our methodology, in our article published in the May/June 2026 edition of Inside GNSS: The Empty Field That Wasn’t: GPS, OTAD and Two Decades of Encrypted Broadcasts. For security researchers, this dataset presents an extraordinary target. It is a globally deployed, operational cryptographic network sitting in plain sight, perfectly suited for traditional traffic analysis and structural cryptanalysis. We invite the infosec community to read the complete analysis, review our open-source Julia code, and join us in auditing these signals. Software-defined GNSS receivers readily allow access to the data, and the signal passes overhead twice a day, every day. Every GPS satellite is a numbers station. The receivers have always been listening; it is time the security community started looking at the bytes.

Acknowledgements

This article is based on a project developed by Ahmed Kamruddin during his MSc studies at University College London. Thanks also to Ramsey Faragher and Markus Kuhn for valuable comments on this work. The initial stages of the work were performed within the Trusted Innovative GNSS receivER (TIGER) project, co-funded by the European GNSS Agency (GSA) under grant agreement 228443.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

13. Gov.uk has replaced Stripe with Dutch provider Adyen

Source: https://www.theregister.com/public-sector/2026/06/04/govuk-goes-dutch-on-payments-as-it-dumps-stripe/5250763
Site: theregister
Author: SA Mathieson
Published: 2026-06-04
HN activity: 367 points · 130 comments
Length: 351 words (~2 min read)
Language: en-US

public sector

Means residents can skip the credit card and use 'pay by bank' for local authorities and services

The UK’s Government Digital Service (GDS) has replaced Stripe with Dutch provider Adyen as its processor for many payments made through its GOV.UK Pay service.

Adyen will take over GOV.UK Pay card payments for local authorities, police forces and armed forces units from Stripe, as well as pay by bank services, under a three-year contract worth up to £25.3 million.

According to the tender notice published in February 2025, the contract covers around 17 percent of payments made through GOV.UK Pay but more than 70 percent of its organizations and includes the only option allowing users to start taking payments within one working day. At that point the contract had an estimated maximum value of £49 million, although with no guarantees over volume.

REG AD

In a blogpost about the contract award on 2 June, GDS said it will migrate around 1,000 services to the new supplier. “We will make migration as straightforward as possible while complying with Know Your Customer legislation that protects everyone from fraud,” wrote Alan Maddrell, senior content designer for the service. “Most importantly, there will be no discernible difference for paying users and no loss in functionality.”

REG AD

He added that the change of supplier will help introduce new options including pay by bank, which transfers money directly between bank accounts using open banking services and avoids the need to type in card details. GDS will continue to use WorldPay to process payments for central government, linked organizations and NHS bodies.

GDS established GOV.UK Pay to save public services the effort and cost of setting up online payments themselves. It doesn’t charge organizations for the service beyond passing on transaction fees.

According to its performance data page, GOV.UK Pay has processed 137.5 million transactions since it was set up in 2016, worth around £9.2 billion. It currently provides 1,718 services, including 662 for local government and 256 for police forces, to 608 organisations ranging from 1079 (Tiverton) Squadron RAF Air Cadets to Yeovil Town Council. ®

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

14. Ask HN: What was your "oh shit" moment with GenAI?

Source: https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=48406174 (Hacker News text post)
Site: news.ycombinator.com
Submitter: andrehacker (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-04 23:42 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 191 points · 423 comments

Most of us were amused when DALL-E and its peers went mainstream, and we were quick to point out the obvious flaws.

Then ChatGPT hit the scene and again, many of us dismissed it as a parlor trick that would never amount to much.

Using LLMs for coding initially was a only small step up from basic code completion, and a welcome farewell to Stack Overflow.

I am curious: what was the specific moment that you went from those quaint, dismissive observations to a slightly panicked,
"Uh Oh" realization of what these models can do?

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

15. Conventional Commits encourages focus on the wrong things

Source: https://sumnerevans.com/posts/software-engineering/stop-using-conventional-commits/
Site: Sumner Evans
Author: Sumner Evans
Published: 2026-06-02
HN activity: 273 points · 212 comments
Length: 1.9K words (~9 min read)
Language: en-us

You’ve almost certainly encountered Conventional Commits before. It may have reared its ugly head in the changelog of an open source project you’ve used. It may have been the enforced commit format for an open source project you contributed to. A lot of people swear by it. I swear at it.

Even though it is used by a large number of popular open source projects, Conventional Commits is an actively bad standard which encourages focus on the wrong things and fails to deliver on its promises.

Focus Failure

Conventional Commits promises to add semantic meaning to commit messages to aid developers and end-users in understanding the changes made in a commit. However, Conventional Commits fails to do this in spectacular fashion. To demonstrate this, let’s look at the anatomy of a conventional commit. According to the Conventional Commit website commit messages should be formatted as follows:

<type>[optional scope]: <description>

[optional body]

[optional footer(s)]


The commit’s subject line has a <type> (something like fix, feat, chore, docs, or refactor1) describing the type of change. Following that, there is an optional scope, and then a description.

This format has a major failing: type is prioritised over scope. This is exactly backwards.

Scope > Type

The scope of a change (the subject of the change) is the most important part of a commit. To demonstrate this, let’s consider why each one of the following stakeholders care about the scope of the change more than the type of the change:

Contributors: when you are a contributor to a project, you often need to read the commit log to identify changes in the codebase relevant to a certain area of the code. There are many reasons for this including:

Wanting to catch up on what has happened since the last time you contributed.
Trying to understand where the project’s overall inertia is.
Looking for commits that might conflict with your in-progress work when pulling or rebasing.

As you read the commit log, you’re looking at what areas were touched. You really do not care about the type of change happening, you care about the scope of the change.

Debuggers: when investigating a bug, you often want to look through the commit log to see what changes might have touched areas related to the component where the bug manifested. Once again, the scope is the most important piece of information. The type of change is entirely useless because bugs can be introduced in any change regardless of type. (I’m sure we’ve all experienced writing a bugfix that caused another bug.)

Incident responders: when production is down, scanning the commit log for changes that were made around the time of the outage is an effective way to identify what areas may be causing the problem. Scope is once again the most important piece of information you can have at this point. For example, if you see a commit related to the auth scope at the tip of the spike of inbound API errors, it’s a likely culprit for the problem. And once again, type is irrelevant because bugs could have been added by any change.

So what does Conventional Commits do? It deprioritises scope so much that it’s optional! Why the hell is scope optional? Having a commit without a scope is like having a sentence without a subject! Then, to add insult to injury, Conventional Commits elevates type to the front of the commit message. Conventional Commits gets the priority of scope and type entirely wrong.

Type is Redundant and Restrictive

You might be thinking “so it may be backwards, but commit type is at least still important, right?” and to that I say “no”. A commit’s description should almost always tell you the type of the change! Consider this commit message as an example:

fix(compiler): prevent namespaced SVG <style> elements from being stripped


Even if you only had the description, it’s obvious that it was a bugfix! Space on the subject line of a commit is already at a premium, wasting characters on the type is not helpful! But it’s often even worse than useless; it’s often restrictive. Take this commit message as an example:

refactor(core): Update webmcp support to use document.modelContext


This commit updated the webmcp functionality in the core component to support both document.modelContext and navigator.modelContext, so was that a bugfix, refactor, or new feature? I would argue it’s all of them! But again, the only thing that really matters is that it was a change to the core/webmcp component.

Conventional Commits fundamentally focuses on the wrong thing (the commit type) and devalues the scope (which is what people actually care about).

Broken Promises

So we have determined that the format of Conventional Commits sucks, but it must provide some benefit. Let’s read the Why Use Conventional Commits section to see if any of the reasons make any sense.

Automatically generating CHANGELOGs.

This is the biggest promise of Conventional Commits: you can run a tool like git-cliff or conventional-changelog to generate a changelog from the commits since your last release. Is this even a good idea? No! The audience of a changelog is entirely different than the audience for a commit log!

A changelog is user-facing, and the user cares about understanding the functional differences between versions. They care about what changed from a business/functional perspective.

A commit log is developer-facing, and the developers care about reading a story of how the codebase has changed over time. They care about what changed from a scope perspective.

As you can see, these are two entirely different grains, and any efforts to combine them result in subpar results. The reasons for this are multiple:

In any moderately complex project, it takes multiple commits to land any notable feature. The process of landing the feature (as documented by the commit log) is valuable for developers and contributors, but it’s useless for the end-user. The end-user only cares about the new feature, not how it was built!
As Rich pointed out, reverts are problematic for Conventional Commits. Revert commits are important from a commit log story perspective for developers, but to the end user, a change that is reverted is equivalent to a change not made.

Automatically determining a semantic version bump (based on the types of commits landed).

This sounds nice, but the realities of software engineering often interfere significantly with the viability of accurately accomplishing this task. Consider the following situations:

Reverts: imagine a situation where the breaking change you introduced was actually so breaking that you have to revert it? Your tooling will pick up a breaking change and increment the major version even though the breakage was actually reverted and there is no breaking change.
Accidental breakages: maybe the breakage is subtle and you don’t realise a change is a breaking change when you make the change. Only in retrospect realise that it’s breaking. You will incorrectly increment a minor/patch version when a major version bump is necessary.
Retroactive unbreakages: say you later add a commit which, in composition with a previously breaking commit, results in a diff which is not breaking. Similar to the revert situation, tooling would incorrectly identify a breaking change.

In such situations, you could rewrite history with a rebase, but that often breaks or is prevented by workflows. It also presents a revisionist history to the contributors trying to contribute to the project, reducing the reliability of the story the commit log is telling.

Communicating the nature of changes to teammates, the public, and other stakeholders.

As we have established up to this point, teammates and the public have very different needs from a changelog and commit log. Conventional Commits manages to solve neither.

Triggering build and publish processes.

This is just a bad idea. Say you only run automated security checks on commits that touch code and then someone creates a Trojan-horse commit titled docs: fix typos which actually introduces vulnerabilities into the authentication subsystem? Obviously, that sort of malicious activity would hopefully be caught in code review, but the automated tooling is bypassed, putting the onus on a human to identify the problem.

Compute is cheap, just use git diff to identify changed files (scope, once again) and run build/publish processes based on that.

Making it easier for people to contribute to your projects, by allowing them to explore a more structured commit history.

More structured, sure. Making it easier to contribute? Not at all (as we have already demonstrated at length).

Not a single one of the “selling points” for Conventional Commits actually holds water.

Conventional Commits is also extremely difficult to apply to a project. You are supposed to define your own set of “types”, but pretty much everyone just takes the defaults from commitlint which often don’t fit well with the particulars of individual projects. This problem is especially acute in corporate environments where change management and audit requirements often mandate a ticket number in every commit message. The <scope> field is the obvious place to put it, but this ends up replacing the only useful metadata in a Conventional Commit with a completely useless ticket number.

A Better Way

So what should you do instead? Follow the lead of truly successful software projects like Linux, FreeBSD, Git, Go, and NixOS! What do these projects have in common? They all use scope-prefixed commit messages (where “scope” is defined to be relevant to the actual project). Usually, the scope to use on a given project is self-evident. For the Linux kernel, the subsystem is the natural scope. For Go projects, the package path is the natural scope. For a project using a microservice architecture, the microservice name is the natural scope.

Here are some examples of projects and their commit format guidelines.

Project	Format	Example
Linux	subsystem: description	i2c: virtio: mark device ready before registering the adapter
FreeBSD	prefix: Description	linuxulator: Return EINVAL for invalid inotify flags
Git	area: description	gitlab-ci: update macOS image
Go	package: description	net/http/cookiejar: add godoc links
nixpkgs	pkg-name: description	xwayland: 24.1.11 -> 24.1.12
Node.js	subsystem: description	stream: fast-path stateless transform flush results

Unfortunately, despite being used by some of the most successful open source projects ever created, this commit style seems to have lost the branding war. I intend to change that. Introducing scopedcommits.com. The website is dedicated to advocating for a return to commit message sanity, and separating the concern of changelog generation from commit log management.

Conclusion

Conventional Commits’ purported advantages are actually illusory and the industry has seen no tangible benefit from using it as a standard. However, Conventional Commits unfortunately seems to have become fairly popular in open source projects, and due to this it seems like AIs have a habit of defaulting to using it for commit messages. This has caused propagation of anti-pattern-ridden commit messages across projects.

My goal in this article is to fight against Conventional Commits’ dominance, and demonstrate that there better ways to structure commit messages. But if this article has not convinced you to stop using Conventional Commits, I look forward to the flame war in the comment section.

Technically, the Conventional Commits specification only defines fix and feat and leaves additional types up to individual projects to specify, however most projects just end up using the types defined by commitlint, so I have included some of them in this list. ↩︎

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

16. Nordstjernen Web Browser 1.0.0 released

Source: https://github.com/nordstjernen-web/nordstjernen/releases/tag/1.0.0
Site: GitHub
Author: nordstjernen-web
Submitted: 2026-06-05 23:42 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 15 points · 10 comments
Length: 63 words (~1 min read)
Language: en

Nordstjernen 1.0.0 released!

Nordstjernen is a web browser, written from scratch in C, focused on supporting the HTML and CSS standards.

It runs on Windows, Mac and Linux, with an Android port in progress.

License: Nordstjernen Source License v1.0 — use, modify and redistribute freely, except as a competing browser; each release becomes MIT after ten years. See License.md. Commercial licenses by agreement.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

17. Transformers are inherently succinct

Source: https://openreview.net/pdf?id=Yxz92UuPLQ
Site: openreview.net
Submitter: brandonb (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-05 18:50 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 99 points · 30 comments

non-HTML content-type (application/pdf); not scraped

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

18. Launch HN: General Instinct (YC P26) – Frontier models on edge devices

Source: https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=48414869 (Hacker News text post)
Site: news.ycombinator.com
Submitter: guanming0717 (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-05 16:33 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 46 points · 14 comments

Hey HN, Guanming and Bill here from General Instinct (https://general-instinct.com/).

After years of working in robotics, we kept running into the same problem: the best models never fit the hardware we actually had available.

The models that performed best were usually designed around datacenter assumptions: large GPUs, lots of memory bandwidth, and reliable network access. But most physical systems have the opposite constraints.

That led us down the path of figuring out how much of a frontier model could be preserved while still making it practical to run on edge hardware.

As part of that work, we recently open sourced InstinctRazor (https://github.com/General-Instinct/InstinctRazor)

One result we're excited about is compressing Qwen3.5-122B-A10B, a roughly 245 GB BF16 MoE model, into a 48 GiB GGUF. The resulting model is actually smaller than Gemma-4-26B-A4B while outperforming it on benchmarks like MMLU-Pro and GPQA-D etc. we preserve the parts that are always active (router, norms, Gated-DeltaNet/SSM layers, vision pathway, etc.) and quantize the routed experts much more aggressively. We then use on-policy distillation to recover capability lost during quantization.

The model can also run in a "small GPU" configuration where experts are streamed from system RAM. With an 8k context window, peak VRAM usage is around 7.6–8 GB.

If you're interested in the technical details, we wrote up the approach here (https://general-instinct.com/blog/frontier-moe-sub-4-bit)

We're especially interested in hearing from people deploying models onto robots or other edge devices. What models are you trying to run locally today? What has been the biggest bottleneck in getting them into production?

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

19. India's surprise baby bust

Source: https://www.economist.com/leaders/2026/06/04/indias-surprise-baby-bust-is-a-warning-to-the-world
Site: The Economist
Author: The Economist
Published: 2026-06-04
HN activity: 142 points · 624 comments
Length: 143 words (~1 min read)
Language: en

Jun 4th 2026|5 min read

YOU ARE having too many babies. For decades that crude message was drilled into the minds of Indians by their rulers, abetted by inept foreign donors. In the 1960s slogans on school buildings chided parents, telling them: “Two or three children, enough”. By the 1970s officials had taken a crueller turn, overseeing the sterilisation of millions of young adults, usually the poor, many forcibly. But when Indian school textbooks are reprinted this summer, they will carry a very different message. They will warn not of the dangers of having too many babies, but of the risks of having too few.

This article appeared in the Leaders section of the print edition under the headline “India’s baby bust”

From the June 6th 2026 edition

Discover stories from this section and more in the list of contents

⇒Explore the edition

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

20. Cooldown Support for Ruby Bundler

Source: https://blog.rubygems.org/2026/06/03/cooldown-let-new-gems-be-vetted.html
Site: RubyGems
Author: Hiroshi SHIBATA
Published: 2026-06-03
HN activity: 147 points · 41 comments
Length: 1.0K words (~5 min read)
Language: en-us

Most supply-chain attacks against RubyGems exploit a narrow window: an account is compromised, a malicious version ships, and any bundle install in the minutes that follow resolves straight to it. Bundler 4.0.13 introduces cooldown, a time-based filter that refuses to resolve to a version until it has been public for at least N days. Releases too new to have been scrutinized are passed over in favor of ones that have aged past the window.

The feature was designed in the open, drawing on how other ecosystems approach the same problem. It is opt-in, and complements rather than replaces existing defenses like mandatory 2FA and trusted publishing.

Cooldown reads the per-version created_at timestamp that rubygems.org’s v2 compact index now serves. A version whose source does not expose created_at, such as older gem servers, historical entries from before the v2 cutover, or private registries still on the v1 format, is treated as outside the window and stays resolvable. Cooldown never blocks resolution silently; it only holds back versions it can prove are too new.

Getting started

Cooldown ships in Bundler 4.0.13. If you are on an earlier release, update Bundler in place and pin the same version in your lockfile so the whole team moves together:

$ gem update --system          # or: gem install bundler -v 4.0.13
$ bundle update --bundler=4.0.13


Then declare a small cooldown on your source in the Gemfile. This is the right setup for most teams: it is committed alongside your code, so every developer and CI run enforce the same window with no extra setup.

source "https://rubygems.org", cooldown: 7

gem "rails"
gem "puma"


Cooldown takes effect during resolution. Run bundle install when there is no lockfile yet, or bundle update to re-resolve against it once a lockfile exists; an existing Gemfile.lock is always honored as-is, so adding a cooldown never disturbs versions you have already locked. Cooldown is unset by default, so a project without it keeps resolving to the newest versions.

That is all most projects need. The rest of this post covers the finer-grained controls.

Other ways to set it

Beyond the per-source keyword, the cooldown setting applies one value across every source, scoped per-project, globally, or through the environment:

$ bundle config set cooldown 7          # stored in .bundle/config for this project
$ bundle config set --global cooldown 7 # applies to every project for this user
$ BUNDLE_COOLDOWN=7 bundle install      # no lockfile yet, e.g. a fresh CI checkout
$ BUNDLE_COOLDOWN=7 bundle update       # re-resolve when a lockfile already exists


For a one-off run, pass --cooldown to install, update, add, or outdated:

$ bundle install --cooldown 7
$ bundle update --cooldown 7
$ bundle add rails --cooldown 7
$ bundle outdated --cooldown 7


When more than one of these is present, they resolve in a fixed order of precedence: command-line flag > configuration setting > per-source cooldown: in the Gemfile. A --cooldown flag overrides the cooldown setting (bundle config or BUNDLE_COOLDOWN), which in turn overrides a cooldown: declared on a source. The cooldown value is always a non-negative integer number of days; a string, float, negative number, or array is rejected with an InvalidOption error.

Mixing sources

Because the flag and the setting apply uniformly to every source, the per-source keyword is what you reach for when policy differs by registry, for instance cooling down public gems while trusting an internal registry you operate:

source "https://rubygems.org", cooldown: 7

source "https://gems.internal.example.com", cooldown: 0 do
  gem "internal-tool"
end


cooldown: 0 on the private source keeps it permanently exempt while public gems still age. Note that a command-line --cooldown N overrides every source for that run, including the exempt one.

The escape hatch

Passing 0 disables cooldown for the run. It is the reliable way to reach the newest version on demand and to override a per-source or configured cooldown. This matters most when waiting is the wrong default: a fix lands for an actively exploited 0-day, or a vulnerability disclosure tells you to upgrade immediately. In those cases the freshest release is exactly the one you want, and --cooldown 0 lets you take it without removing the policy for everyone else:

$ bundle install --cooldown 0
$ BUNDLE_COOLDOWN=0 bundle update rails   # ignore any configured cooldown this time


You will reach for this when every candidate version of a gem is still inside the window. Rather than fall back to a too-new release, Bundler stops, reports how many versions the cooldown excluded, and points you at --cooldown 0 to proceed.

Seeing what is held back

bundle outdated is cooldown-aware. It annotates versions that are newer but still inside the window with the days left before they become resolvable, so “up to date” stays distinct from “deliberately waiting”:

$ bundle outdated --cooldown 7
Gem             Current   Latest                  Requested   Groups
aws-partitions  1.1251.0  1.1256.0 (cooldown 3d)  = 1.1251.0  default


One layer among many

Cooldown is most useful as one part of the wider security investment happening on rubygems.org. The registry now validates gem contents at push time and checks logins against Have I Been Pwned so that compromised passwords cannot be reused, work described in Protecting rubygems.org from the outside in. A dedicated team is running AI-assisted vulnerability scanning against the most critical gems, backed by Alpha Omega and Anthropic, and the direction of all of this is tracked on a public roadmap. Trusted publishing and mandatory 2FA already raise the bar for who can push a release in the first place.

Cooldown itself only works because rubygems.org now publishes the per-version created_at timestamp through its v2 compact index (v2 is an internal format version, not a public API change), delivered through a careful dual-write migration and a flagged cutover with no disruption for clients. I’m grateful to the rubygems.org team for that groundwork. Cooldown is a thin client-side filter on top of it.

Each of these defenses covers a different gap, and they compound. Resolving your dependencies against rubygems.org is what puts all of them to work on your behalf, which makes it the safest default for Ruby projects.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

21. I tested every IP KVM in my Homelab

Source: https://www.jeffgeerling.com/blog/2026/i-tested-every-ip-kvm/
Site: Jeff Geerling
Submitter: vquemener (Hacker News)
Published: 2026-06-05
HN activity: 248 points · 69 comments
Length: 3.3K words (~15 min read)

Jun 5, 2026

Since the PiKVM came out in 2017, there's been an explosion of IP KVMs. I've tested almost every one. But what are they good for?

You can use Remote Desktop, Screen Sharing, or VNC to remote control a computer from anywhere on a LAN. And if you don't have a private VPN, you could use RealVNC, Raspberry Pi Connect, or wire up Tailscale or Pangolin for fully remote access. Those solutions are great, and so is SSH if you don't need a full desktop.

But there are situations where you don't want to have remote control software running on the computer. When I'm benchmarking remotely, I don't want screen sharing using up any resources. Or what if you have a computer you want access remotely no matter what. Screen sharing and SSH don't work if the computer's locked up—or turned off!

Enter the IP KVM. High end server hardware has this feature built-in (HP's ILO, Dell's iDRAC, or IPMI), but not everyone has access to server motherboards. Even if you do, the BMC might be wildly out of date, or you might want to connect through a GPU, and not through the built-in VGA graphics.

IP KVM stands for "IP Keyboard Video and Mouse". Basically, these devices allow you to control of your computer over an IP network.

High-end IP KVMs have special features like PoE support, HDMI passthrough, and backup 5G modems. But sometimes you just want no frills remote KVM, and for that, there are even sub-$50 models you can buy.

In this post, I'll run through all the KVMs I've tested.

But before we get started, a word of caution:

One of these devices actually got me a visit from the FBI. And all these things can be security holes, just waiting to be exploited. Any form of remote control needs to be treated like an open door into your network—make sure you put a good lock on it.

Keep them updated, don't buy one if you don't trust the vendor, and firewall them off as much as you can. Using an IP KVM allows remote BIOS access, which can be pretty dangerous!

To see just how damaging things can be, check out this article about some pretty serious vulnerabilities some of the devices I'm about to review have run into.

But let's start with the PiKVM.

PiKVM

For me, this thing started it all. The folks at PiKVM built the open source software that was used in every first-generation clone, and cemented Raspberry Pi as the computer used in these things. My Dad and I tested all the PiKVM models, and I like everything but the price. I 100% recommend them, especially since you're directly supporting the folks who wrote the software. But I also know many people stop looking once they see the price tag.

Going from $275 to $400 bucks, they offer features like HDMI passthrough, two-way audio, power controls, addons for KVM switching, 5G backup, and a fully open source software stack. They even have instructions for building your own, if you have a Pi and you want to save some money!

Prices:

PiKVM v4 Plus (with CM4): $400(ish) on PiShop.us
PiKVM v4 Mini (sans-CM4): $270(ish) on CloudFree
PiKVM v3 (with Pi 4): $275(ish) on PiShop.us

Chipset: BCM2711 (Raspberry Pi 4/CM4)

Topline features: 1080p at 60fps, HDMI passthrough, two-way audio support, ATX power control, multi-computer option with extra hardware, a PCI Express slot for 4G or 5G cards for redunant Internet, and uses around 3W of power

Open source: GPLv3 license, source is here, basis for almost all the Raspberry Pi-powered KVMs

BliKVM

The BliKVM is basically a PiKVM, but cheaper, because the company benefitted from the software PiKVM already built. The hardware has the same benefits and tradeoffs. But on the software side, you're not putting money back into the open source project that started it all. They modified the software and UI a bit, and they acknowledge where they get the software, but honestly? Starting over over $200 for a cheaper Allwinner version, they're outclassed by newer KVMs. My favorite thing BliKVM did was their PCI Express version, that you can slot inside your computer.

$235 to $300 on AliExpress
Chipset: Allwinner H616 or Raspberry Pi CM4
Topline features: Versions with Pi or Allwinner chip, a PCIe card version you can stick inside a PC, and plenty of accessories if you need extra features like HDMI passthrough. A bit of a messy setup, but it has everything out of the box.
Open source: GPLv3 license, source is here

GL-iNet Comet

GL-iNet is quickly expanding their IP KVM offering. They kicked off their KVM journey with the $99 Comet. Like BliKVM, their software is a fork of PiKVM. So between that and using a cheaper single-core Arm SoC instead of Raspberry Pi, they can cut down the cost a lot. They also bump the supported resolution up to 4K, and they have external options for ATX power control or even a cute little FingerBot add-on, for remotely pushing buttons.

$99.99 from GL-iNet
Chipset: RV1126
Topline features: 4K at 30fps, 8GB eMMC, option for ATX board and Fingerbot for remote power button pushes
Open source: Self-hosted cloud feature, KVM UI based on PiKVM, source is here

GL-iNet Comet Pro

The Comet is barebones, so they also sent me a Comet Pro to test.

Aside: Most of the KVMs I'm testing are review samples. Even though none of the companies paid any money or have a say in what I write, I want to be clear: I only paid for a few of the KVMs under test.

The Pro isn't quite double the cost, but it adds WiFi, 4x more onboard storage for bootable ISOs, a touchscreen, HDMI passthrough, and it still supports the FingerBot and ATX power control add-ons.

GL-iNet has a couple other unreleased KVMs which I hope to test out someday (one for USB control, the other for 4-computer switching).

$179.99 from GL-iNet
Chipset: RV1126B (unconfirmed)
Topline features: 4K at 30fps, built-in WiFi, 32GB eMMC, touchscreen, HDMI passthrough, option for ATX board and Fingerbot for remote power button pushes
Open source: Self-hosted cloud feature, KVM UI based on PiKVM, source is here

Sipeed NanoKVM Cube

This is the little guy that got me an FBI visit. The NanoKVM Cube is so cheap at $70, that apparently hackers were sending these to US workers to access corporate networks, in some espionage scheme. That doesn't mean the NanoKVM is 'bad', just that they're cheap and inconspicuous, and that made them great for North Korean spies.

Of course, Sipeed who makes these things didn't help the fact by including a tiny microphone. I made a short video about it. The problem is Sipeed built the NanoKVM with a RISC-V development board, that just so happens to include a tiny microphone.

But in general, if you're nervous about using hardware like this from China, then pick something else. Sipeed also took a while to open source their firmware, which also didn't help NanoKVM's trust level.

But I still like the Cube, if for no other reason than it showed manufacturers you could build tiny IP KVMs under $100.

$69 on AliExpress
Chipset: SG2002 (RISC-V)
Topline features: 1080p at 60fps, 32GB microSD, Comes with ATX breakout when buying full kit
Open source: KVM UI source

Sipeed NanoKVM PCIe

I haven't tested it, but Sipeed also makes the NanoKVM PCIe form factor, for installation inside a computer.

$73 on AliExpress
Chipset: SG2002 (RISC-V)
Topline features: 4K at 30fps, 32GB eMMC, HDMI passthrough, options for PoE, WiFi, ATX breakout adding on up to $120 total
Open source: KVM UI source

Sipeed NanoKVM Pro / Pro PCIe

Sipeed also branched out like GL-iNet and made a Pro version with a touchscreen, a control wheel, WiFi, and HDMI passthrough.

And they made two PCI Express card versions. And all these things are pretty cheap still (under $100). The cheaper NanoKVMs are built around the Sophgo SG2002 RISC-V chip, and the Pro models use Axera's dual-core Arm AX630C chip.

I've tested all their different models, and they work great. Sipeed's UI is completely custom, too, and quite minimal. Availability at least in the US can be hit or miss, but I'm not sure if that's more from tariffs, production speed, or import restrictions.

$99 on AliExpress
Chipset: AX630C
Topline features: 4K at 30fps, 32GB eMMC, HDMI passthrough, PoE, built-in display with control wheel, options for WiFi, ATX breakout adding on up to $120 total
Open source: KVM UI source

JetKVM

I tested the JetKVM pre-launch, and I still enjoy the JetKVM's fast UI and clean aesthetic. The two little screws up top mean you can hard-mount these into rackmounts, like I'm using in my clock rack:

I don't know if it's just me, but this whole setup feels like one of the most polished. From the packaging, to the solid metal unit, to the snappy UI, I still use JetKVMs around the studio more than any other device.

These use a single core Arm SoC, which helps them stay around $100, but because of import issues, they never got to ship in quantity at the same low price I think they intended.

There are some quirks with the first version, like no built-in PoE, and a mini HDMI port on the back that needs an adapter, but overall this is one of my favorite little IP KVMs. There's apparently a new PoE version that also has full-size HDMI and a microSD card slot, but I haven't been able to buy one yet.

WisdPi makes a PoE splitter you can use to power it over Ethernet (that's how I'm powering it in my clock rack).

The JetKVM is a lot like the PiKVM in that the team behind it devoted a lot of time and resources to building an entirely new open source software stack...

Also like PiKVM, other companies quickly forked it and built their own tiny, cheap KVMs, diverting a portion of the potential market.

$103 on wisdPi
Chipset: RV1106G3
Topline features: 1080p at 60fps, 16GB eMMC, touchscreen, small zinc-alloy body, ATX, Serial, DC Power control attachments sold separately
Open source: KVM Go-based App (GPLv2), Firmware (upstream licenses)

LuckFox PicoKVM

One of the companies that cloned it is LuckFox. They're a newer embedded device manufacturer, and their PicoKVM is basically the JetKVM, but square, with the screen on top. The price is a bit lower, though, and if you don't need it rackmounted, I guess it's a viable option.

$61.99 on Waveshare
Chipset: RV1106G3
Topline features: 1080p at 60Hz, 8GB eMMC, Touchscreen, GPIO for ATX power, microSD expansion
Open source: KVM UI is a fork of JetKVM (GPLv2), and they provide hardware schematics

LeafKVM

Another KVM that built off JetKVM's software is the LeafKVM. Unlike the JetKVM, it built in a larger display, and added one feature I haven't seen anywhere else: a VGA adapter that doesn't need extra power. You have to buy their adapter, and it only works with the LeafKVM (for now), but it worked perfectly on my old Xserves. The Xserve only has two USB ports on the back, so using one for a VGA power adapter is wasteful.

The big problem I have with LeafKVM (at least for my rackmount use) is that ports go out both sides. It's like the Raspberry Pi: cables splayed out all over the place.

But it's just finishing up a crowdfunding campaign on Crowd Supply, where it's $120 right now. The price will likely go up after the campaign is over.

$120 on CrowdSupply, price increase after campaign ends
Chipset: RV1126B
Topline features: 4K 30fps (or 1080p 90fps), microSD storage, IPS touchscreen, WiFi built in, HDMI preview on device, optional ATX power control, PoE support (option), special VGA to HDMI adapter that doesn't require extra power (when used with LeafKVM), as well as RustDesk support in software
Open Source: hardware planned on CERN-OHL-HW license, software build scripts "will be provided", UI forked from JetKVM

TinyPilot Voyager 3

Now getting back to a PiKVM-style Pi-based device, TinyPilot is another box I've covered before, except they're up to the Voyager 3 now. Their 3rd generation hardware is even easier to set up, and it's even laid out in a more thoughtful box, compared to some other solutions.

TinyPilot targets more the business side users than a hobbyist looking to save a few bucks, judging by the price and how they have licensing and management set up. It's still good to see this thing kicking around after a few years, and I think features like RBAC and extended warranty options help.

They also partnered up with distributors in Canada, Europe and the US, meaning it's easier to get these units wherever you are, especially compared to some of the cheap Chinese options.

Finally, they're building out a central management system called TinyPilot Dashboard that you can self-host; it's still in beta, but I got it working through my Mac running in Docker.

$379.00 on TinyPilot Store ($499.00 for PoE + 2nd LAN)
Chipset: BCM2711 (Pi CM4)
Topline features: Web access, 1080p60, built-in status LCD, HDMI passthrough, metal case, rackmount options, RBAC with up to 8 simultaneous users, 1-year warranty (with options for extended warranties, up to 4 year), ships from North Carolina, USA, or Ontario Canada, available through CDW, Insight, SHI, DigiKey, Amazon Business, or in Europe through Welectron — bottom line, built for business use, probably not the best option for individuals running it in a homelab
Open source: Community version is free, MIT-licensed. Pro license is perpetual per device.

Openterface KVM-GO

At this point, all these KVMs have been 'traditional' IP KVMs, where you plug them into Ethernet and you can access a computer across your LAN.

Openterface's KVM-GO is not that. It's meant to just plug one computer into another, like if you're in front of a rack with a tablet, and want to jack in and control it.

I've used it a few times for interfacing with my older machines and some servers, because they sell a VGA model that's little bigger than a standard VGA plug itself. But it can be awkward getting their control software running. I also had trouble plugging it in on one machine, due to clearance issues.

My favorite feature is these are powered over the same USB-C connection you use for control, so you don't have to find an extra wall plug or even use PoE.

They have versions for direct connection to VGA, DisplayPort, or HDMI, and the kits cost about $120 each, or a little over $300 for all three.

They also make a more generic Mini KVM for $99, but I haven't tested that.

$119 for each kit, or $319 for full set on Crowd Supply
Chipset: Macro Silicon MS2130S
Topline features: 4K at 30fps (default 1080p), Bluetooth for iPad use, aluminum alloy case, USB-C powered, microSD storage
Open source: OSHWA Certified after Crowdfunding
Also have a Mini-KVM for $99 on Crowd Supply

Sipeed NanoKVM USB / Pro

Speaking of USB, Sipeed also makes USB versions of their NanoKVM, also for around $100.

$99 on AliExpress
Chipset: SG2002 (I think)
Topline features: 4K at 30fps (60fps Pro), Aluminum Alloy case, HDMI passthrough, browser and desktop apps available
Open source: KVM UI source is https://github.com/sipeed/NanoKVM-USB (GPLv3)

Pi-Cast

I actually had some trouble getting the Pi-Cast working on my iPad. But basically, it's a PiKVM, but instead of accessing it over the LAN, you access it over a direct IP connection that's set up through the USB-C port you plug into your computer.

It's similar to the other USB KVMs I've mentioned, except it hosts its own webserver, so you don't have to run special software on your computer.

But because it runs on a Pi, it's a bit more expensive, coming in at $214.

$214 on CrowdSupply
Chipset: BCM2711 (Pi CM4)
Topline features: 1080p at 60Hz, OLED status display, OTG port for direct connection to iPad, WiFi AP built-in, options for ATX control, PoE, LTE/5G, Dual-ATX KVM switch control
Open source: Software is PiKVM-based, schematic available here

DezKVM-Go

On the opposite side of the pricing spectrum is the DezKVM-Go, the cheapest KVM of the bunch, which also works through USB.

It's made by Toby Chui, and it's an open source hardware design, with a little open source web app you can either run from GitHub or self-host.

That means you don't even need an app on your iPhone or whatever, you can just run it in the browser. Well, at least if your browser is Chrome, Edge, or a recent version of FireFox that support Webserial.

This thing is so cheap because it relies on a this little HDMI to USB adapter. It muxes in keyboard and mouse control over USB, and device control is handled through WebSerial.

It worked great on my Windows laptop, but I had trouble in Ubuntu 26.04. I'm not sure if it's a Linux permissions thing or what, but just something to keep in mind.

If this were $200 I'd complain, but not for $25. For that, it's a neat little box that maybe more people could contribute to, to make it the most handy way to jack in from a crash cart.

$24.99 on Tindie

Chipset: Uses 3rd party HDMI converter (MS2109), and generic USB chips

Topline features: Self-hosted or GitHub-hosted web UI, no app required; have to plug into a computer to use. WebSerial requires Chrome, Edge, or Firefox

Can be extended with DezKVM software with an SBC or miniPC to manage one or multiple systems over IP

Open source: Software is custom Go and JS, licensed as GPLv3. Hardware is Creative Commons non-commercial. Toby Chui designed it.

ArkKVM

The crowdfunded ArkKVM looks like a JetKVM clone that fixes a few minor annoyances I had with the first-gen version by using full-size HDMI and including PoE support out of the box.

$99 on ArkKVM store
Chipset: RV1106B
Topline features: Almost a clone of the JetKVM, fixing a few shortcomings, but without any screws. Screws can be nice for hard mounting like in racks.
Open source: ArkKVM told me they'll be releasing the Rust code for the UI and the image sometime in June, but time will tell. I know some companies are better about it than others: https://github.com/arkkvm

Conclusion

If you have to choose an IP KVM, first start with your list of must-have features.

The main thing I want is having all the ports on one side, to make it easier to put in a rack or cable manage. That rules out a few units, but what I need is different than what you need.

I think we can all agree we want a good value, though; slapping a $400 remote control box on a $300 mini PC is a bit much—but maybe you need a special feature like backup 5G Internet.

The KVM I use the most around the Studio is the JetKVM. It's tiny, bus-powered, and simple. And most of the time, that's all I need.

A lot of features are still being actively developed, like on the JetKVM it looks like it's finally getting audio support a year after launch. So look at the links I put in the description for the latest specs.

Even while I was writing this post, GL-iNet announced more KVMs, the Comet Q for USB control, and Comet X with a built-in 4-computer switcher.

Bottom line: the market for these things is booming, and there are probably more IP KVMs on the market by the time you're watching this.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

22. "Maybe later" was a feature

Source: https://arnorhs.dev/posts/2026-06-04/maybe-later-was-a-feature/
Site: arnorhs.dev
Submitter: arnorhs (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-04 18:31 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 79 points · 27 comments
Length: 639 words (~3 min read)
Language: en

The most valueble code in my repo, is the code I didn't write.

Have you ever thought back to when you were kind of excited about something - eg. of having more tests for some particular part of your stack, or rewriting legacy website from "legacy old thing" to "shiny new thing"? Or deploying your services on AWS intead of GCP?

Or maybe it was a feature you wanted to build - such as a task management thing on top of your CRM, or some slick way of handling images in your infra?

Is your team's backlog filled with these things? I know mine is. Those are ideas and tasks that the business, your boss, your team, or yourself never prioritized. You thought to yourself: I'll get to it later.

The ideas that are actually worth prioritizing, you work on. Or you hire people to work on. They get done because they are deemed important enough.

4 years later it's clear that those backlog features would not have helped at all. It is a good thing they never got built. They're either irrelevent today or you already pivoted your product to something completely different.

They'd simply be legacy cruft you either need to support or remove.

I think about those things all the time. All the things I never built.

Every time you don't build something, you are accelerating your team, the product and you are prioritizing what is important at any given moment. Not building is a really powerful feature. Picking is a product and development strategy.

"the models keep getting better"

People talk about AI taking our jobs all the time now. I'll admit, that I worry about that sometimes as well. It's hard not to. Tech CEOs keep reminding me.

On the surface they already are better and in some localized cases I they can produce better code than I can.

But in the larger picture I feel like they're still ways off. How many times have you tried to completely vibe-out but then you look at the code after a while and you ask yourself why the same thing is defined in 15 different places? Or seen 4 different implementations of the same schema validation in nested if-statements?

Personally, I just find LLM output often hard to read. And when it's hard for me to read, it's probably also hard for the AI to read.

But we will get there. I'm sure.

When to build

So LLMs are improving and everybody is using them. Tokenmaxxing like there is no tomorrow (literally and figuratively).

But I worry that that people are, and will be, spending their tokens building exactly these things that you previously would not have built. The backlog ideas. They are no longer picking, they are just building.

And what happens down the road is that all the code bases will just grow with more features and more frameworks and more things that have been re-written from A to B, when you otherwise would not have.

I also worry that the code ends up in a state where it is illegible to a human, and you can only get AI to interface with the code.

And yes, you will be able to use AI to help you remove those things and reshape them. But will you do that? Won't there simply be more systems or more things or people that now rely on this feature?

It's also really difficult making the argument that you need to spend time, tokens or other resources to remove something. It's often hard for non-developers to undestand how removing things can be a net positive.

Additionally, Hyrum's Law will affect your APIs

There's a lot of value in the code that we don't write. and often not choosing to write some code, is the best thing you can do.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

23. Tracing a powerful GNSS interference source over Europe

Source: https://arxiv.org/abs/2606.03673
Site: arXiv.org
Author: [Submitted on 2 Jun 2026]
Submitted: 2026-06-05 08:32 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 366 points · 200 comments
Length: 167 words (~1 min read)
Language: en

View PDF HTML (experimental)

Abstract:This paper analyzes and identifies a space-based Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS) interference source that has caused scores of powerful transient wide-area interference events over continental Europe, Greenland, and Canada since 2019. While terrestrial or near-terrestrial sources are primarily responsible for the recent uptick in GNSS interference worldwide, space-based interferers are of special concern given their potential for vast geographic reach and their portent of a qualitative escalation in GNSS interference. Based on data collected between 2019 and 2026 from a network of terrestrial GNSS reference stations, this paper (1) develops a received-power-based detection framework; (2) details the spatial, temporal, and spectral patterns of wide-area interference events caused by the source; (3) presents and analyzes identification techniques that blend received-power and time-difference-of-arrival measurements; and (4) applies these techniques to confidently identify the GNSS interference source as a constellation of Russian early warning satellites in Molniya ("lightning") orbits.

Submission history

From: Todd Humphreys [view email]
[v1] Tue, 2 Jun 2026 13:57:43 UTC (2,828 KB)

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

24. Aging and Eye Problems

Source: https://ldstephens.net/posts/aging-and-eye-problems/
Site: ldstephens.net
Submitter: speckx (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-05 18:30 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 61 points · 28 comments
Length: 198 words (~1 min read)
Language: en

Aging and eye problems

June 5, 2026

I found it interesting to come across two posts in my RSS feed about aging and eye problems the other day.

Robert Breen

Eleven years ago, just after my fiftieth birthday, I started having trouble reading late in the day. This is common for people of a certain age, but the reason I was struggling wasn’t normal. Instead of a single row of data on a spreadsheet, I saw two, one below the other. If I closed one eye, everything was fine.

Bryce Wray

Despite studies I cited back then, I am now making use of dark mode whenever possible because, simply put, the floaters make reading light text on dark backgrounds far less aggravating than is the case with dark text on light backgrounds.

Like Bryce, I've also been making use of dark mode. Several months ago I had a posterior vitreous detachment in my left eye, where the gel inside the eye pulls away from the retina, causing floaters and flashes of light. The floaters and flashes have faded over time, but my left eye still gets cloudy, which makes it especially difficult to see when using light mode.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

25. C++: The Documentary

Source: https://herbsutter.com/2026/06/04/c-the-documentary-released-today/
Site: Sutter’s Mill
Author: Herb Sutter
Published: 2026-06-05
HN activity: 383 points · 276 comments
Length: 472 words (~3 min read)
Language: en

C++ 2026-06-042026-06-04 2 Minutes

C++: The Documentary premiered today on YouTube, and it was great to be on the live chat with Bjarne and many other key folks who participated in C++’s history. I’m honored to have been one of hundreds of people who have played a part in advancing Bjarne’s wonderful project over the years.

If you haven’t watched this yet, make it a weekend goal. What a great synopsis of a 40-year success story, from humble beginnings to global adoption to being currently (as of Q3 2025) the fastest-growing of the top four languages in the world… +90% users in the past 3.5 years.

People who appear in the documentary:

Bjarne Stroustrup: Bell Labs, Designer and original implementer of C++
Alexander Stepanov: Designer of the Standard Template Library
Anders Hejlsberg: Creator of C#, TypeScript, and Turbo Pascal
Andrei Alexandrescu: Principal Research Scientist, Nvidia & C++ Author
Andrew Koenig: Bell Labs, Founding member of the C++ Standards Committee, Researcher, C++ Author & Educator
Barbara Moo: Bell Labs, Manager C++ Development Team & C++ Author
Brian Kernighan: Bell Labs, Computer Scientist, Co-author of “The C Programming Language”
Chris Lattner: Creator of Mojo, LLVM, Clang & Swift
Danilo Piparo: Particle Physicist, CERN, ROOT Framework Project Lead
Eric Lubin: Software Developer – Lead, Hudson River Trading
Gabriel Dos Reis: Software Engineer and Architect, Microsoft; C++ tools builder; Mathematician
Herb Sutter: Technical Fellow, Citadel Securities; Chair, Standard C++ Foundation; Chair Emeritus, ISO C++ Committee
John Romero: Video Game Developer, Co-Creator of Doom and Quake, Co-Founder id Software
Nina Ranns: Vice-Convener of the ISO C++ Committee

Chapters

00:00 Intro
01:50 Invention at AT&T Bell Labs
07:30 C with Classes
09:37 Early adoption of C with Classes
10:53 From C with Classes to C++ (and CFront)
12:32 Why is it called C++?
13:24 AT&T starts selling software / Another team tries to take over C++
16:08 Early development of C++ at AT&T Bell Labs
19:10 “It was a buggy product” / Release 2.0.0
21:55 C++ spreading beyond AT&T
24:50 Too many versions of C++
26:03 Need for standardization
29:38 The STL by Alexander Stepanov
37:19 The first standard: C++98
39:21 C++ at CERN in the 90s
40:34 C++ spreading to games and trading
43:00 C++ winter of the early 2000s
45:34 Programming language wars (C#)
49:25 There’s a need for an efficient programming language again
52:29 Modern C++ (C++11)
56:29 Is the standards committee making C++ too complicated?
1:00:45 C++ is everwhere
01:05:00 The future and challenges for C++
01:08:31 Bjarne’s impact

Published by Herb Sutter

Herb Sutter is an author and speaker, and a technical fellow at Citadel Securities. He serves as chair of the Standard C++ Foundation and its conference CppCon, and served as chair of the ISO C++ standards committee from 2002 to 2025. View all posts by Herb Sutter

Published 2026-06-042026-06-04

Post navigation

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

26. The perils of UUID primary keys in SQLite

Source: https://andersmurphy.com/2026/06/05/the-perils-of-uuid-primary-keys-in-sqlite.html
Site: andersmurphy.com
Submitter: emschwartz (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-05 23:13 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 26 points · 17 comments
Length: 786 words (~4 min read)
Language: en

05 Jun 2026

It's common to use random UUIDs as a primary key in databases. One of the known downsides of random UUIDs is that their unordered nature (UUID4) can cause a lot of extra paging for the clustered index because you are inserting rows randomly into the Btree and having to re-balance it. This post tries to help us develop a more visceral understanding of the performance cost of all that extra paging.

While this post is about SQLite specifically, the problem of random UUIDs also extends to other databases that use clustered indexes.

What is a clustered index?

A clustered index determines the physical storage order of the rows in a table. The table's data rows are stored in the index's leaf pages, sorted by the indexed key. Because of this:

There can be only one clustered index per table (rows can only be physically sorted one way).
A clustered index is the table. The leaf nodes contain the full row data
A non-clustered index, by contrast, stores only the indexed columns plus a pointer to the actual row data, which lives elsewhere.

Rowid

Every ordinary SQLite table has an implicit 64-bit integer primary key called rowid. The table's data is stored in a B-tree ordered by rowid. This is effectively SQLite's clustered index. The physical storage order of rows follows rowid sequence.

Without rowid

SQLite also supports WITHOUT ROWID tables. These tables have no implicit rowid. Instead, the primary key you declare becomes the clustered index.

Baseline

Let's establish a performance baseline with regular rowid int primary key. We'll insert 10 million rows in batches of 1 million.

(d/q writer
  ["CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS event(id INT PRIMARY KEY, data BLOB)"])
      
(dotimes [_ 100]
  (time
    (d/with-write-tx [db writer]
      (dotimes [_ 1000000]
        (d/q db ["INSERT INTO event (data) values (?)" data])))))


Results:

total rows	time in ms
10000000	1208
20000000	1102
30000000	1177
40000000	1138
50000000	1086
60000000	1101
70000000	1070
80000000	1069
90000000	1079
100000000	1081

Roughly a million inserts per second.

UUID4

Now lets try UUID4.

(d/q writer
  ["CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS event(id BLOB PRIMARY KEY, data BLOB) WITHOUT ROWID"])

(dotimes [_ 10]
  (time
    (d/with-write-tx [db writer]
      (dotimes [_ 1000000]
        (d/q db ["INSERT INTO event (id, data) values (?, ?)"
                 (random-uuid4-bytes) data])))))


Results:

total rows	time in ms
10000000	2649
20000000	5644
30000000	7137
40000000	8352
50000000	9359
60000000	9817
70000000	10490
80000000	11130
90000000	11668
100000000	12586

Oh no! What's happened here 10-12x slower?!

Profile

That's a big difference. But, lets not guess when we can profile.

Below is a normalised diffgraph. A diffgraph compares two profiling snapshots (in this case INT vs UUID4) and displays the differences in a flamegraph structure. Unlike a regular diffgraph that shows absolute changes, a normalised view adjusts the total number of samples between the two compared profiles to be the same. This means we can see the relative differences as a percentage. This matters because our profiles will run for different amounts of time.


The colour signifies the direction of the change: a blue frame means less time was spent in this function in the second profile (UUID4) compared to the first (INT); a red frame means more time was spent in the second profile. The colour intensity indicates the relative change in the number of samples for the frame itself (self time delta).

We can see from the diffgraph that we are spending a lot more time balancing the tree, reading and writing. This is because the unordered nature of UUID4 means they are ordered randomly which is forcing SQLite to constantly re-balance the Btree.

UUID7

We can theoretically fix this with UUID7 which is time ordered eliminating the ordering problem of UUID4. Let's see if this improves things.

(d/q writer
  ["CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS event(id BLOB PRIMARY KEY, data BLOB) WITHOUT ROWID"])

(dotimes [_ 10]
  (time
    (d/with-write-tx [db writer]
      (dotimes [_ 1000000]
        (d/q db ["INSERT INTO event (id, data) values (?, ?)"
                 (random-uuid7-bytes) data])))))


Results:

total rows	time in ms
10000000	1372
20000000	1280
30000000	1365
40000000	1250
50000000	1256
60000000	1270
70000000	1246
80000000	1257
90000000	1245
100000000	1258

Back to a more reasonable number. Slightly slower than our baseline. UUID blob primary keys are 16 bytes vs int primary keys which are 8 bytes.

Conclusion

Hopefully, this post helps illustrate some of the pitfalls with UUID primary keys in SQLite and how to navigate them.

The full benchmark code can be found here.

If you enjoyed this post you might like this one 100000 TPS with SQLite

Further reading

Clustered Indexes
Clustered Indexes and the WITHOUT ROWID Optimization
clj-async-profiler
Exploring flamegraphs
Diffgraphs

Thanks to Everyone on the Datastar discord who read drafts of this and gave me feedback.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

27. Inside FAISS: Billion-Scale Similarity Search

Source: https://fremaconsulting.ch/blog/faiss
Site: Tom Salembien - AI/ML Consulting
Author: Tom Salembien
Published: 2026-01-23
HN activity: 50 points · 4 comments
Length: 4.0K words (~18 min read)
Language: en

1. Everything is a Vector

In modern AI, images, text, and audio are not understood by computers as "cat" or "symphony". Instead, they are converted into lists of numbers called embeddings or vectors.

These vectors live in a high-dimensional geometric space. The core idea is simple: items that are semantically similar are placed close together in this space.

Cat

Dog

Pizza

Car

Foundations · Vectors & similarity

step 1 / 4

1. The Challenge

Computers don't have eyes or ears. They only understand numbers. How do we explain the concept of a 'Dog' or a 'Cat' to a machine?

step 2 / 4

2. Vectorization

We use Neural Networks to transform raw data (pixels, text) into a list of numbers. This list is the 'Embedding'. It captures the semantic meaning.

step 3 / 4

3. The Vector Space

These numbers act as coordinates (X, Y, Z...). We can plot every image or word as a single point in a high-dimensional space.

step 4 / 4

4. Similarity is Distance

In this space, concepts that are similar are placed close together. 'Cat' is close to 'Dog', but far from 'Car'. We measure this using distance (Euclidean or Cosine).

Above, we visualize a simplified 2D slice of this space. Imagine this in 1024 dimensions. Finding the "nearest neighbor" for a query point is equivalent to finding the most similar item in your database.

2. The NN Problem at Scale

Formally, given a query and a database of vectors, exact nearest-neighbor search solves:

The naive Brute Force solution evaluates every distance explicitly. Cost per query: time and memory to hold the database in full precision. For SIFT descriptors (, 4 bytes per float), that is 512 GB of RAM and one billion distance evaluations per search, a non-starter for real-time systems like web-scale retrieval or live LLM memory.

The rest of this article explores the two escape routes FAISS exploits:

Partitioning: skip most of at query time (IVF).
Compression: make each comparison cheap, and make the database fit in RAM (Product Quantization).

Production systems combine both.

3. FAISS to the Rescue

FAISS (Facebook AI Similarity Search) introduces approximate search methods. By sacrificing a tiny bit of accuracy (maybe you get the 2nd best match instead of the 1st), we can speed up search by orders of magnitude.

Let's explore two key indexing strategies:

Flat: The baseline brute-force. Slow but accurate.
IVF (Inverted File):Partitions the space into "Voronoi cells". We only look in the most promising cells.

Try it yourself. Increase the dataset size and see how different indexes perform.

Interactive Index Benchmark

Compare the performance of different indexing algorithms on random datasets.

Precomputed benchmarks

Dataset Size (N)

Index Type

4. Partitioning with IVF

The Inverted File (IVF)index works like a library classification system. Instead of looking at every book to find a specific title, you go to the "Science Fiction" section first.

Mathematically, it uses K-Means clustering to partition the vector space into Voronoi cells. When we search, we first identify which cell our query vector falls into (using a "coarse quantizer"), and then we only calculate distances for vectors inside that cell (and perhaps a few neighboring ones).

IVF Clustering1. Raw Data

K-means partitions random vectors into the Voronoi cells that IVF searches.

Start: Here is our raw dataset. 80 vectors in a 2D space. Searching this linearly (Brute Force) would require calculating distance to 80 points.

5. Compressing with Product Quantization

IVF makes search fast by skipping most of the database, but leaves every vector uncompressed. One billion SIFT descriptors still cost 512 GB of RAM. Product Quantization (PQ), introduced by Jégou, Douze and Schmid (2011), is the compression trick FAISS builds on to shrink each vector to 8 bytes while keeping distance estimates meaningful.

Same centroids, a different job

§4 used centroids to partition the search space. PQ uses them to compresseach vector. Same K-Means math, new purpose: the centroid's index becomes the vector. If your codebook has centroids, any vector collapses to one integer in .

A pixel-sized analogy

A 24-bit RGB pixel can be any of 16.7 million colors. A GIF gives up some of that range: it picks a 256-color palette and replaces every pixel with an 8-bit index into it. Storage drops 3×, the picture still looks like the picture. That palette is a codebook; the index is a code.

A 128-D SIFT descriptor is just a very long pixel. We want the same trick: find a palette of representative vectors, replace every descriptor with its nearest palette index.

How many bits does an index cost?

To label centroids uniquely you need enough bits to distinguish all of them. Each bit doubles the number of labels, so the code length is bits. Concretely:

centroids → bits per code (1 byte)
centroids → bits
centroids → 64 bits (8 bytes)

More centroids means the quantizer discriminates finer detail, and the code grows accordingly. The codebook designer is playing a bit-budget game.

The paper's aggressive target

Jégou et al. want each 128-D SIFT descriptor to become a 64-bit code, which is 0.5 bit per dimension, a 64× compression ratio against the 512-byte original. Half a bit per dimension is ambitious: it means the quantizer has to encode all the variation along each axis with a single binary-ish choice.

Hitting 64 bits with one flat codebook means picking centroids. That is roughly 18 quintillion, more than the number of grains of sand on Earth. Let's feel that number before we dismiss it.

Flat codebook feasibility

Pick a vector dimension and a bit budget per dimension to see the centroid count and storage footprint a single flat quantizer would need.

Vector dimension (D)

Bits per dimension

Total bits per code64bits

Centroids needed (k = 2^64)1.84 × 10^19centroids

Codebook storage9.44ZB

Impossible

Bigger than all cloud storage on Earth. Lloyd's algorithm would need roughly 5.53 × 10^20 training samples.

Why 264 is not a codebook

Three walls hit simultaneously when gets that large:

Storage.Each centroid is 128 floats × 4 bytes = 512 bytes. Times centroids gives about 9.4 zettabytes, more than all cloud storage on Earth in 2025. You cannot persist the codebook, let alone page through it at query time.
Training data.Lloyd's algorithm needs at least tens of samples per centroid to converge. That is training vectors. No dataset in existence is that large.
Query cost.To encode one descriptor you compare it to every centroid. 18 quintillion distance computations per vector is not a latency you can ship.

The flat codebook dies on all three fronts. The paper's move is to keep the effective vocabulary the same size while shrinking the stored codebook by many orders of magnitude.

The factoring trick

Back to the GIF analogy. Instead of finding one 256-color palette that works for the whole image, cut the image into 8 tiles and give each tile its own 256-color palette. Each tile is now one byte; the image is 8 bytes; every tile had access to a full 256-color palette tuned to its own pixels. PQ does exactly this for vectors.

Formally: split into sub-vectors and learn one small sub-quantizer per block. The product quantizer is the tuple of their outputs:

With and centroids per block, the effective codebook has possible combinations (same order of magnitude as the impossible flat case), but we only store centroid vectors in each. Total codebook storage is (paper §II.B, Table I), small enough to live in L2 cache.

Each encoded vector fits in , one byte per block index. Ratio: 512 B to 8 B, a 64× drop in memory, with a codebook that actually fits on the machine.

The walkthrough below builds the full index on the paper's reference SIFT setting (), turning each concept above into a concrete operation on real numbers.

descriptor

u1

u2

u3

u4

u5

u6

u7

u8

zoom on cell[row 4, col 9]= 0.259555

0

s

01111101

exponent

00001001110010001101101

mantissa

32 bits = 4 bytes per dimension · 128 dims × 4 B = 512 B per vector

Compression · Product Quantization

step 1 / 8

1. One descriptor, zoomed all the way in

A 128-D vector is 128 floats. Zoom into a single one and you find IEEE 754: 1 sign bit, 8 exponent bits, 23 mantissa bits.

Four bytes per dimension, 512 bytes per vector.

step 2 / 8

2. Cut it into 8 sub-vectors

Same 128 numbers, regrouped into 8 contiguous blocks of 16 dimensions each.

Each block gets its own colour because each one will get its own codebook.

step 3 / 8

3. Now multiply: a tiny demo database

A codebook needs a population, not a single vector. This demo uses 4 example vectors; the paper trains on millions.

Every database vector gets the same 8-block split, and each block contributes one point per vector to its own subspace.

step 4 / 8

4. Focus on one codebook: u₁

Each subspace gets its own codebook, trained alone. That independence is the product in Product Quantization.

To see the whole recipe, we zoom into just one subvector, u₁, rendered in 2-D for readability (the paper's subspaces live in d* = D/m = 16 dimensions, with D = 128 and m = 8). Four training vectors is a pedagogical cartoon; real PQ trains each subspace on roughly 10⁶ descriptors.

Lloyd's algorithm runs k-means on this subspace alone: assign every point to its nearest centroid, move each centroid to its cluster mean, repeat until the within-block distortion MSE(q₁) = 𝔼‖u₁(x) − q₁(u₁(x))‖² stops falling.

The 6 centroids you end with (k* = 256 in the paper) form the codebook C₁. Encoding any future vector's first block is then a nearest-centroid lookup: emit the index i of c₁,ᵢ.

step 5 / 8

5. Same thing, 8 times in parallel

All 8 subspaces are quantized the same way at once, each block over its own slice of the data with its own codebook.

Lloyd's runs per block, independently (k* = 256 clusters per codebook in the paper, shown here with 6).

step 6 / 8

6. Encoding a brand-new vector

A query x arrives at search time, it was never in the training set.

Split it into 8 sub-vectors and, in each plot, snap to the nearest centroid. The 8 indices concatenate into the 8-byte code.

step 7 / 8

7. Decoding and per-block error

Reconstruction is a table lookup: replace each index by its centroid.

The gap between the unknown raw point and its centroid is the per-block quantization error; the total reconstruction error is their sum of squares.

step 8 / 8

8. Distance without decoding: SDC vs ADC

Two ways to compute query-to-database distance from codes.

SDC quantises both points and reads centroid-to-centroid distances. ADC keeps the query in full precision and reads raw-to-centroid distances.

ADC has a tighter error bound; FAISS defaults to it.

Once encoded, how do we measure distances without decoding every vector back to its 512 bytes? The paper gives two options.

SDC (symmetric) quantizes both the query and the database vector and reads a pairwise centroid distance from a precomputed table per sub-quantizer.
ADC (asymmetric) leaves the query in full precision and precomputes only query-to-centroid distances per block, then sums one lookup per block:

Per-query cost is similar (Jégou et al., Table II), but ADC has a tighter error bound: the mean squared distance error satisfies for ADC(Eq 18) versus for SDC. FAISS defaults to ADC.

6. Combining: IVFPQ

IVFPQ (also called IVFADC in the paper) stacks the two previous techniques: a coarse quantizer prunes the database to a handful of cells, and a product quantizer compresses what remains to 8 bytes per vector. One subtle choice makes the combination work: PQ encodes not the raw vector but its residual with respect to the coarse centroid.

Indexing a database vector :

coarse quantize , the nearest of the coarse centroids;
compute the residual ;
encode the residual with the product quantizer, giving 8 byte codes ;
append the pair to the inverted list of cell , where is the database index of and is the m-byte PQ code produced in step 3.

Residuals concentrate near zero, so the PQ codebook spends its bits modeling variation the coarse quantizer did not already capture. Same byte budget, better reconstruction.

Searching for a query :

find the nearest coarse centroids to ;
compute the query residual for each selected cell;
precompute the distance Look-Up Table (LUT). Index selects the PQ sub-block ( in our setup), and index selects one of the centroids of that sub-block's codebook (). Each entry is the squared distance between the query's sub-block residual and that centroid:
scan the inverted list: for each stored entry with PQ codes (one sub-block index per ), read the precomputed distances from the LUT and sum them: table reads, additions per candidate. No float multiplications, no square roots.
keep a fixed-capacity max-heap of size holding the best candidates seen so far, keyed by their ADC distance. While the heap is not full, push every scanned candidate. Once full, compare each new ADC distance against the root (the current worst of the best-): if smaller, pop the root and push the candidate, otherwise discard it. The heap is shared across the probed inverted lists. When the scan is done, drain the heap in ascending order to get the approximate nearest neighbors of .

The walkthrough below runs the full pipeline with real arithmetic at every stage.

training · offline

Lloyd's on the training set

iter 0 / 6 · MSE 0.280

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

k-means produces 8 coarse centroids → 8 inverted lists

Phase 1 · Training (offline)

step 1 / 12

1. Train the coarse quantizer

Run k-means on a training set to learn coarse centroids. They carve into Voronoi cells, and these are the neighborhoods of IVFADC.

Paper setting: for SIFT (Jégou et al. §IV.A). We render 8 cells here so each one stays readable.

step 2 / 12

2. From raw vectors to residuals

For every training vector , subtract its nearest coarse centroid:

Subtracting the centroid re-centers each cell's points on the origin of its own frame. Pooled together, all cells share one centered residual distribution, and that is what the product quantizer learns on.

step 3 / 12

3. Why residuals quantize better

Residuals carry much less energy than raw vectors: on average. Same centroid budget, smaller region to cover, finer quantization steps.

Analogy: video compression. First send a coarse frame, then spend your bits on the difference. You encode motion and detail, not the whole picture from scratch.

Toggle the overlay in the visual to superimpose both histograms and read the variance ratio.

step 4 / 12

4. Train PQ on residuals

Split each residual into sub-vectors . Run Lloyd's on each block independently, with one codebook per block.

The codebooks model variation the coarse quantizer already subtracted away. Same 8-byte footprint, sharper reconstructions. Training ends here; the next three chapters consume these codebooks at speed.

Phase 2 · Encoding the database

step 5 / 12

5. Assign the coarse bucket

A new database vector arrives. Compare it to every coarse centroid, pick the nearest. Call its index . This index identifies the inverted list where will be stored.

step 6 / 12

6. Encode the residual with PQ

Compute , split into eight sub-vectors, snap each to its nearest centroid in . Emit the 8 block indices .

bits per block, 8 blocks, one byte each. Eight bytes of code locate inside its inverted list, with no need to store the raw coordinates.

step 7 / 12

7. Append to the inverted list

Append to the inverted list . The raw coordinates of are discarded. Memory per vector:

Click a Voronoi cell on the left to inspect the entries stored in its list.

Phase 3 · Search

step 8 / 12

8. Query arrives, probe w cells

Your true nearest neighbour can land near a cell boundary. To catch it, check the closest coarse centroids to , not just the top one (multiple assignment).

Adjust w on the left to probe more cells and see the pruning ratio update live.

step 9 / 12

9. Build the ADC lookup tables

For each probed cell , compute a query-specific residual , split it into 8 blocks, then for (one row per sub-block) and (one column per centroid), fill

8 × 256 = 2,048 cells per LUT. Built once per probed cell, reused across every candidate in its inverted list.

Why is constant across the whole list?

The query residual relative to a specific coarse cell is

is the query, fixed for this search.
is the center of the coarse bucket we are currently scanning, fixed for this specific inverted list.
Therefore is identical for every comparison we make within that list.

Why is the LUT reused?

For a candidate inside that list we estimate

Using the residual decomposition ,

is the query's offset from the cell center: same for every in this list.
(with ) is the candidate's offset from the cell center: different for every , but it is just a selection of centroids from the codebooks. For sub-block , the candidate stores an index , so the per-block contribution is

Key realization. The specific index changes from candidate to candidate, but the set of possible centroids is the same for the whole database, and is the same for the whole list. So we pre-compute the distance from the query sub-vector to every possible centroid and store it in the LUT. When the scan moves to the next candidate, there is no math: we look up the index the candidate already points to (say ) and read .

“For each subquantizer the distances between the partial residual vector and all the centroids of are preliminarily computed and stored.” (Jégou et al., 2011)

Component	Status during list scan
Query Fixed
Cell center Fixed
Query residual Fixed
Sub-codebook centroids Fixed (permanent)
LUT values	Fixed (computed once at start of list scan)
Candidate Changes (iterating through the list)
Candidate indices Changes (used to look up the fixed LUT values)

step 10 / 12

10. Scan: 8 lookups, 7 adds

Each stored code is 8 table indices. The ADC distance estimate is:

No float multiplications, no square roots. The scan loop is eight random reads from an L1-resident table plus seven adds per candidate. That is the inner loop of IVFADC.

step 11 / 12

11. Merge top-K across w lists

A fixed-capacity max-heap of size tracks the current best. Whenever a new estimate beats the heap root, the root is popped and the candidate is pushed. After scanning all lists, drain the heap in ascending order; those are the approximate nearest neighbours.

step 12 / 12

12. Why it scales

Scanning only entries instead of , with each candidate costing 8 look-ups and 7 adds. Training runs once; encoding and search run forever.

Dispatched on GPU with WarpSelect (Johnson et al. 2017, §4.2), the same pipeline handles SIFT1B at 17.7 µsper query on a single Titan X.

Assuming balanced inverted lists, each query scans only about entries instead of . Jégou et al. (§IV.A) recommend between 1,000 and 1,000,000 for SIFT; their Table V uses and with . With at , that is roughly 7.8 million scanned entries per query, each costing 8 LUT look-ups and 7 additions.

On CPU, the 2011 paper reports 8.8 ms per query on a 1-million-vector GIST benchmark with these parameters (Table V). Billion-scale CPU latencies are an order of magnitude higher; the sub-millisecond regime belongs to the GPU implementation of Johnson, Douze and Jégou (2017), covered in §7.

7. Accelerating IVFPQ on GPU

Going from CPU to GPU shifts the bottleneck. The hard question is no longer “how fast can we sum these numbers” but “how fast can we stream thousands of tiny PQ codes from DRAM into the compute units.” The answer is about memory bandwidth, not arithmetic.

Mental model

Each inverted list is one aisle in a huge warehouse. A query is a shopping list split into features. The LUT is a tiny price sheet, one row per feature. A CPU sends one worker down the aisle; a GPU sends a warp: 32 threads moving in lock-step.

Four tricks turn that crew into a billion-vector scanner:

Coalesced reads. Transpose the list so the warp picks up 32 sub-codes in one 128-byte DRAM burst instead of 32 scattered ones.
Shared-memory LUT. Copy the table into SRAM once per list. Every thread then reads it at ~25 cycles instead of ~400 (§5.3).
Warp scan. One thread per vector, 32 distances per tick, partial sums held in registers.
WarpSelect. Top-K without a global lock: warp queue, then block merge, then global merge (§4.2).

Step through the four tricks below; click any figure to zoom in on the labels.

Step 1 of 4

Memory layout

How the inverted list is stored decides how many DRAM transactions a warp costs.

The warp reads sub-q 0 for 4 different vectors. Where do those bytes sit in DRAM?

Row-major (CPU layout)

stride 4 → scattered

codes of vector v are stored together, one block per vector

v0q0

v0q1

v0q2

v0q3

v1q0

v1q1

v1q2

v1q3

v2q0

v2q1

v2q2

v2q3

v3q0

v3q1

v3q2

v3q3

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

t0

t1

t2

t3

4 threads fetch bytes at positions 0, 4, 8, 12 → 4 separate DRAM reads (32 threads → 32 reads)

transpose by sub-q

Transposed (GPU layout)

stride 1 → contiguous

codes of sub-quantizer q are stored together, one block per sub-q

v0q0

v1q0

v2q0

v3q0

v0q1

v1q1

v2q1

v3q1

v0q2

v1q2

v2q2

v3q2

v0q3

v1q3

v2q3

v3q3

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

t0

t1

t2

t3

4 threads fetch bytes 0, 1, 2, 3 → 1 coalesced read (32 threads → 1 × 128-byte transaction)

click to zoom

Takeaway.Row-major puts all codes of one vector together. Transposed groups all codes of one sub-quantizer together. With the transpose, 32 threads asking for sub-q j land on contiguous bytes and the memory controller answers with a single 128-byte transaction.

Scaling past one GPU is an explicit knob (§5.4): replication splits the query stream across devices, sharding splits the database across devices, and the two compose to GPUs.

8. Real-World Use Cases

FAISS isn't just for benchmarks. Here are six production scenarios where vector search with FAISS powers real applications:

Semantic Search

Find documents by meaning, not just keywords. Query embeddings retrieve the most relevant passages from millions of documents.

index.search(embed("climate change effects"), k=10)

Image Similarity

Reverse image search and visual deduplication. Find visually similar products, detect copyright infringement, or organize photo libraries.

index.search(clip_embed(query_image), k=5)

RAG / LLM Memory

Retrieval-Augmented Generation grounds LLM responses in real data. FAISS serves as the fast retrieval backbone for context injection.

context = index.search(embed(user_query), k=3)
llm.generate(prompt + context)

Recommendation Systems

Item-to-item and user-to-item recommendations. Embed user preferences and product features, then find nearest neighbors.

similar = index.search(item_embedding, k=20)

Document Deduplication

Detect near-duplicate documents at scale. Hash or embed content, then use range search to find items within a similarity threshold.

lims, D, I = index.range_search(emb, thresh=0.95)

Anomaly Detection

Score outliers by distance to their nearest neighbors. Points far from any cluster are likely anomalies or novel inputs.

D, _ = index.search(point, k=5)
anomaly_score = D.mean()

9. Conclusion

Four ideas, layered on top of each other. Flat gives perfect recall at impossible cost. IVF partitions the space so most of it can be skipped at query time. PQ compresses every vector into roughly 8 bytes so a billion of them fit in RAM. IVFPQ combines the two, and on a single GPU the pipeline returns top-K in microseconds.

The move underneath is always the same: embed your data into a geometry where close means similar, then pick the index whose trade-offs match your constraints (latency, memory, recall). Graph indexes (HNSW, NSG) and hardware-aware accelerators (FastScan, IMI) reach the same goal through different tricks and will get their own articles.

Once the geometry and the trade-offs click, billion-scale nearest-neighbor search stops being a research problem and starts being a dial you turn.

References

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

28. Redis 8.8: New array data structure, rate limiter, performance improvements

Source: https://redis.io/blog/announcing-redis-8-8/
Site: Redis
Author: Redis
Published: 2026-05-28
HN activity: 204 points · 92 comments
Length: 3.0K words (~14 min read)
Language: en-US

Redis 8.8 in Redis Open Source is now available, bringing performance improvements alongside a set of powerful new features. Highlights include array - a new general-purpose data structure, a window counter rate limiter, streams message NACKing, subkey notifications for hash fields, explicit control over JSON numeric array storage, multiple aggregators in a single time series query, and a new COUNT aggregator for sorted sets union and intersection.

Summary of performance improvements in 8.8

Redis 8.8 introduces significant end-to-end throughput improvements:

Data type	Operations	End-to-end throughput improvements
Strings	MGET (pipelined, with I/O-threads)	Up to 68%
MGET (pipelined, single thread)	Up to 50%
MSET	Up to 8%
Hash	HGETALL	Up to 25% (1K+ fields)
Streams	XREADGROUP	Up to 83% (COUNT 100)
Sorted set	ZADD, ZINCRBY, ZRANGEBYSCORE	Up to 74%
Bitmap	Bitmap operations	Up to 28% (x86)
HyperLogLog	PFCOUNT	Up to 18% (x86)
(several)	SCAN, HSCAN, SSCAN, ZSCAN	Up to 40%

In addition, persistence and replication (full synchronization) is now up to 60% faster.

Summary of new features in 8.8

Redis has always been about choosing the right data structure for the job. In Redis 8.8, we introduce a new general-purpose data structure: array. An array is an index-addressable collection of string values. Each array element is stored at a numeric index, and can be accessed extremely fast. Arrays are dynamic, sparse-friendly, and compute-aware containers, enabling new use cases and better flexibility and efficiency for existing use cases (by @antirez).

Rate limiting is one of the most common Redis use cases. Traditionally, users implemented rate limiters using server-side Lua scripts combined with client logic. In Redis 8.8, we introduce a window counter rate limiter (by @raffertyyu, together with the Redis team).

Our investment in improving Redis Streams continues.

Redis 8.2 simplified message acknowledgment and deletion across multiple consumer groups
Redis 8.4 made it easier for consumers to read both new and idle pending messages
Redis 8.6 introduced idempotent production

Building on this momentum, Redis 8.8 adds support for message NACKing, allowing consumers to explicitly release pending messages so they become immediately available and prioritized for consumption by other consumers.

In Redis 7.4 we introduced hash field expiration – a capability that saw strong adoption. A frequent follow-up request was for field-level notifications, similar to existing key-level notifications. Redis 8.8 delivers this with subkey notifications for hash fields, allowing clients to subscribe to events such as field expiration and deletion. These notifications include the key, the subkey (field name), and the event type.

Retrieving multiple time series aggregators is a common operation. For example, candlestick charts rely on MIN, MAX, FIRST, and LAST aggregations. Prior to Redis 8.8, this required multiple commands. Redis 8.8 now supports multiple aggregators in a single time series command, reducing round trips and simplifying client logic.

Redis 8.4 introduced support for homogeneous numeric arrays in JSON, delivering up to 92% memory reduction – especially valuable for AI workloads. In Redis 8.8, users can now explicitly control how numeric arrays are stored (BF16, FP16, FP32, or FP64), enabling better alignment with source data, vector indexing needs, and memory/precision tradeoffs.

Finally, Redis 8 extends sorted set union and intersection operations with a new COUNT aggregator. This allows the score of each element to reflect either the number of input sets it appears in or the weighted sum across those sets, unlocking new use cases in ranking, scoring, and analytics.

The new features explained

Array: A new general-purpose data structure

Redis has always been about choosing the right data structure for the job. Redis traditionally provides several core data structures, including lists, hashes, sets, and sorted sets. In Redis 8.8, we introduce a new general-purpose data structure: array.

What is an array?

An array is an index-addressable collection of string values. Each element is stored at a numeric index, and can be accessed extremely fast.

Arrays go far beyond basic indexed storage. They are flexible, memory-efficient, and compute-aware. Arrays have some capabilities that enable new use cases and better flexibility and efficiency for many existing use cases:

An array doesn’t need to have a fixed size
Arrays grow and shrink dynamically. Elements can be set at any index (0 to 2⁶⁴−1), and the array grows efficiently as needed. Elements can be deleted and the array shrinks accordingly.
An array can be dense or sparse
The used indices don’t have to be consecutive, and yet the memory footprint is proportional to the number of elements, and access by index remains extremely fast.
For example: an array index can represent a product ID and the values hold product names or details. Similarly, the index can represent timestamps and the values hold log events.
An array can be used as a ring buffer (Sliding Window)
Arrays can act as a bounded rolling buffer: retain the last n elements, maintain insertion order, and automatically overwrite older entries.
Think of a log file or a stream of events, where you want to efficiently keep the last n log entries, events, or measurements, and frequently fetch the last [up to] n values. This is especially useful if you need to feed a rule engine, process a fraud detection window, continuously update a chart, or execute security validations.
Arrays can aggregate data
When the values are numeric (for example, real-time sensor reports or stock quotes), arrays support server-side computation over index ranges, including SUM, MIN, and MAX. When the values are binary flags, Boolean aggregators (AND, OR, XOR) are supported as well.
Server-side aggregators are Ideal for sensor data, financial ticks, and real-time metrics. When combined with ring buffer semantics, Arrays enable sliding window analytics such as real-time anomaly detection.
An array can be searched
An array can represent a textual file (e.g., .txt, .csv, .log), where each element is indexed by the line-number and holds a single text line. Users can iterate over these lines for analysis, and can search for specific lines using an exact or partial string, a glob-style pattern, or a regular expression.
With ring buffer semantics, arrays can constantly hold the last n log-lines allowing users and agents to contextualize or enrich incoming events based on recent ones.

In summary, an array is a dynamic, flexible, high-performance, index-addressable, compute-aware container that combines aspects of:

List (ordered data)
Time-series (sliding windows)
Sparse map (non-contiguous indices)
Analytical engine (aggregation and search)

Random element access: Array vs list vs hash

Benchmarking arrays against the closest list and hash equivalents under random access at large element counts, the advantages of array show up clearly:

Operation (100K elements; 1 KB values)	Array	List	Hash
Read random element	675K ops/sec	133K ops/sec	626K ops/sec
Write random element	757K ops/sec	137K ops/sec	689K ops/sec
Delete random element	841K ops/sec	—	730K ops/sec

* Redis 8.8, single instance on an Intel Sapphire Rapids m7i.metal-24xl machine

For random-element operations, array provides 8-15% better throughput than Hashes and are at least 5 times faster than Lists.

Memory wise, lists are the most compact. Arrays require ~18% more memory per element, while hashes require 30-46% more memory than lists, depending on the size of the elements:

Element size (100K elements)	Array	List	Hash
100 bytes	122 bytes/element	104 bytes/element	151 bytes/element
1 Kbyte	1290 bytes/element	1035 bytes/element	1337 bytes/element

Ring buffer: Array vs list

A common pattern in Redis is using a list as a bounded ring buffer: clients push new entries with RPUSH and trim list back with LTRIM to keep a constant number of elements. Arrays expose ARRING, which performs the same operation in a single atomic command.

Ring size; element size	Array (ARRING)	List (RPUSH+LTRIM)	Array’s advantage
1K elements; 100 bytes	1.11M inserts/sec	512K inserts/sec × 2.2
100K elements; 100 bytes	1.12M inserts/sec	528K inserts/sec	× 2.1
1K elements; 1 Kbyte	840K inserts/sec	424K inserts/sec	× 2.0
100K elements; 1 Kbyte	837K inserts/sec	413K inserts/sec	× 2.0

* Redis 8.8, single instance on an Intel Sapphire Rapids m7i.metal-24xl machine

ARRING delivers twice the throughput (inserts/sec) compared to the equivalent RPUSH+LTRIM idiom, independent of ring size. Memory footprint is the same as above: Arrays require ~18% more memory than lists.

When should arrays be used?

Arrays are extremely useful when:

You need extremely fast access by index or by index-range
You need a sliding window over recent data
You need server-side aggregation
You want to search for matching elements

What arrays are not suitable for?

Arrays are not a replacement for other data structures.Use lists if you need push/pop operations, or inserting elements between others.

Use hashes if you need field name-based access instead of numeric indices.

Where can I learn more?

Array documentation: https://redis.io/docs/staging/DOC-6334/develop/data-types/arrays/

Array commands: https://redis.io/docs/latest/commands/?group=array

Diving deep into Redis’s new array data type: https://redis.io/blog/diving-deep-into-rediss-new-array-data-type/

Window counter rate limiter

Window counter rate limiters, including fixed window, fixed window with lazy reset, and sliding window counter variants, use one or more fixed-duration time windows. Each window maintains a counter initialized to 0 when the window is created, along with a maximum capacity representing the number of tokens allowed during that window’s lifetime.

Before Redis 8.8, implementing a Window counter rate limiter required Lua scripting. In 8.8, we introduce a new command for working with window counters:

The idea is simple: each window has a duration (specified via EX or PX) and a token capacity (specified with UBOUND). The number of tokens requested can be specified with BYINT increment (default is 1). INCREX attempts to increment the counter by the requested number of tokens. The key is created if it does not already exist.

To make this command suitable for rate limiter use cases, beyond basic increment semantics, INCREX introduces three new capabilities compared to the existing INCR family of commands:

INCREX returns both the new counter value and the actual increment applied, allowing the caller to immediately determine whether the request should be allowed or rejected.
When ENX is specified, expiration is set only if the key does not already have one. This ensures that the window’s TTL is set only when a window is created and not modified on subsequent requests during its lifetime.
Boundary enforcement: the request is rejected if it would exceed the defined bounds. With SATURATE, the request may be “partially accepted” with the counter clamped to the specified bounds (“saturated”) .

Beyond rate limiting, INCREX can be seen as a generalized form of INCR, INCRBY, INCRBYFLOAT, as well as DECR and DECRBY (via negative increments), with added support for bounds and expiration control.

Streams: NACKing messages

In real-world applications, stream consumers don’t always successfully process the messages they consume. Failures can happen for many reasons:

A consumer may encounter internal issues unrelated to the message itself. For example, failing to reach an external service it needs for processing the message.
A consumer may need to shut down and release unprocessed messages.
A resource-constrained consumer (CPU, memory) may be unable to process certain messages (at least, in a timely manner).
A message may be malformed, poisoned, or even malicious.

Before Redis 8.8, consumers had no way to explicitly reject (NACK) a message. They could either acknowledge it or leave it pending. In practice, this meant other consumers in the consumer group had to recover these messages using XREADGROUP … CLAIM, XPENDING+XCLAIM or XAUTOCLAIM.

This approach introduces delays, since messages remain idle in the Pending Entries List (PEL) until another consumer claims them – an issue for time-sensitive systems.

Redis 8.8 introduces a new command to address this directly:

XNACK key group [SILENT|FAIL|FATAL] IDS numids id [id ...]

This command allows consumers to explicitly release messages back to the stream, making them immediately available for re-delivery.

XNACK supports three modes, each designed for a different real-world scenario:

SILENT - Used when the failure is unrelated to the message (e.g., shutdown or transient internal errors). The delivery counter is decremented by 1, effectively undoing the increment that occurred when the message was added to the PEL.
FAIL - Used when the message cannot be processed by this consumer but may succeed elsewhere (e.g., requires more resources). The delivery counter remains unchanged (it was already incremented by 1 when added to the group's PEL).
FATAL - used for malformed, poison, or potentially malicious messages. The delivery counter is set to LLONG_MAX, making it easy to detect and route to a dead-letter queue.

These modes map naturally to production scenarios: graceful shutdowns or transient failures, resource-based failures, and poison message handling.

When a message is NACKed, it is:

Marked as unowned (its last consumer is set to an empty string)
Assigned a last delivery time of 0
Placed at the end of the NACKed portion of the PEL

The head of the PEL is reserved for all NACKed messages, ordered FIFO among themselves, followed by pending messages that were neither ACKed nor NACKed in their existing order. This guarantees that NACKed messages are always prioritized over idle pending messages.

The delivery order on XREADGROUP is updated accordingly:

When CLAIM min-idle-time is specified:

NACKed messages (new behavior)
Messages pending for at least min-idle-time
Never-delivered messages
If CLAIM is not specified:

Only never-delivered messages are returned (unchanged behavior)

Hash: Subkey notifications

Redis key-level notifications let clients subscribe to key-related events in real time via pub/sub channels. There are two types of channels:

Keyspace notifications: clients subscribe to a specific key; each message contains an event type.
Keyevent notifications: clients subscribe to specific events; each message contains a key name.

In Redis 7.4, we introduced hash field expiration. This feature saw strong adoption, and a common request followed: support for hash field-level notifications, since key-level notifications do not include field names.

Redis 8.8 introduces subkey-level notifications. Starting with Hashes, clients can now subscribe to events at the field level, such as field updates, deletions, and expirations.

Subkey notifications include the key, subkeys (for hashes, these are field names), and the event type.

Redis 8.8 adds four new channel types:

Subkeyspace notifications: Clients subscribe to a specific key; each message contains an event type and field names.
Subkeyevent notifications: Clients subscribe to a specific event type; each message contains a key name and field names.
Subkeyspaceitem notifications: Clients subscribe to a specific key+field combination; each message contains an event type.
Subkeyspaceevent notifications: Clients subscribe to a specific event+key combination; each message contains field names.

These mirror the flexibility of keyspace notifications while extending visibility down to the field level.

The following events are emitted for hash fields: hset, hdel, hexpire, hexpired, hpersist, hincrby, and hincrbyfloat.

Time series: Multiple aggregators in a single command

The TS.RANGE, TS.REVRANGE, TS.MRANGE, and TS.MREVRANGE commands support an optional AGGREGATION parameter which allows grouping samples into time buckets and applying an aggregation function.

Users can choose from 15 supported aggregators (such as AVG, SUM, MIN, MAX, FIRST, and LAST), and the results are computed accordingly.

In many real-world scenarios, however, multiple aggregations are needed simultaneously. A common example is candlestick charts, which require MIN (low), MAX (high), FIRST (open), and LAST (close).

Before Redis 8.8, this required issuing multiple commands - one per aggregator - resulting in additional latency and client-side complexity.

Redis 8.8 introduces support for multiple aggregators in a single command, allowing all required aggregations to be computed in one request.

The command syntax remains unchanged. Users can now specify multiple aggregators as a comma-separated list:

TS.RANGE key from to AGGREGATION MIN,MAX,FIRST,LAST bucketDuration

Note that aggregators are comma-separated, with no spaces between them.

JSON: Explicitly declaring floating-point array types

The JSON specification defines a generic “number” type, without enforcing a specific representation such as IEEE-754 FP16, FP32, or FP64 for non-integers. As a result, each implementation must choose how to represent numeric values internally.

Starting with Redis 8.4, JSON numeric arrays (such as vector embeddings) are stored using efficient binary representations, significantly reducing memory usage. Redis automatically selects the most appropriate numeric type, but for non-integers, and without additional hints, this usually defaults to FP64 to preserve precision.

For example, the decimal value 0.3 cannot be represented exactly in binary (similar to how 1/3 cannot be represented exactly in decimal). To avoid loss of precision, Redis typically uses FP64. In practice, this means that many floating-point arrays end up being stored as FP64, even when such high precision is not required.

In many real-world scenarios, the original data was already generated using lower-precision formats. Redis 8.8 addresses this by allowing users to explicitly control how floating-point arrays are stored. Users can now choose between BF16, FP16, FP32, and FP64, enabling better alignment with source data, vector indexing requirements, and memory/precision tradeoffs.

The JSON.SET command includes a new optional parameter:

JSON.SET key path value [NX | XX] [FPHA BF16|FP16|FP32|FP64]

FPHA stands for Floating-Point Homogeneous Array
It forces Redis to store any floating-point array in value using the specified format
For large arrays, such as embeddings with hundreds or thousands of elements, the difference becomes substantial, often reducing memory usage by multiple times.

Sorted sets: Union and intersection - COUNT aggregator

Sorted sets support set operations via ZUNION, ZUNIONSTORE, ZINTER, and ZINTERSTORE. For all four commands, users can control how element scores are computed in the result using the SUM, MIN, or MAX aggregators, optionally applying weights to each input set.

In some use cases, however, the original scores are not relevant. Instead, users may want the resulting score to reflect how many input sets contain each element, or, when weights are provided, the sum of the weights of the sets that contain it.

In Redis 8.8, we introduce a new COUNT aggregator to support this directly.

With COUNT:

If no weights are specified, the score becomes the number of input sets containing the element (i.e., 1 + 1 + ...)
If weights are specified, the score becomes the sum of the weights of the sets containing the element (i.e., weight₁ + weight₂ + ...)

This effectively ignores the original element scores and focuses only on set membership.

The COUNT aggregator enables patterns such as:

Ranking items by popularity across multiple sources
Finding elements that appear in many datasets
Implementing voting or scoring systems based on presence rather than value

All without requiring additional client-side logic.

Getting started

All these enhancements are generally available on Redis 8.8 today. You can start using the new commands by downloading Redis 8.8 and experimenting with them in your existing workflows.

Have feedback or questions? Join the discussion on our Discord server or reach out to your account manager.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

29. South Korean forums will need to scan every images with AI censorship tools

Source: https://discuss.privacyguides.net/t/south-korean-online-communities-will-need-to-scan-every-images-with-ai-censorship-tools/38341
Site: Privacy Guides Community
Submitter: Cider9986 (Hacker News)
Published: 2026-06-04
HN activity: 229 points · 136 comments
Language: en

No extractable content.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

30. Mantine-datatable (and others) compromised – owner account suspended

Source: https://github.com/icflorescu/mantine-datatable/discussions/813
Site: GitHub
Author: icflorescu
Submitted: 2026-06-05 16:39 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 62 points · 24 comments
Length: 429 words (~2 min read)
Language: en

⚠️ Important Security Notice -- Please Read

Hi everyone. I'm Irinel-Ramona, Ionut's wife.
I'm posting this on his behalf because his GitHub account has been suspended and he has no way to reach you directly right now.

Earlier today, unauthorized commits were pushed to this repository and 4 others via the github-actions bot. The commit message reads chore: update dependencies [skip ci] and looks innocent, but it isn't.

The malicious commit injects a payload runner (node .github/setup.js) into:

.claude/settings.json -- triggers automatically on Claude Code session start
.gemini/settings.json -- triggers automatically on Gemini session start
.cursor/rules/setup.mdc -- triggers automatically when opening the repo in Cursor
.vscode/tasks.json -- triggers automatically when opening the repo in VS Code
package.json -- hijacks the npm test script

If you have cloned or pulled this repository recently, please do NOT open it in VS Code, Cursor, or any AI coding assistant, and do NOT run npm test until Ionut regains access and reverts the malicious commits.

The good news: the published npm packages are completely safe. No malicious versions were published. This risk only affects people working directly with the source repository.

We have checked our own environments thoroughly and found no traces of compromise. We suspect this may be part of the broader GitHub infrastructure breach carried out by the TeamPCP hacking group in May 2026: https://techcrunch.com/2026/05/20/github-says-hackers-stole-data-from-thousands-of-internal-repositories/

Ionut has filed the #4448974 support ticket with GitHub and is waiting for a response. I wish I could say more than that, but GitHub's support process during a security incident is, frankly, slow and dehumanising. He is a legitimate open-source maintainer, a victim of an attack that may have originated from GitHub's own infrastructure breach, locked out of an account he has been building for years -- and he is sitting here waiting, with no timeline, no direct contact, no way to protect his users himself.

Nearly 20 hours after the incident, the malicious commits are still present in the repositories -- because he cannot revert them without access, and GitHub has yet to act on them directly or come up with a proper reply to the support ticket.

It's deeply frustrating, and if you've followed Mitchell Hashimoto's recent writing about leaving GitHub, you'll understand the feeling.

Regardless, regaining access and reverting the malicious commits will be his absolute first priority the moment GitHub lets him back in.

Thank you for your patience.
This community has always meant a lot to him, and we're truly sorry you're caught in the middle of this.

-- Irinel-Ramona, on behalf of @icflorescu, creator and maintainer of Mantine DataTable

