Hacker News Top 30 — 2026-06-09

Generated on 2026-06-09 03:30 UTC

1. Apple reveals new AI architecture built around Google Gemini models

Source: https://www.macrumors.com/2026/06/08/apple-reveals-new-ai-architecture/
Site: MacRumors
Author: Hartley Charlton
Published: 2026-06-08
HN activity: 398 points · 342 comments
Length: 532 words (~3 min read)
Language: en

Apple today announced a major overhaul of its Apple Intelligence platform, revealing a new architecture built on foundation models developed in collaboration with Google using the technologies behind the Gemini family.


The new architecture centers on Apple Foundation Models co-developed with Google, which Apple says are adapted to run both on-device and on servers through its existing Private Cloud Compute infrastructure. Apple described the collaboration as a "deep" one that it says unlocks what it called a "huge upgrade" for ‌Apple Intelligence‌, bringing state-of-the-art understanding and reasoning capabilities as well as multimodal support including image understanding and generation.

The upgraded models support new capabilities use cases, including realistic image creation, advanced photo editing, and visual question answering. Certain devices will receive a higher-power version of the model with additional capabilities including speech generation, improved dictation accuracy, and stronger natural language understanding, though Apple did not specify which devices qualify.

A new system orchestrator sits at the center of the revised architecture, coordinating ‌Apple Intelligence‌ features securely across Apple's platforms. Apple says the orchestrator allows the system to tailor its responses based on the active app and the user's current task, enabling what the company described as truly system-wide intelligence.

Apple used the announcement to frame its approach as a contrast to competitors it characterized as "racing forward" without regard for users. The company reiterated that ‌Apple Intelligence‌ relies on on-device processing and Private Cloud Compute, with a promise that user data is only used to execute the immediate request and is not accessible to Apple or third parties. Apple added that outside experts can verify those privacy guarantees "at any time."

Popular Stories

Google Maps for CarPlay Getting Gemini AI

Monday May 11, 2026 4:25 pm PDT by Juli Clover

The Google Maps app for CarPlay could soon include support for Gemini, based on code that MacRumors found in the Google Maps app. Gemini integration would allow CarPlay users to get detailed directions and information from Gemini. Strings in the app suggest users will be able to tell Gemini to navigate to a specific location after agreeing to new Terms of Service in the iPhone version of the ...

Google Previews Android 17 With 'Gemini Intelligence' a Month Before Apple's iOS 27 Reveal

Tuesday May 12, 2026 12:21 pm PDT by Juli Clover

Google today previewed Android 17, the next version of Android that it is bringing to smartphones and other devices. Android 17 includes multiple new AI features, and it comes about a month ahead of when Apple plans to unveil iOS 27 with new AI capabilities. Google is now calling the AI features on Android "Gemini Intelligence," branding similar to Apple Intelligence. Google said it is...

Google Makes It Easier to Share Files Between Android and iPhone

Tuesday May 12, 2026 2:48 pm PDT by Juli Clover

Google today said it is introducing updated file sharing features that will make it easier for Android users to send files to iPhone users. Quick Share is already compatible with Apple's AirDrop feature on select Android devices, but Google says the feature will expand to Samsung, OPPO, OnePlus, Vivo, Xiaomi, and HONOR devices in 2026. On Android devices that are not compatible with...

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

2. Siri AI

Source: https://www.apple.com/apple-intelligence/
Site: Apple
Submitter: 0xedb (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-08 18:17 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 451 points · 395 comments
Length: 1.4K words (~7 min read)
Language: en-US

Introducing the next generation of Apple Intelligence and Siri. Truly helpful AI that’s centered around you and your needs. Integrated into your apps, grounded in your context, and private at every step. Coming later this year.

New reimagined Siri
Siri AI
Apple Intelligence in apps
Visual Intelligence
Photo editing
Write with Siri

Just ask Siri.

Powered by Apple Intelligence, Siri AI is your conversational AI assistant with entirely new capabilities. Ask open-ended questions, brainstorm ideas for work or creative projects, and engage in natural, back-and-forth conversations.

Siri understands your personal context.

Siri AI can find relevant answers to what you’re looking for just by asking. Search for a photo from years ago, easily locate an email buried in your inbox, or pull up the details from a note you saved.

Take action in more apps.

Siri AI can take actions in apps like Messages, Music, Reminders, and more based on what you’re doing in the moment. Quickly edit a message you just sent or add a song you hear in the car to your workout playlist.

Tap into broad world knowledge.

Ask about virtually any topic that’s on your mind, from important facts to recipes and travel recommendations. Siri AI can reference information online to give you detailed, up-to-date insights.

Introducing the Siri app.

A dedicated app brings together all your conversations in one place, so you can ask a question on your iPhone and pick up where you left off on your iPad. You can also pin conversations for easy access or start a new one.

Customize how Siri sounds.

Pick a voice, then customize expressivity and pace until it clicks for you.4

Siri AI in CarPlay.

On the road, ask Siri which trailhead your friend suggested and get the answer instantly. Siri in CarPlay keeps you informed without taking your hands off the wheel.5

Siri mode in Camera.

Siri mode and Visual Intelligence let you search, ask questions, and take action based on what’s around you with just a tap.

New smart actions.

Visual Intelligence makes it easy to split the bill with friends when you get the check, get nutritional information on a dish in front of you, quickly import a card to Apple Wallet, and more.

Ask Siri about what’s in front of you.

Get information, take action, and search visually using the content on your screen.

Visual Intelligence with Siri on Mac.

Take a screenshot of what’s on your display, like an image or a PDF, and Visual Intelligence lets you search and take action.

Visual Intelligence with Siri on iPad.

Ask Siri AI about virtually anything on your display with a screenshot. Just tap the item with your finger or circle it with Apple Pencil to find out more.

Visual Intelligence with Siri on Apple Vision Pro.

Simply look at something to learn more about it. You can ask Siri AI about text, images, and even real-world objects as you see them in the moment.

Next-level intelligent photo editing.

Reframe a photo after it’s been taken with Spatial Reframing. Expand your shots with the Extend tool. And remove even larger objects with the enhanced Clean Up tool.

Reframe your photo even after it’s taken.

Move the viewpoint, adjust the angle, or zoom in as if you were repositioning the camera in the moment with Spatial Reframing.

Express more with Image Playground.

Create unique, high-quality images in just about any style, including photorealistic. Modify and transform your images with just a description or using touch for endless possibilities.

Image Wand.

Transform rough sketches into images in virtually any style right in Notes.

Available now

Write with Siri virtually anywhere you type.

Siri AI can now generate a draft from scratch or provide feedback on what you’ve written. Just describe what you need in your own words. And in Messages and Mail, Siri AI can match your writing style, punctuation, and tone.

Get things done with Suggestions.

Messages and Mail offer suggestions to help you take quick actions based on context from your conversation — add a calendar event or search for a photo with just a tap.

Coming in English

Proofread as you type.

Apple Intelligence automatically checks your grammar and spelling and offers suggestions virtually anywhere you type.

Get relevant information while on a call.

Call Context can proactively surface relevant information from across apps when you’re calling a business — like a confirmation code from Mail when you call an airline.

Coming in English

Communicate across languages.

Turn on Live Translation to automatically translate texts in Messages, display live translated captions in FaceTime, and get spoken translations for calls in the Phone app and conversations on your AirPods.

Available now

Safari works smarter for you.

Now your tabs can be automatically grouped into topics, so related pages are easier to find. Safari Notify Me monitors pages for changes — for example, a price change or restock — and alerts you when it’s time to act. And you can create an extension that personalizes website content and formatting or automates common Safari actions.

Fix passwords with a tap.

The Passwords app alerts you to weak or compromised passwords and can update them on your behalf without the hassle.

Describe a shortcut.

Automate daily tasks with a simple description. Just describe what you need, and Shortcuts creates an automation that connects actions across apps.

Improved accuracy in Dictation.

A powerful new on-device model allows Dictation to understand you even better as you speak.6

Coming in English

Describe a calendar event.

Add and edit events on your calendar with just a description. Change a lunch meeting to a coffee chat and the Calendar app will adjust the details.

Accessibility.

VoiceOver describes your physical surroundings and onscreen content in richer detail. Magnifier zooms in so you can ask about what’s in frame. Accessibility Reader cleans up text for easier reading. Voice Control is more flexible so you can interact with apps in your own words with less to memorize.

Smarter Home.

Apple Intelligence in the Home app unlocks new capabilities, like combining related activity notifications,7 describing what happened in a selection of HomeKit Secure Video footage before you watch,8 and using AI to search for a clip based on what happened.9

Genmoji.

Create high-quality Genmoji to match the moment.

Workout Buddy.

Get deeper insights and more data-rich motivation with enhancements in Workout Buddy. Train even without your iPhone nearby. And Workout Buddy is now available in Spanish.10

Great powers come with great privacy.

Apple Intelligence is designed to protect your privacy at every step. It’s integrated into the core of your iPhone, iPad, and Mac through on-device processing. So it’s aware of your personal information without collecting your personal information. And with groundbreaking Private Cloud Compute, Apple Intelligence can draw on larger server-based models, running on Apple silicon, to handle more complex requests for you while protecting your privacy.

Private Cloud Compute

Your data is never stored
Used only for your requests
Verifiable privacy promise

iPhone 17 Pro

Innovative design for ultimate
performance and battery life.

iPhone Air

The thinnest iPhone ever.
With the power of pro inside.

iPhone 17

Even more delightful.
Even more durable.

iPhone 17e

Feature stacked.
Value packed.

iPhone 16

Amazing performance.
Durable design.

iPad Pro

The ultimate iPad experience with the most advanced technology.

iPad Air

Serious performance in a
thin and light design.

iPad mini

The full iPad experience in
an ultraportable design.

MacBook Neo A18 Pro chip

The magic of Mac at a surprising price.

MacBook Air 13” and 15” M5 chip

Thin. Fast. Powerful and portable.

MacBook Pro 14” and 16” M5, M5 Pro, or M5 Max chip

The most advanced Mac laptops for
demanding tasks.

iMac M4 chip

An all‑in‑one desktop for
creativity and productivity.

Mac mini M4 or M4 Pro chip

The mini-est, most
affordable Mac desktop.

Mac Studio M4 Max or M3 Ultra chip

Powerful performance and
connectivity for pros.

New possibilities for your favorite apps.

The Foundation Models framework, along with App Intents, APIs, and frameworks, is built with privacy at the center. Any app can tap into the on-device models that power Apple Intelligence, and the features you build work offline. And it’s all at no cost per request. App developers can easily integrate features like Siri, Writing Tools, and Image Playground.

Learn more about developing for Apple Intelligence

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

3. Show HN: Performative-UI – A react component library of design tropes

Source: https://vorpus.github.io/performativeUI/
Site: vorpus.github.io
Submitter: lizhang (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-08 14:05 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 824 points · 162 comments
Language: en

hope you enjoy

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

4. xAI is looking more like a datacentre REIT than a frontier lab

Source: https://martinalderson.com/posts/xais-new-rental-business/
Site: Martin Alderson
Author: Martin Alderson
Published: 2026-06-08
HN activity: 436 points · 344 comments
Length: 1.1K words (~5 min read)
Language: en

An unexpected development over the past few weeks is xAI's new partnerships with Anthropic and Google, providing them with a huge amount of capacity. It's worth remembering that xAI is now part of SpaceX, after the two merged back in February - so the revenue from these deals flows straight into the entity about to go public. While much has been made of the potential financial engineering given SpaceX's upcoming IPO, I think there's a bit more to this than just pure accounting tricks.

Anthropic was in a serious bind

If you use Claude products much, you'll be (very, probably) aware that Anthropic has had serious capacity problems, especially early afternoon onwards in Europe and in the mornings in the US (this is when demand seems to be highest as both European users and the Americas are both at work, fighting for capacity). I've written about this compute crunch before a few times - the coming crunch, whether it's here yet, and what comes next.

This resulted in Anthropic having to introduce new peak hour restrictions on their subscriptions, with usage between 5am–11am PT / 1pm–7pm GMT using more of your usage limit - with the aim of smoothing demand between peak hours and off peak hours where they had more capacity available.

However, there is only so much demand shifting you can do when demand is growing as fast as Anthropic's. At some point you end up having to ration users further, which definitely is far from ideal when you have both Google and OpenAI breathing down your neck for customers.

xAI to the rescue?

At the start of May, xAI announced a partnership with Anthropic to provide access to their (older) Colossus 1 datacentre in Memphis. This allowed Anthropic to reverse the usage limit restrictions on their subscriptions, and in general while stability of Anthropic services still leaves a lot to be desired, the peak time crunch has abated (for now, at least).

The fees involved are enormous, ramping to $1.25bn/month for 300MW of capacity - approximately 220k GPUs.

Last week, Google announced a similar partnership - $920mn/month for 110k GPUs[1]. It's important to note that both agreements have cancellation clauses - allowing either party to cancel with 90 days' notice after an initial lock-in period.

If you take this on face value, this is a ludicrously profitable deal for xAI:

While this doesn't include opex[2] and depreciation, if the deals continue for 18 months, xAI recoups all the capex they spent and still has many hundreds of MW of GPUs available. With the giant compute shortages likely to persist into the medium term, even older H100s are likely to be extremely useful even 18 months out.

The case against

It's important to note there are certainly some red flags with the deal. Firstly, Elon Musk and OpenAI were/are locked in a bitter legal battle, and the Anthropic deal could be motivated to add pressure to OpenAI more than commercial reality.

And Google is a major shareholder in SpaceX, so they certainly have incentive to juice the valuation of the IPO.

While I'm sure there is some degree (potentially a lot!) of truth in these viewpoints, it's important to note that huge volumes of GPUs are in enormously short supply.

One of the untold stories of this capex boom in datacentres is just how behind all of them are. Even OpenAI's flagship Stargate UAE datacentre - being built in a jurisdiction that is renowned for a laissez-faire attitude to building regulations - is now under direct threat from the current Iran conflict, with Iranian drones having already hit other UAE datacentres.

In comparison, SpaceX/xAI are incredible at building datacentres on time. The original Colossus 1 datacentre was built in 122 days. Musk's empire does have a huge advantage in really understanding how to plan, build and execute enormous infrastructure projects quickly. While the hyperscalers no doubt have the experience to do this, they were built with far less urgency - with typical project execution taking many years. Given the capex only really started to ramp up in the last couple of years, many of these projects are still years away.

This gives xAI a serious competitive advantage that shouldn't in my opinion just be hand waved away.

But what about Grok?

There is no doubt this leaves Grok in an odd spot, with a lot of the datacentre capacity that was destined for Grok training and inference now being leased to a direct competitor.

While it's foolish to write off any model provider, it certainly looks like a serious retreat from Grok vying to be a frontier class lab. But, perhaps, they over-specified their datacentre capacity - there is no doubt that inference demand for Grok models is likely to be seriously behind projections, leaving a bunch of spare capacity which might as well be monetised while the training lottery continues? It's hard to say and the xAI & Cursor deal muddies the water even further.

As such, I think all three things are true to some degree. There's no doubt some level of financial engineering going on. There's also an enormous compute shortage. And it seems to me SpaceX/xAI does have a real competitive advantage in datacentre buildout.

It's just the magnitude of how true each of these are is going to define the success or failure of the biggest IPO in North American history.

Either way, the more I look at it, the more xAI is starting to resemble a datacentre REIT with a frontier lab attached, rather than the other way around.

I suspect that these are likely to be GB200s given the pricing, vs the mostly H100/H200 for Anthropic, but this is speculation on my part. ↩︎

Power is the obvious big opex line, but at this scale it's almost a rounding error. 300MW running flat out is roughly 300,000 kW × 8,760 hours, or about 2.6 billion kWh a year. Tennessee has some of the cheapest industrial electricity in the US at around 6 cents/kWh, so buying it off the grid would cost somewhere around $160mn a year. Colossus actually runs largely on its own on-site gas turbines, which comes out even cheaper: at a simple-cycle heat rate of ~10,000 Btu/kWh and Henry Hub gas at ~$3.50/MMBtu, the fuel bill is only around $90mn a year. Either way, set against the ~$15bn a year Anthropic is paying for that 300MW, power is no more than about 1% of revenue. The deal value utterly dwarfs the running costs. ↩︎

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

5. MiMo-v2.5-Pro-UltraSpeed: 1T model with 1000 tokens per second

Source: https://mimo.xiaomi.com/blog/mimo-tilert-1000tps
Site: mimo.xiaomi.com
Submitter: gainsurier (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-08 15:27 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 508 points · 361 comments
Length: 1.9K words (~9 min read)
Language: en

June 8, 2026

MiMo-V2.5-Pro-UltraSpeed: Pushing 1T-Parameter Model Generation Speed to 1000 TPS
Try it now ›Access API ›中文 ›

1. Xiaomi MiMo-V2.5-Pro-UltraSpeed: Speed is the Ultimate Edge

From the first roaring racer of the combustion age to the sonic boom that shattered the sound barrier, humanity's hunger for speed is written into our very DNA. The speed of AI reasoning is no different — it defines the boundaries of intelligence itself. When a model is fast enough, it ceases to be a tool you wait on and becomes an extension of your own thinking: responding in real time, iterating in an instant, collaborating without friction.

Today, we are thrilled to release Xiaomi MiMo-V2.5-Pro-UltraSpeed in collaboration with TileRT, breaking the 1000 tokens/s decode speed on a 1-trillion-parameter model for the first time!
MiMo-V2.5-Pro UltraSpeed real-time generation speed comparison (up to ~1200 tokens/s)

2. Limited-Time Access · Application-Based

The MiMo-V2.5-Pro-UltraSpeed API launches simultaneously at a limited-time promotional price — 3× the cost of MiMo-V2.5-Pro, but delivering approximately 10× the generation speed! 3× the price, 10× the output experience. (API only; Token Plan not supported.)

Due to limited high-speed inference resources, MiMo-V2.5-Pro-UltraSpeed will be available through an application-based, limited-time window. Approved users can access the API during the trial period, available only from June 9 to June 23, 2026, 23:59 (Beijing Time, UTC+8 / 08:59 PDT).

How to Apply

API platform: platform.xiaomimimo.com/ultraspeed. Trial slots are limited — submission does not guarantee approval. We will prioritize enterprises and professional developers with genuine business needs. For standard model access, please follow the MiMo-V2.5 model series. For in-depth business partnerships for the UltraSpeed model, contact business-mimo@xiaomi.com.

Chat Experience (Free During Trial)

Approved users will receive free Chat access valid within the two-week window. Entry point: ultraspeed.xiaomimimo.com

To ensure quality and fairness under resource constraints, the following rules apply: each account may enter the queue up to 10 times per day; each session is capped at 30 minutes; sessions idle for more than 5 minutes will be automatically released.

3. 1000 tokens/s: Not Just Fast, But a Paradigm Shift

At the trillion-parameter (1T) scale, breaking 1000 tps is far more than a faster typewriter — it fundamentally disrupts AI application paradigms.

First, speed itself begins to transmute into intelligence. Previously, when facing a hard problem, you could only "wait for one answer and pray it's correct." Now, within the same wall-clock time, the model can run dozens of reasoning paths in parallel (Best-of-N / Tree Search), automatically verifying and self-correcting in the background — using raw speed to generate depth of thought, directly elevating reasoning quality.

Second, it completely unleashes the productivity ceiling of Coding Agents. Before, having AI write code meant developers painfully waiting in front of screens, bottlenecked by inference latency. At 1000 tps, code generation speed and production efficiency undergo a paradigm-level acceleration.

Most importantly, trillion-parameter models can now enter real-time decision loops. Millisecond-level "think-respond" cycles allow 1T flagship models to seamlessly plug into time-critical scenarios — high-frequency quantitative trading signal generation, instant anti-fraud interception, intelligent bidding, and real-time interactive dialogue. And when this power is brought to surgical assistance and medical imaging analysis in life-or-death situations, AI speed is no longer just a metric of efficiency — it becomes a chip in the race against death. On the operating table, every second AI saves in completing lesion analysis and risk prediction gives the surgeon one more degree of freedom. This deepens our conviction that the ultimate significance of speed is not merely boosting productivity, but enabling technology to help humanity live better.

4. Extreme Model-System Codesign

Achieving 1000+ tokens/s generation speed with a 1T flagship model is not the breakthrough of a single technique — it is the product of deep collaboration and extreme Codesign between the MiMo model team and the TileRT system team. The industry's current approach to similar extreme speeds typically relies on specialized hardware — Cerebras's Wafer-Scale integration or Groq's pure on-chip SRAM custom architecture. We chose a different path: achieving even more impressive inference speed on commodity GPUs through model-system codesign alone.

On the model side, we applied FP4 quantization targeting the bandwidth bottleneck of commodity hardware, dramatically shrinking model size and reducing memory-access overhead; simultaneously, we introduced DFlash, an efficient speculative decoding method based on block-level masked parallel prediction, substantially increasing the accepted token length per verification step. On the system side, TileRT perfectly adapts to the dynamic characteristics of these algorithms, delivering a tailor-made compilation engine and compute kernels optimized specifically for the novel quantization and speculative decoding pipeline. Through this extreme Codesign, we achieved 1000+ tokens/s output from a 1T model using just a single standard 8-GPU commodity node.

3.1 FP4 Quantization

At the trillion-parameter (1T) scale, traditional 8-bit (FP8 / INT8) or even 16-bit inference imposes prohibitive memory footprint and bandwidth pressure. Reducing parameter bit-width directly contributes to decoding speed. We therefore adopt the widely validated, virtually lossless FP4 (MXFP4) quantization format[1].

However, naively applying FP4 across the entire model causes degradation in complex reasoning, logic, and code generation. Given the MoE (Mixture of Experts) architecture of Xiaomi MiMo-V2.5-Pro — where Experts constitute the vast majority of parameters and exhibit the highest tolerance to quantization — we selectively quantize only the MoE Experts to FP4 while preserving original precision for all other modules. Through FP4 QAT (Quantization-Aware Training), we dramatically reduce model size and maximize hardware bandwidth utilization while keeping the model's overall capability essentially on par with the original, as shown below:
Model capability comparison between FP4 quantization (MoE Experts only) and FP8 across benchmarks, with overall capability essentially on par with the original model

3.2 DFlash Speculative Decoding

Traditional Speculative Decoding relies on a small draft model to "guess" subsequent tokens, which the large model then verifies. This transforms autoregressive generation (1 token per forward pass) into parallel multi-token generation, with rejection sampling during verification ensuring lossless output quality. However, its bottleneck lies in the draft model's quality determining the acceptance rate, while a stronger draft model incurs higher compute overhead — a fundamental tension.

To break this deadlock, we adopt DFlash, an innovative block-level masked parallel prediction method from the research community[2]: the draft model fills an entire block of masked positions in a single forward pass, fundamentally eliminating the serial constraint of "autoregressive drafting."

We deployed this approach on MiMo-V2.5-Pro with custom optimizations tailored for trillion-scale MoE and long-context scenarios. Using the Muon second-order optimizer and model self-distillation, we ensure that compact mask blocks still deliver ideal acceptance rates while compressing draft-stage overhead to near its theoretical minimum:

The draft model exclusively uses Sliding Window Attention (SWA), naturally aligning with the SWA design of the MiMo-V2 series. This eliminates dependency on complete prefixes, reducing per-prediction compute from context-length-linear to constant.
During training, mask-signal sampling is pushed down to GPU-local shards, enabling a single sequence to produce tens of thousands of independent training signals covering diverse context positions in one step — aligning with the long-context capability of the MiMo-V2 series while avoiding cross-device communication overhead.

In terms of results, our parallel-prediction speculative decoding achieves significant acceptance-length improvements across high-value agent and coding scenarios, meaning the large model can confirm more content "in one breath" per verification round. Furthermore, we limit block size to 8 to reduce verification overhead and increase concurrency, allowing high acceptance lengths to translate directly into high inference throughput:

Scenario	Acceptance Length
Coding	6.30
Math / Reasoning	5.56
Agent	4.29

In the Coding scenario, we achieve an average acceptance length of 6.30, with some samples reaching a maximum of 7.14 — meaning 6–7 out of the 8 draft tokens per verification round are accepted. The draft model remains lightweight while pushing acceptance rates to levels that deliver real end-to-end gains. We also observe that in more semantically divergent, higher-uncertainty general conversation scenarios, current acceptance rates are not yet high. We are continuously optimizing the algorithm to explore higher generalization ceilings.

3.3 TileRT Ultra-Low-Latency Inference Kernels / System

If MiMo's algorithmic innovations unshackle the bandwidth constraints of hundred-billion and trillion-parameter models, then the TileRT inference system squeezes every last drop of physical potential from commodity GPUs down to the microsecond level.

At 1000 tokens/s operating frequency, each operator's lifecycle is compressed to microseconds, and the "operator boundaries" of traditional inference systems become the core bottleneck — every operator launch, hardware synchronization, and global memory round-trip fractures the execution flow at the microsecond scale, exposing visible "Execution Gaps."

TileRT's Paradigm-Level Execution Model Revolution

As the foundational infrastructure for ultra-low-latency inference, TileRT introduces an entirely new execution model that eliminates execution gaps from operator boundaries at their root:

Persistent Engine Kernel: Completely discards the traditional per-operator launch paradigm, keeping the entire compute pipeline persistently resident and flowing within the GPU. This enables full-pipeline continuous prefetching — while the current Tile is still computing on Tensor Cores, subsequent data is already flowing through the memory hierarchy, achieving extreme overlap between data movement and computation.
Warp Specialization (Heterogeneous Pipeline Collaboration): At the Tile level, communication, data movement, and tensor computation are physically decomposed with finer granularity. Breaking the homogeneous lock-step execution model, different Warps (thread groups) and even heterogeneous execution domains across the entire GPU operate independently yet in precise coordination — transforming the GPU into a continuously flowing, precisely orchestrated heterogeneous execution system.

Microsecond-Scale Hardware-Software Deep Convergence (Codesign)

When the underlying execution model pushes hardware performance to its limits, pure runtime optimization begins to hit physical boundaries. Building on this foundation, the TileRT system team and Xiaomi's MiMo team engaged in deep technical co-creation, breaking down traditional software layer boundaries. To perfectly align model behavior with this ultra-low-latency execution pipeline, the model layer ultimately adopted a mixed FP4 quantization strategy for MoE Experts and deployed SWA-aligned DFlash speculative decoding on the trillion-parameter architecture. TileRT tightly couples with these algorithmic characteristics and quantization schemes, delivering custom-built compilation engines and compute kernels. Both teams made profound joint engineering tradeoffs based on hardware physics, ensuring execution pressure closes smoothly within hardware boundaries.

The birth of 1000 tokens/s is no coincidence of point optimizations. It is the inevitable result of world-class system infrastructure and extreme algorithmic models deeply converging toward each other, co-evolving as one.

TileRT is a frontier systems architecture team focused on next-generation AI infrastructure and ultra-low-latency inference. The team is dedicated to enabling millisecond-level real-time response for frontier large models in production environments, breaking traditional storage-compute barriers with an entirely new runtime architecture. The team has conceived and implemented a paradigm-level execution model. Through full-stack breakthroughs in persistent kernels, tile pipelines, and heterogeneous collaboration, TileRT achieves extreme compute utilization within complex heterogeneous ecosystems. As a core infrastructure enabler, the team actively partners with industry-leading collaborators on hardware-software codesign, building the high-performance compute foundation for the era of autonomous intelligence that craves "ultimate speed." For more TileRT technical details: tilert.ai/blog/breaking-1000-tps.html

5. More Demos
Build a Snake game in just 10 seconds
Recreate a MacOS interface in just 1 minute

6. Open Source & Outlook

We have open-sourced the MiMo-V2.5-Pro-FP4-DFlash checkpoint on HuggingFace, including FP4 quantized weights and DFlash model parameters. Community usage and feedback are welcome: huggingface.co/XiaomiMiMo/MiMo-V2.5-Pro-FP4-DFlash
UltraSpeed support for MiMo-V2.5 is on the way — stay tuned.

MiMo × TileRT — extreme model-system codesign, delivering 1000 tps output speed for trillion-parameter models.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

6. Anti-social: It's fads, not friends, which now dominate social media feeds

Source: https://www.bbc.com/worklife/article/20260520-how-social-media-ceased-to-be-social
Site: BBC
Author: John Laurenson
Published: 2026-05-22
HN activity: 577 points · 419 comments
Length: 1.4K words (~7 min read)
Language: en-GB

22 May 2026

John Laurenson

Getty Images

Social media platforms used to be about communication between friends – now many are increasingly short video entertainment hubs. The business model is to increase the time people spend on their apps and increase ad revenue. But is there already a consumer backlash?

Aurélia fixes herself a coffee, sits down in her beautiful garden not far from Paris and goes on Instagram "to relax." First up: "a guy I like a lot who does interior design. He's in Venice at the moment." She's into interior design, and has even just had two bird drawings by the 19th Century English designer William Morris tattooed on her arms. She scrolls down. Two kittens having a fight. "I love animals so I get a lot of animals. That's how it works, social media. You click on bananas and they give you bananas."

There are ads too – although they look just like the other posts – for a robot-vacuum cleaner, a diet and bed linen (with Morris-inspired designs). But no friends. She has 198 on Instagram but she says "it's completely changed. I practically don’t see any friends' posts anymore." She’s pretty much given up posting herself. "I don't think anyone sees them anymore anyway."

While there remain committed social, amateur posters on Instagram and especially Facebook, the switch from communicating with people you know to scrolling through professionally made content from people you don't, is even more pronounced among young users.

Kylian, 16, is in vocational training to become a chef. He's on TikTok and Youtube a lot, he says. "I like looking at videos more than photos or messages. I watch videos made by people I don't know. I don’t post at all. I'm a rather shy person. I stay in my bubble. I watch and that’s all. I keep my reactions to myself."

"I spend a lot of time scrolling through videos made by content-creators," says Lucie, also 16. "They're more interesting than the posts of people I know." She doesn't post except sometimes "stories" which disappear after 24 hours.

Whether it's TikTok, Snapchat, Facebook and Instagram, we are a long way from the "digital town square" of personal interaction that social media was even just a few years ago.

John Laurenson

Many social media users, such as Aurélia, have largely given up on posting content or comments (Credit: John Laurenson)

In France, annual official Barometre du numerique 2026 shows 49% of social media users are "active only occasionally". In the UK, an Ofcom report published in April showed a year-on-year drop of users who actively post from 61% to 49%. In the US, a Morning Consult survey of June last year found 28% reported posting less often than the previous year. Just 33% now post daily compared to 57% who use it for entertainment daily. The gap is a lot wider still for Gen Z – 18% active for 74% passive.

Vanessa Lalo, a Paris-based clinical psychologist specialising in on-line behaviour, says "users have become more conscious that the traces you leave (on social media) stay there forever and some no longer want to maintain social media relations that can be superficial. Some don’t want the exposure to criticism that might be a risk when you post or the feeling that their post will seem poor alongside all the professional content".

However, Lalo adds, people haven’t stopped posting, rather they are posting different things and in different places. "On TikTok, for example, young people publish a lot of content but it's more funny parodies and remixes of existing material. The goal is to make people laugh, not to tell people about their lives."

That still happens, she says, but it’s moved from social media platforms like Instagram and Facebook to messaging sites like WhatsApp. There's also been a move towards private groups on Instagram and Snapchat. "These are much more intimate places where you're not bombarded with ads and content made by influencers," she says.

"What we're seeing is social media splitting in two," says social media consultant Matt Navarra, author of the Geekout Newsletter. "Big platforms like Instagram and TikTok are becoming more about entertainment and discovery. WhatsApp is becoming the place people go to actually be social. The catch is, those kinds of spaces are harder for companies to make money from."

Small business owners are being pushed to become presenters, editors, trend spotters and content creators, on top of actually running the business – Matt Navarra

It was TikTok that helped to pioneer an algorithm that figures out from the moment you start scrolling what you like, and then fills your feed with material calculated to keep you on the app for the longest possible time.

Now, says Matt Navarra, "Meta has built what it calls an AI system for unconnected content recommendations on Facebook and Instagram, which basically means, they're increasingly showing you stuff from people you don't follow because the machine thinks you're going to like it. It's not biased towards, is it a professional creator? Is it a brand? Is it a friend? If they can see that you've engaged with a friend a lot, you might see a lot more of their content. It's just that who you are friends with, who you follow, has become irrelevant in a way."

This all means that small businesses, that have long used social media for free promotion have to up their game.

"There's a real opportunity for some small businesses," says Matt Navarra. "A bakery, florist, salon or local café can still break through if they have a good story, strong visuals or behind-the-scenes content people want to watch. But it also means the job has changed. Small business owners are being pushed to become presenters, editors, trend spotters and content creators, on top of actually running the business."

The social platforms continue to be monetised predominantly by ad revenue. That is still the core business model. And ad revenue continues to grow – Matt Navarra

Social media is evolving into something passive like television, albeit television that adapts as you zap. Or rather which knows you so well that it doesn't seem to matter that much that it's taken the remote control. You give the platform information about yourself that it uses for commercial gain and, in return, it gives you content tailored to please you for free.

The transition from truly social media to entertainment platform does seem to be paying off. "The social platforms continue to be monetised predominantly by ad revenue. That is still the core business model. And ad revenue continues to grow," says Matt Navarra. Global social media ad revenue is expected to reach $317 billion (£236bn) in 2026, up from $277 billion (£206bn) last year. Meta is the biggest winner. Its ad sales already increased 22% year-on-year in 2025. Ad sales are expected to hit $243 billion (£181bn) this year, enough to overtake Google for the first time.

AI powered digital ad targeting is becoming ever more effective and precise. "The social platforms allow companies to put ads amongst the content that you're scrolling through. Every third or fourth scroll is an ad. And they are the world's best ad targeting engines. They know so much about your interests because of what you've looked at, liked, engaged with, what you've chosen to follow, the time you've spent in certain areas of the app, things like that," Navarra says.

"So advertisers will go in and say: 'I want to place an ad next to people in the UK who are between thirty and sixty years old and who are interested in DIY' and the social platforms will have that information and will place the ads accordingly."

The price will depend on the number of impressions (clicks) the advertiser wants and how tight the criteria are. It costs more to place ads in the social media feeds of people who buy horses than people who buy ice-cream.

More like this:

Might there be a backlash coming? Don't many people go on to social media to see how friends are reacting to their posts or comments before settling down to scroll through professionally made content?

Meanwhile, for those who miss what are fast becoming the old days when social media enabled you to share a bit of your life, a joke or a point of view with people you more-or-less knew, there are tools within platforms, says Matt Navarra, that allow you to choose to see mainly friends and family content. "People can flick to a feed that gives them that," he says. "But most people don't."

--

For more on business and beyond, follow us on LinkedIn.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

7. EU-banned pesticides found in rice, tea and spices

Source: https://www.foodwatch.org/en/eu-banned-pesticides-found-in-rice-tea-and-spices
Site: foodwatch.org
Submitter: john-titor (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-08 15:59 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 264 points · 96 comments

Scrape failed: fetch: Get "https://www.foodwatch.org/en/eu-banned-pesticides-found-in-rice-tea-and-spices": dial tcp 62.113.231.137:443: i/o timeout

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

8. We Think the SpaceX IPO Is Overvalued

Source: https://www.morningstar.com/stocks/why-we-think-spacex-ipo-is-overvalued?content_id=20768396545
Site: Morningstar, Inc.
Author: Nicolas Owens
Published: 2026-06-08
HN activity: 111 points · 91 comments
Length: 1.4K words (~7 min read)
Language: en

Why Is Morningstar So Bearish on SpaceX’s IPO?

We value SpaceX at $63 per share, a 53% discount to the upcoming IPO’s offering price. Our valuation is the result of mathematics more than skepticism. With such a wide range of possible outcomes for the company’s financial future, we created forecasts and valuations for three scenarios and probability-weighted them.

Even at $63 per share, we give SpaceX a lot of benefit of the doubt in two of the three scenarios, in which we assume the company can achieve a rapidly reusable Starship rocket enabling multiple launches per week and successfully commercialize data centers in space. Neither of these engineering problems has been solved, and we don’t expect them to be until at least 2028.

In our most optimistic “moonshot” scenario, the company would be worth $1.97 trillion, or $154 a share. That’s 14% above the offering price and a level the shares might even reach in the short term after their public launch, given widespread investor enthusiasm about SpaceX, artificial intelligence infrastructure, and the IPO. However, we assign this scenario, in which both Starship is reusable and scaled orbital data centers are highly successful, a 7% chance of happening, which is one reason our final fair value estimate of $63 is much lower than $154.

What Would It Take for SpaceX to Get a ‘Buy’ Rating From Morningstar?

Morningstar’s consistent and independent equity research methodology is designed to help long-term investors ascertain a stock’s intrinsic value and weigh it against the prevailing market price. What’s more, with a Very High Uncertainty Rating for SpaceX, we would only think the shares offered a compelling risk-adjusted return (and thus garner a 5-star

Morningstar Rating

) below a 50% discount to our

fair value estimate

. To illustrate, to get

5 stars

from Morningstar at the $135 IPO offering price, our fair value estimate, all else equal, would have to be $270 per share. Here are the assumptions we made to arrive at our more realistic valuation.

What Are the Building Blocks of the Fair Value Estimate?

Our analysis of fair value focuses on the profit drivers and forecasts for the company’s businesses described in our full report. Some items that add up to our fair value estimate don’t change with our scenarios. We assume the firm will raise $85.7 billion for 639 billion shares offered in the IPO, which amounts to $6.50 per share of our fair value estimate. Add to that its existing $1.80 of cash and investments, minus $2.30 per share of debt.

Our valuation for the core space and connectivity businesses adds around $40 per share (we believe a slower-growth scenario for Starlink after 2028 would reduce that estimate by $5). Our probability-weighted average of the three wide-ranging AI scenarios adds $16.50 to our overall valuation estimate, which we view as more akin to the value of a call option on the commercialization of orbital AI infrastructure. The math: $6.51+$1.80-$2.30+$40.00+$16.50=$62.51 (we rounded up to $63.00).

What Assumptions About SpaceX Drive the Forecast?

In all three scenarios, we apply base-case forecasts provided by PitchBook for the space and connectivity businesses, in which we assume that by 2035, SpaceX will be able to launch 340 Starship missions (nearly one a day), and that the reusability rate of the rockets on these missions reaches 85%, extending cost and time savings beyond the reuse of the boosters to the upper stage spacecraft. Then we built forecasts for three scenarios to ascertain what the AI business might achieve.

Moonshot

In the first, our most optimistic scenario, SpaceX’s orbital AI platform works, achieves operating cost advantages over terrestrial computing, and eventually deploys and commercializes one-fifth of our forecast of AI infrastructure computing capacity (excluding Russia and China) by 2040. We apply the estimates provided by SpaceX that it can engineer and deploy satellites with the equivalent of 100 kilowatts of AI processing capacity each and eventually fit more than 100 of them into the fairing of a Starship, which we forecast to result in an orbital computing cluster of some 59,000 satellites by 2035, providing the equivalent of 11.6 gigawatts of AI computing capacity and generating $225 billion of annual revenue.

No Go

In our downside scenario, orbital data centers won’t work or offer any advantage over terrestrial ones. We surmise that the company, having invested tens of billions to find this out, would cut bait on the project sometime around 2028, the way management walked away from plans to build multiple small-car factories at Tesla. We assume SpaceX would continue to commercialize its terrestrial Colossus data center but would not take a meaningful share of global computing capacity.

Minimum Viable Product

In our most likely scenario, orbital data centers prove viable, subject to some capacity constraints, but also benefit from SpaceX’s decreasing cost to launch large payloads on Starship, and the company successfully deploys and commercializes around 4% of our forecast AI computational capacity—probably best serving those use cases that can tolerate higher data transmission latency. It’s a project that requires some unproven engineering to succeed, but we do see SpaceX as the best positioned to pursue it.

In this scenario, we estimate SpaceX would engineer and deploy satellites with the equivalent of 50 kilowatts of AI processing capacity each and eventually fit more than 90 of them into the fairing of each Starship launch, resulting in an orbital computing cluster of some 48,000 satellites by 2035, providing the equivalent of 2.4 gigawatts of AI computing capacity and generating $47 billion of annual revenue.

How Do the Scenarios Add Up to the Fair Value Estimate?

We give the optimistic Moonshot scenario a 7% chance of happening. This represents the combined probability that Starship is reusable 85% of the time and orbital data centers scale well commercially. This scenario would add $108 to our fair value estimate, unweighted, and it lifts the final result by $7.56 per share.
We assign the No Go scenario a 43% chance of happening, meaning even if Starship is successful, orbital AI data centers may not be, which would detract $6.20 from our fair value estimate on its own, and it weighs on the average by $2.67.
We deem the Minimum Viable Product scenario as most likely (though far from guaranteed). It is worth $23.50, adding $11.75 to the fair value weighted at 50% probability.

What About Fabricating Chips on the Moon and the City on Mars?

SpaceX has a long list of other projects and ambitions, including actual moonshots and interplanetary colonization. These would most probably absorb massive investment, could come with dilution to stockholders, and have a wide range of possible payoffs, positive or negative. In this way, we view them all as having potential “optionality” value, and it’s a matter for investors to decide what they think the payoffs could be and what premium they assign to each project.

We did not explicitly model or forecast these projects, so we would say either our valuation is agnostic to them or that it effectively gives the projects as a group a net present value of zero.

As with orbital AI computing clusters, we see SpaceX as the firm best-positioned to pursue such ambitious projects. One way to evaluate the value of these opportunities is to use the logic of pricing call options, wherein an investor pays a premium upfront to buy into a project at a predetermined price. If the project works out and is worth more than the strike price, the investor wins. But if it doesn’t, the investor loses their premium and the option expires without value.

If our weighted $63 fair value estimate of SpaceX is accurate, at the offering price of $135, investors are adding $72 per share of “option premium” to their investment, for the right to participate, come what may, in the long list of future projects SpaceX may undertake. The more likely you believe cost-competitive orbital AI data centers will be, the closer to the offering price a reweighted valuation of SpaceX gets, and those extra projects could be seen as free options. Using the inputs above and reweighting our scenarios to 77% likely for Moonshot and 23% likely for MVP, excluding the No Go scenario, the valuation equals the $135 offering price.

The author or authors do not own shares in any securities mentioned in this article. Find out about Morningstar’s editorial policies.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

9. Apple Core AI Framework

Source: https://developer.apple.com/documentation/coreai/
Site: Apple Developer Documentation
Submitter: hmokiguess (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-08 18:47 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 215 points · 46 comments
Language: en-US

No extractable content.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

10. Looking Forward to Postgres 19: Query Hints

Source: https://www.pgedge.com/blog/looking-forward-to-postgres-19-query-hints
Site: pgedge.com
Submitter: jjgreen (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-05 15:15 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 77 points · 9 comments
Length: 2.5K words (~11 min read)
Language: en

Well, the world has officially ended. Peter Venkman from Ghostbusters was right all along, and we'll soon be experiencing "human sacrifice, dogs and cats living together, mass hysteria!" Pack it in everybody; we had a great run. The feature freeze of Postgres 19 includes the one feature many claimed would never see the light of day: query hints. I guess "never say never" is pretty good advice.

OK, so they're not technically called hints. The Postgres community would never be so pedestrian. Instead, Postgres 19 introduces two new contrib modules: pg_plan_advice and pg_stash_advice. It's "plan advice" you see. Totally different thing.

An occasion this monumental deserves a bit more fanfare than simply describing the feature. So let's begin with a walk through one of the longest-running arguments in Postgres history.

A Brief History of "Never"

The Postgres community's position on query hints has been, shall we say, firm. The official wiki page on the subject states it plainly:

"We are not interested in implementing hints in the exact ways they are commonly implemented on other databases. Proposals based on "because they've got them" will not be welcomed."

Fair enough. The wiki goes on to list six solid reasons hints are problematic:

They create maintenance nightmares.

They break on upgrades.

They discourage root-cause analysis.

They scale poorly.

The optimizer is usually smarter than you think.

They actually impede planner improvements because users stop reporting bugs.

Yeah, that sounds about right. And for years, that was the end of the discussion. Postgres doesn't do hints. Go fix your statistics. Next topic, please.

But behind the scenes, the debate was never quite so settled. Back in late 2010, a legendary thread erupted on the pgsql-performance mailing list that raged on for several months and captured nearly every available sentiment. It started innocuously enough as a complaint about slow COUNT(*) queries, veered through Oracle comparisons, and somehow spiraled into a full-blown existential crisis about whether Postgres needed hints.

Robert Haas, threw the first real punch:

"I think it's just dumb to say we don't want hints. We want hints, or at least many of us do. We just want them to actually work, and to not suck."

He went further, arguing that Postgres needed to give DBAs an escape hatch for the edge cases:

"We should be willing to provide a way for those people to not get fired when they hit the 0.1% of queries that can't be fixed using existing methods."

It's hard to argue with "please don't let people get fired."

The legendary Tom Lane chimed in with similar sentiments:

"I haven't seen a hinting scheme that didn't suck... I don't say that there can't be one."

In doing so, he effectively left the door open just a crack.

Kevin Grittner later observed a rather obvious paradox in the anti-hint argument:

"Even those most ostensibly opposed to hints have been known to post that they would rather not have the optimizer recognize two logically equivalent constructs and optimize them the same because they find the current difference ‘useful to coerce the optimizer’ to choose a certain plan. That's implementing hints but refusing to document them."

Was he wrong? How many of us have toggled enable_seqscan to off to force an index scan? Or thrown an OFFSET 0 into a subquery to prevent the planner from flattening it? Or wrapped a materialized CTE around something just to create an optimization fence? These are hints in all but name, with coarse knobs available only to seasoned experts. We were only pretending to eschew hints.

Josh Berkus, one of the more vocal anti-hint advocates, drew a clear line in the sand:

"Any hint which gets coded into the actual queries becomes a massive maintenance and upgrade headache thereafter."

But even he wasn't against all forms of planner override. His position was against the Oracle model of embedding them in SQL comments. His preferred hierarchy was GUC cost parameters first, then cost parameters on database objects, then new statistical metadata, and query hints only as a desperate last resort. That's actually a reasonable action plan, but Postgres has always lacked that final option.

The third-party pg_hint_plan extension eventually filled the gap for many users, borrowing Oracle's comment-based hint syntax. It worked, more or less, and the urgency to add hints to the core quietly dissipated. Or so we thought.

By Any Other Name

So what changed? Well, for one thing, the person who built these modules is none other than Robert Haas. Fifteen years later after that epic thread, he's the author of both pg_plan_advice and pg_stash_advice. Say what you will, but the man plays the long game.

Haas didn't just slap Oracle-style hints onto Postgres and call it a day. He was deeply embroiled in the controversy from the very beginning, and knew all of the pain points. As a result, he'd been considering how to actually address every objection the community raised over the past two decades.

Berkus insisted hints should never live inside query text. So pg_plan_advice keeps advice completely outside the SQL. Advice is set via a GUC (pg_plan_advice.advice) or stored in a separate stash keyed by query ID. Queries themselves remain unencumbered by extra slop.

The community worried that hints would replace the planner's judgment entirely, producing plans that looked "correct" but were secretly catastrophic. So pg_plan_advice works by constraining the planner's search space rather than replacing it. The documentation is explicit: advice "can only produce plans the core planner considers viable." Advice only nudges the planner toward one it already considered.

What about when advice is wrong or outdated? Instead of silently producing garbage or throwing an error, the planner marks affected nodes as Disabled and falls back to whatever it considers best within the remaining constraints. Bad advice degrades gracefully.

And perhaps best of all, the system generates its own advice. It's not necessary to memorize a syntax reference and hand-craft advice strings from scratch. It is possible to ask the planner what it's doing, and it responds in a format that doubles as syntax:

CREATE TABLE my_fact (
  id      BIGINT PRIMARY KEY GENERATED ALWAYS AS IDENTITY,
  dim_id  BIGINT NOT NULL
);
CREATE TABLE my_dim (
  id     BIGINT PRIMARY KEY GENERATED ALWAYS AS IDENTITY,
  stuff  TEXT
);
CREATE INDEX idx_fact_dim_id ON my_fact (dim_id);

EXPLAIN (COSTS OFF, PLAN_ADVICE)
SELECT * FROM my_fact f
  JOIN my_dim d ON f.dim_id = d.id;

            QUERY PLAN            
----------------------------------
 Hash Join
   Hash Cond: (f.dim_id = d.id)
   ->  Seq Scan on my_fact f
   ->  Hash
         ->  Seq Scan on my_dim d
 Generated Plan Advice:
   JOIN_ORDER(f d)
   HASH_JOIN(d)
   SEQ_SCAN(f d)
   NO_GATHER(f d)

The planner literally hands over the advice string that reproduces its current plan. From there, it's just a matter of salting to taste. And we get all that just by adding pg_plan_advice to shared_preload_libraries.

Whispering Sweet Nothings

The advice language is surprisingly expressive for something the community resisted for decades. There are several categories, each targeting a different aspect of query planning.

Scan methods control how individual tables are accessed:

SET pg_plan_advice.advice = 'INDEX_SCAN(f idx_fact_dim_id)';

This tells the planner to use a specific index for the f alias. The documentation lists several other handy scan types. Want to exclude a table from the final plan entirely? There's even DO_NOT_SCAN for that.

Join order is where things get interesting. The JOIN_ORDER tag supports a nested syntax with parentheses for strict ordering and braces for flexible grouping:

-- Strict: join b to c first, then join a to that result, then to d
SET pg_plan_advice.advice = 'JOIN_ORDER(a (b c) d)';

-- Flexible: join b and c in any order, but they go between a and d
SET pg_plan_advice.advice = 'JOIN_ORDER(a {b c} d)';

The syntax here is great, offering a convenient distinction between required and optional ordering. That makes it possible to lock down critical parts of the join order while leaving the planner room to optimize the rest. The argument that a DBA may know better than the planner in certain cases is definitely possible with join ordering, and now it's tunable.

Join methods control which algorithm the planner uses for each join, with a bevy of options. There's a subtle but important detail here: specifying a method implies that the target should appear on the inner side of that join type. So HASH_JOIN(d) means "build the hash table from d." The documentation helps disambiguate here, and this is all still very new so is subject to further clarification.

Want to specify that multiple relations should be on the inner side of a single join? Wrap them in parentheses:

-- d1 and d2 each on inner side of separate hash joins
SET pg_plan_advice.advice = 'HASH_JOIN(d1 d2)';

-- d1 and d2 together on inner side of one hash join
SET pg_plan_advice.advice = 'HASH_JOIN((d1 d2))';

Parallel query control rounds things out with GATHER, GATHER_MERGE, and NO_GATHER for controlling where and whether parallel execution happens.

Can we combine all of these? Of course:

SET pg_plan_advice.advice =
    'JOIN_ORDER(f d1 d2) HASH_JOIN(d1 d2) SEQ_SCAN(f) INDEX_SCAN(d1 idx_d1_pk)';

That's a single string controlling join order, join methods, and scan strategies all at once. And remember, if any part of this advice can't be honored, the planner degrades gracefully rather than catching fire, burning down, and then falling into a swamp.

Stashing it for Later

Using pg_plan_advice.advice directly is great for ad-hoc tuning and experimentation, but what about production? It's pretty inconvenient to set a GUC before every query. That's where pg_stash_advice comes in.

Once we've added it to shared_preload_libraries, it must also be installed:

CREATE EXTENSION pg_stash_advice;

The system works by establishing an "advice stash" as a named collection of query-to-advice mappings stored in shared memory. Create a stash, populate it with advice strings keyed by query ID, and tell sessions to consult it during planning:

-- Create a stash
SELECT pg_create_advice_stash('production_tuning');

-- Get the query ID from EXPLAIN VERBOSE or pg_stat_statements
EXPLAIN (VERBOSE, PLAN_ADVICE)
SELECT * FROM my_fact f
  JOIN my_dim d ON f.dim_id = d.id;

-- Stash the advice for that query
SELECT pg_set_stashed_advice(
    'production_tuning',
    5424487836266966148,
    'INDEX_SCAN(f idx_fact_dim_id) NESTED_LOOP_PLAIN(f)'
);

-- Activate the stash for this session
SET pg_stash_advice.stash_name = 'production_tuning';

From this point on, every time the planner encounters this specific query pattern, it automatically applies the stashed advice. And since it's not embedded in the query itself, we can change it at any time. And don't worry about the query ID changing, that's essentially a hash of the query minus any dynamic parameters; the advice should apply universally.

The stash can be scoped per-session, per-role, or per-database:

-- Every session in this database uses the stash
ALTER DATABASE mydb SET pg_stash_advice.stash_name = 'production_tuning';

-- Only this role uses the stash
ALTER ROLE reporting_user SET pg_stash_advice.stash_name = 'reporting_tuning';

Stashes persist to disk by default via pg_stash_advice.persist = on, with a configurable write interval. This means they survive restarts, allowing DBAs to inspect their contents, update individual entries, or drop entire stashes when they're no longer needed.

This is the part that addresses the production DBA's actual needs. In a scenario where there's a problematic query and it's not possible to change the application code, sometimes the ability to redirect the planner is critical. So create a stash, drop in the right advice, and the problem goes away without touching a single line of SQL. When statistics, the application, or the planner itself improves, just remove the plan advice on the database side. The application or end user never has to know.

The advice stash is the last resort, and it's designed to be temporary.

Trust but Verify

One of the more thoughtful design decisions is the feedback mechanism. EXPLAIN thoroughly clarifies the result of each piece of advice. Consider this setup using fact and dimension tables from earlier:

SET pg_plan_advice.advice = $$
  INDEX_SCAN(f idx_fact_dim_id)
  NESTED_LOOP_PLAIN(f)
  INDEX_SCAN(d no_such_index)
  SEQ_SCAN(z)
  SEQ_SCAN(f)
$$;

EXPLAIN (COSTS OFF, VERBOSE, PLAN_ADVICE)
SELECT * FROM my_fact f
  JOIN my_dim d ON f.dim_id = d.id;

The EXPLAIN output provides impeccable feedback about our advice:

Supplied Plan Advice:
  INDEX_SCAN(f idx_fact_dim_id) /* matched */
  INDEX_SCAN(d no_such_index) /* matched, inapplicable, failed */
  SEQ_SCAN(z) /* not matched */
  SEQ_SCAN(f) /* matched, conflicting, failed */
  NESTED_LOOP_PLAIN(f) /* matched */

We can see a few things from this:

matched means the targets were found and the advice applied.

not matched means the targets weren't found in the query at all.

inapplicable means the advice can't be honored (like referencing a nonexistent index).

failed means the final plan doesn't comply.

conflicting means two pieces of advice contradict each other.

Advice honors dollar $$ quoting syntax, making it more convenient and human-readable.

It's also possible to set pg_plan_advice.feedback_warnings = true to get these as WARNING messages during query execution. That's handy for catching stale advice in production logs before it becomes a problem.

So what can't it do? For now, it's not possible to control whether aggregates use sorting or hashing. Nor can we supply the strategy for UNION or INTERSECT operations. The planner is also free to reject advice on correctness grounds. There's also a small performance penalty to applying advice since it necessarily interrupts the planner loop even when it doesn't change the resulting plan. The documentation explicitly warns to use this judiciously for a reason.

It's a scalpel, so use it like one.

The Long Game

There's something deeply satisfying about this saga. Somehow hints went from an accepted feature we would probably never have, to what looks like one of the better implementations available. The devs also did so in a way that reasonably addresses every one of the major complaints about hints:

Advice lives outside the SQL to avoid embedding them permanently.

Advice guides the planner rather than replacing it.

Advice degrades gracefully with detailed feedback to avoid worst case plans.

The planner generates its own advice strings for self-documentation purposes, enabling easier tweaks.

The community said they'd consider hints if someone could avoid the problems observed in other systems. It took a decade and a half, but someone finally did. Whether it's stubbornness or incredibly high standards, that's just the Postgres Way™.

Will this end the debate? Perhaps not. There will always be folks who insist the planner should handle everything autonomously, and they're not wrong most of the time. The right approach is still to fix statistics, tune cost parameters, and leverage features like CREATE STATISTICS to give the planner better information. Plan advice is for when the planner still insists on a bad plan despite doing all of that.

For those cases, we'll finally have a first-class, core-supported, well-designed escape hatch. No more toggling enable_seqscan like savages. No more jamming OFFSET 0 into subqueries and praying. No more relying on third-party extensions crudely bolting on questionable syntax from a completely different engine.

The Postgres community spent two decades saying they'd never add query hints and ended up adding advice instead. And as we all know, technically correct is the best kind of correct. Now go enjoy your hints, you certainly waited long enough!

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

11. Show HN: Gitdot – a better GitHub. Open-source, written in Rust

Source: https://gitdot.io/
Site: gitdot.io
Submitter: baepaul (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-08 16:52 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 168 points · 135 comments
Length: 21 words (~1 min read)
Language: en

# this weekBuild something great.Week 20: May 24 — May 31, 2026
# next releasev0.2: Infra & issuesETA: July 15, 2026

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

12. Why are cells small?

Source: https://burrito.bio/essays/what-limits-a-cells-size
Site: burrito.bio
Submitter: mailyk (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-08 19:10 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 113 points · 54 comments
Length: 929 words (~5 min read)
Language: en

A human body is built from 30 trillion cells — excluding microbes — that each arise from a lone, fertilized egg. These cells come in a multiplicity of shapes and sizes, with internal volumes spanning five orders of magnitude. The smallest human cell, a sperm, has a volume of just 30 µm³, whereas an oocyte has a volume of 4,000,000 µm³, making it the largest cell in the human body.1

What accounts for this huge range? A simplistic answer is that evolution has made each cell the size best suited to its function. Maybe sperm are small because the body needs to make many of them, and tiny cells cost less energy to make. (Sperm consist of little more than DNA and a few mitochondria, which are necessary for providing energy to spin their whip-like tails.) By contrast, an oocyte needs massive reserves of mitochondria and nutrients to support early embryonic growth. In short, every cell is as large or small as it needs to be — within reason.

But we can derive far more satisfying answers from physics.

The first major limit on a cell’s size is its surface area-to-volume ratio. Assuming that a cell is roughly spherical in shape, its internal volume grows proportionally to the cube of its radius, whereas its surface area grows proportionally to the square of that radius. In other words, a cell’s volume grows much faster than its surface area.

This ratio has big consequences for cell survival. The cell’s membrane funnels nutrients into the cell and secretes waste. It’s also where the energy in a prokaryotic cell — like E. coli — gets made. If the interior grows too large relative to the membrane, the cell will not be able to produce enough energy or excrete waste quickly enough to maintain all the ‘stuff’ inside, and metabolism will slow down.

A second constraint is diffusion, or the tendency for molecules to migrate from areas of high concentration to areas of lower concentration. This migration dictates how quickly enzymes find substrates, or how signaling molecules reach receptors, and how often ribosomes collide with messenger RNAs. Inside a cell, nearly everything happens by chance encounters amongst molecules! As a cell’s volume grows, though, the chance that these encounters will happen decreases (assuming the total numbers of molecules stay constant).

A molecule’s diffusion rate changes based on various factors. The cytoplasm is extremely crowded, for example, and so molecules spend lots of time ricocheting off obstacles, delaying their arrival at a distant location. Every protein in a cell collides with about 10 billion water molecules per second on average. The vast majority of proteins in a bacterium have diffusion coefficients of only 5 to 10 µm2 per second (a measure of how quickly molecules spread through space). Some molecules also aggregate or stick to charged surfaces, further slowing their movement.2 In general, large molecules diffuse slower than small ones.

Metabolites in E. coli can diffuse from one side of the cell to the other in milliseconds, which means collisions — and cellular outcomes — happen quickly. A typical protein takes just 0.01 seconds to traverse a bacterium’s diameter (about 1 micrometer), but the same protein would take around four minutes to move one millimeter and more than six hours to move one centimeter. This is, in part, why cells are so tiny.

With these constraints in mind, we can begin to speculate as to why various cells are shaped the way they are.

Red blood cells are tiny and shaped like biconcave discs to aid with diffusion; by abandoning a spherical shape and evolving more toward a ‘donut,’ they increase their surface area without compromising their compact volume. This, in turn, enhances their ability to exchange oxygen with cells in the body. Their small size (just 8 micrometers across) also helps them move through narrow capillaries.

In contrast, oocytes can grow so large (around 100 micrometers in diameter), in part, because they are less metabolically active than other types of human cells — and thus don’t depend so much on random collisions. They stockpile nutrients during oogenesis to wait out fertilization. Eukaryotic cells also grow large, in general, because they’ve evolved compartmentalization; by modularizing specific functions into organelles, they bring molecules closer together to help get the job done.

Cell sizes are not fixed, however, even within a single species. Cells often swell as they increase their production of proteins and metabolites in preparation for division. This is in line with biology’s only rule: namely, there are exceptions to every rule!

Case in point: a giant bacterium called Thiomargarita magnifica can extend about one centimeter in length, so large that it can be seen by the naked eye. It does so by breaking the surface area-to-volume rule, filling between 65–80 percent of its internal volume with an empty vacuole. In other words, it pushes most of its molecules to the cell periphery, thus shortening diffusion distances.3
Thiomargarita magnifica is a bacterial species that can extend about one centimeter in length, several orders of magnitude more than E. coli. These microbes are visible to the naked eye. Credit: Jean-Marie Volland
Bubble algae (aka Valonia ventricosa). Credit: Trident's Cove

Despite their variety, these architectures still hinge on molecules bumping into each other, guided by the immutable laws of physics. Or, as D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson mused in On Growth and Form (1917), “The form of an object is a ‘diagram of forces.’” Cells bear witness to both internal and external forces; they are constrained by diffusion and shaped by the delicate trade-off between volume and surface area.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

13. Surveillance is not safety: A statement on the UK's latest threat to privacy [pdf]

Source: https://signal.org/blog/pdfs/2026-06-08-uk-surveillance-is-not-safety.pdf
Site: signal.org
Submitter: g0xA52A2A (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-08 19:42 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 447 points · 169 comments

binary file (.pdf); not scraped

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

14. Ask HN: What are tools you have made for yourself since the advent of AI?

Source: https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=48449187 (Hacker News text post)
Site: news.ycombinator.com
Submitter: aryamaan (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-08 18:22 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 173 points · 314 comments

No extractable content.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

15. FrontierCode

Source: https://cognition.ai/blog/frontier-code
Site: cognition.ai
Submitter: streamer45 (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-08 20:45 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 114 points · 20 comments
Length: 2.9K words (~13 min read)
Language: en

By Eric Lu, Ben Pan, Deniz Birlikci, Sam Lee, Ray Wang, Rohan Choudhury, Fermi Ma, TC Qin, Carlo Baronio, Silas Alberti, and more →06.08.26

Raising the bar from correctness to quality

Today’s coding benchmarks have established that models can write correct code. But as AI-generated code becomes the dominant path to production, correctness is now table stakes. The question that we should be asking is: can models actually write good code?

We’re excited to introduce FrontierCode, a benchmark that measures how well models can truly meet the standards of high-quality production codebases. What sets us apart:

Would the maintainer actually merge this PR? We’re the first benchmark to measure code mergeability. Our criteria assess end-to-end code quality — correctness, test quality, scope discipline, style, and adherence to codebase standards. This employs a novel ensemble of grading techniques, including unit tests, rubrics, and new types of verifiers.

Crafted by open-source maintainers. 20+ world-class open-source developers built realistic, diverse, and challenging coding tasks from the repos they maintain, spending more than 40 hours per task. They define what “mergeable” means in their repo.

Rigorous quality control. Rubric grading is subjective, so we built an extensive QC pipeline with adversarial testing, calibration, and multi-stage review, where every task is manually reviewed by a Cognition researcher. We achieve an 81% lower false positive rate compared to SWE-Bench Pro.

Our benchmark provides the strongest available signal of a model’s ability to write high-quality, maintainable code. We find that even today’s most capable models struggle on this new standard.

20+ world-class open-source maintainers

40 hours effort per task

Manually reviewed by Cognition researchers

Every task

81% lower false positive rate

Compared to SWE-Bench Pro

First-ever benchmark measuring code quality

And subtle human preferences

Results

We present three nested subsets of FrontierCode at increasing difficulty: Extended, Main, and Diamond. Diamond comprises the 50 hardest tasks, Main the 100 hardest (including Diamond), and Extended the full set of 150.

We report two metrics, pass rate and score:

A solution passes if it clears all blocker criteria, i.e., criteria that a maintainer would consider hard stops during code review, and fails otherwise.

A solution’s score is a weighted aggregate of the rubric items. Solutions that do not pass blocking criteria receive 0.

Each model is run 5 times at every available reasoning effort. For each effort, we average the metric across the 5 trials, then report each model’s score at its best performing reasoning level.

FrontierCode Diamond remains unsaturated: the best performing model, Claude Opus 4.8, achieves a score of only 13.4%. Other models score significantly lower: GPT-5.5 receives 6.3%, Gemini 3.1 Pro 4.7%, and others even less. However, GPT 5.5 consistently uses up to 4x fewer tokens than Opus 4.8, achieving a better cost-intelligence tradeoff.

On FrontierCode Main and Extended, Opus 4.8 still maintains a clear lead, at 34.3% and 51.8%, respectively. We also observe a large gap between open-source models and the frontier. Kimi K2.6, the best-performing open-source model, achieves just 3.8% on Diamond, 16% on Main and 37% on Extended.

The rest of this post will be a deep dive into why and how we built FrontierCode.

Why we built FrontierCode

The first generation of coding benchmarks, such as SWE-Bench Verified and Pro, were designed for less capable models. They fall short on many measures of realism and robustness.

Fundamentally, they only test functional correctness, not quality. Moreover, these benchmarks are prone to misclassification errors. Experiments from METR have found that high-scoring models on these benchmarks often produce patches that wouldn’t be accepted by human maintainers.

How do we define misclassifications? These fall under two categories:

False Positives: The verifier should not reward solutions that are wrong. Test coverage may be incomplete, allowing the model to write an incorrect solution that’s still accepted.

False Negatives: The verifier should not penalize solutions that are correct. Tests can be either too specific, e.g. checking for exact error strings or function names, or unsolvable, testing for a behavior not in the instruction or in the codebase.

We show through analysis of agent trajectories that FrontierCode produces 81% less misclassification errors than other leading benchmarks. This means that FrontierCode scores are the most accurate ranking currently available.

Existing benchmarks also suffer from lack of diversity in several ways.

While other benchmarks generated issues from single PRs via programmatic scraping, FrontierCode is hand-selected by repo maintainers from multi-PR chains and freeform requests. We also triple the number of represented languages from SWE-Bench Pro.

It’s also known that existing benchmarks provide too much guidance in the form of overly specified and detailed prompts. Today’s frontier models need far less hand-holding. FrontierCode expects the agent to infer the maintainer’s intent, given the same context as a human contributor.

Our prompts contain two parts. First is the task description. Second, the codebase guidelines for generic testing, lint, and style practices, just like those found in AGENTS.md. The task descriptions are humanlike and deliberately concise — a third the length of SWE-Bench Pro’s.
Example prompts from each benchmark, shown at the same scale. Scroll within each column to compare structure, length, and specificity.

Furthermore, we’ve chosen to scale the difficulty of tasks using quality rubrics, rather than simply increasing patch size. Despite having smaller patches than benchmarks like DeepSWE, FrontierCode is harder for agents to solve.

To produce an evaluation for code quality as ambitious as FrontierCode, we had to embed quality into every step of the benchmark creation process.

How we built FrontierCode

A Team of Open Source Maintainers

FrontierCode aims to measure whether models can produce code that would be merged into production codebases. To ensure this, we collaborated directly with the maintainers of 36 flagship open-source repositories. This team of all-star experts has collectively reviewed and merged thousands of commits to their codebases. They can apply deep stylistic and design knowledge to every PR they see.

Each maintainer invested more than 40 hours per task, undergoing multiple rounds of iteration with other eval engineers and Cognition researchers. They’ve distilled their judgment into concrete evaluation criteria: any PR that satisfies these standards would actually be approved.

Here’s what they say about FrontierCode:

“Working with the team behind FrontierCode was a privilege. Taking on the AI evaluation problem felt like nothing less than an art… Where others grade like a CI, FrontierCode grades like a tech lead.”

Tomer Nosrati, CEO and Tech Lead of Celery (28.6k stars)

“What sets FrontierCode apart is the attention to detail. Each task is calibrated to a depth that simply hasn’t been seen before in LLM benchmarking. We should be moving away from benchmarks that can be gamed and instead using ones like FrontierCode to demonstrate genuine model intelligence and creativity.”

Martin McKeaveney, Co-Founder and CTO of Budibase (28k stars)

“I’m grateful to have worked with leading experts in the Open Source community. We had deep discussions on correctness versus quality and what mergeability means in the context of their repository. FrontierCode is a milestone for AI models respecting subjective quality in the real world.”

Merlijn Vos, Core Maintainer of uppy (30.8k stars)

“FrontierCode’s unique value comes from the human experience encoded in its evals: years of judgment about what makes code high-quality and worthy of merging. The almost obsessive care brought to every criterion is why I believe this benchmark sets a new bar for SWE evaluation.”

Claudio Costa, Core Maintainer of Mattermost (37k stars)

Beyond Unit Tests

FrontierCode measures mergeability by evaluating code along the following axes:

Behavioral correctness: Does the patch successfully solve the problem?

Regression safety: Does it break anything in the existing codebase?

Mechanical cleanliness: Does it pass the project’s build, lint, and style checks?

Test correctness: Do the agent’s tests actually capture the desired behavior?

Scope: Does the patch touch only what it needs to?

Code quality: Does the code conform to codebase conventions, follow sound design patterns, and remain readable to collaborators?

The following table describes how we use both classical unit tests and novel methods, such as adaptive classical grading, scope, and reverse-classical tests (more on these methods below) to evaluate these criteria.

Category	Method	How it works	Passes when
Behavioral correctness	classical	Injects test files into the repository, runs them, then cleans up.	All injected tests pass
Mechanical cleanliness, regression safety	command	Runs a shell command.	Exit code 0
Test correctness	reverse-classical	Runs agent’s submitted tests against the base commit.	The tests fail
Behavioral correctness for complex tasks	adaptive classical grading	Uses an LLM to adapt reference tests or application code to align with the implementation.	Adapted tests pass
Scope	scope	Checks file boundaries, diff size constraints, and optionally semantic locality of changes.	Diff within constraints
Code quality	prompt	An LLM reviews agent’s diff against a natural-language prompt.	LLM score meets threshold

Each criterion is either a blocker or a non-blocker:

Blockers represent mergeability requirements, i.e., criteria that a maintainer would consider hard stops during code review. These include correctness checks, as well as non-correctness concerns like performance or scope restrictions.

Non-blockers represent quality signals such as code style, type safety, and readability, which would not necessarily block a merge.

If a solution satisfies all the blockers, it is considered passing, and its score is the weighted aggregate of all the rubric items it passes. Otherwise it receives a score of zero.

Novel Grading Methods

We’ve introduced three main techniques to strengthen criteria against misclassifications, while allowing space for multiple valid solutions:

Reverse-Classical: The reverse-classical criterion is a way to ensure that agent-written tests are meaningful: when we run them on the original, broken codebase, they must fail. This gives us an automated, deterministic check that the agent understood the problem well enough to write an effective test for it.

Code Scope: A good PR should exercise restraint: it modifies only what it needs to, without touching unrelated files or introducing unnecessary refactors. The scope criterion is an automated check that enforces these boundaries. It combines three types of constraints:

files: For fast, deterministic checks on which files can be allowed, denied, or must be deleted.

size: To enforce limits on the number of changed lines, net line growth, or total files modified.

semantic: For LLM-based checks that verify the locality or nature of a change within a specific part of a file (e.g., inside a single function).

Adaptive Classical Grading: Open-ended coding tasks can have many valid solutions. Static unit tests are too rigid; good solutions can fail for superficial differences like function names or error wording. We resolve this conflict with mutagent, a tool we built that uses an LLM to surgically patch the test environment (or the application code) and align with the agent’s implementation details, allowing us to run rigorous, deterministic tests on open-ended solutions.

Example Task

8 files+53-11

Task description

Encapsulate all warning logs in a new auto LOG_WARNING() -> std::ostream & method in src/logger.h such that:

Warnings are always printed to standard error
Warnings are always printed, independently of --verbose
The helper automatically prints the warning: prefix

Use this new function in every instance of warning: <message> messages throughout the codebase.

Test guidelines

Run make and ensure no code changes remain. If there are more code changes, then it means that the code was not formatted properly.

Unless you are sure that the code change is already covered by an existing test case, always edit or create relevant tests (in the ./test directory) to confirm the changes work and prevent regressions.

The tests are written using GoogleTest and POSIX shell scripts (not bash) and must be registered in the test/CMakeLists.txt build definition to run.

Lint guidelines

Run make configure compile to compile and format the code in-place. The compile step comes with a large amount of linter-like checks.

Style guidelines

You are already on the correct base commit. Create your branch from this commit. Do not rebase or start from master, main, or any other branch.

Press "Run eval" to generate Opus 4.8's patch for this task.

The graded rubric appears here after the run.
Interactive: run the FrontierCode grading pipeline against each model’s output and inspect how the patch maps to rubric pass/fail.

Andrew He (ecnerwala) is the second highest rated US competitor on Codeforces, two-time IOI gold medalist, a founding engineer at Cognition and our resident C++ expert. He personally reviewed the models’ behavior on this task.

This task is based on the jsonschema repo which is written in C++. It requires implementing a new function auto LOG_WARNING() -> std::ostream & that should be used in every instance of printing warning: <message> in the codebase. The helper should prefix log messages with warning:, print to stderr, and ignore the --verbose flag.

The task seems simple: a passing solution has to just identify all places in the given codebase that print warning: and replace them with a call to a newly implemented LOG_WARNING() function. However, models fail this task in a somewhat surprising way. One of the blocking criteria requires that multi-line warning messages idiomatically call LOG_WARNING, like so:

cpp

LOG_WARNING() << "You are opting in to remove schema identifiers... \n"
              << "The only legit use case...\n"
              << "non-compliant...\n" << ... ;
Idiomatic multi-line LOG_WARNING usage

Claude Opus 4.8, on the other hand, consistently opts for the following implementation:

cpp

LOG_WARNING() << "You are opting in to remove schema identifiers...\n";
    std::cerr << "The only legit use case...\n";
    std::cerr << "non-compliant...\n";
Claude Opus 4.8 mixed LOG_WARNING and std::cerr usage

These two are behaviorally the same; in both cases a multi-line error message will be printed to stderr. However, the agent solution bakes in the assumption at the call site that LOG_WARNING() and std::cerr are the same stream, which could change in a future modification of LOG_WARNING().

Quality Control

How do we iterate on rubric quality?

Improving binary verifiers like unit tests is relatively tractable because every solution falls into one of two buckets — correct or incorrect. You can examine each rollout, check its bucket, and strengthen the tests accordingly.

Hardening prompt-based criteria is a much harder QC problem. Rubrics introduce a spectrum of correctness: two solutions for the same task can both be functionally correct yet score differently on every criteria. We can no longer look at solutions in isolation. We have to compare within a group of solutions and verify that their relative scores actually separate better solutions from worse ones.

Rubric design is also inherently subjective and requires domain expertise. For each criterion, the maintainer must decide whether it’s a blocker or non-blocker, assign its weight relative to other criteria, and ensure complete coverage so that models cannot exploit gaps in the rubric.

Our rubric creation process

1.

Design

We prefer classical tests for things that can be checked deterministically, such as correctness. For complex tasks, we favor behavioral tests that are robust to superficial differences in implementation details.

For soft qualities, we prefer LLM grading. This is better for assessing, say, idiomatic code, readability, or adherence to a preferred architectural pattern.

Based on these principles, we first ask the task creator to manually audit each rubric item and document its rationale.
2.

Hack report

To prevent false positives, the task author imitates a lazy or adversarial programmer and tries to get a passing score with a deliberately incorrect or incomplete solution. This exposes criteria that can be improved.

To prevent false negatives, the task author tries to write a perfectly valid, alternative solution that is different from the canonical one. If this solution fails the evaluation, the rubric is too rigid.

We augment the hack report process by also asking Devin to come up with novel ways to hack the rubric.
3.

Rubric calibration

To ensure that the rubric has sufficient resolution, the author must write four distinct solutions that target a range of scores from 0 to 100%.
4.

Review

Each contributor belongs to an eval pod led by an experienced pod lead, who acts as the first quality gate. The lead reviews the full eval candidate and iterates with the contributor through multiple rounds. Once the eval candidate passes all pod-level checks, a Cognition researcher conducts a final review along with the pod lead and contributor. For a random subset, researchers also solve the tasks themselves to verify that instructions are clear and grading is fair.
5.

Re-Review

At any stage, reviewers can send the task back for revision. Most tasks cycle through multiple iterations before passing.

The result of this extensive process is a suite of durable, difficult tasks that reflect the high standards of the world’s top open-source repositories.

Conclusion

FrontierCode is the benchmark for the next generation of coding agents. We are confident developers, enterprises, and researchers can trust it to evaluate the production readiness of their strongest models. While we don’t currently plan to release the tasks publicly to avoid contamination, we are opening up our evaluation to all model creators, in the hope that we can push the frontier even further in the coming months.

Acknowledgments

FrontierCode is the product of close collaboration across research, design, and a community of practitioners who lent their expertise to vet tasks and shape the rubric. Thank you to everyone listed below.

Research
Eric Lu, Ben Pan, Deniz Birlikci, Sam Lee, Ray Wang, Rohan Choudhury, Fermi Ma, TC Qin, Carlo Baronio, Silas Alberti

Design
Katie Cheng, Joseph Alessio

Outstanding External Contributors
Claudio Costa, Martin McKeaveny, Lance Fuchia, Merlijn Vos, Tomer Nosrati, Swyx

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

16. Ask HN: Why hasn't there been a real competitor to Ticketmaster yet?

Source: https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=48448313 (Hacker News text post)
Site: news.ycombinator.com
Submitter: mdni007 (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-08 17:28 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 100 points · 87 comments

It feels like every event/venue is selling tickets exclusively through Ticketmaster.  Every other ticketing platform seems to only hold resale tickets in their inventory which just transfers the tickets to your Ticketmaster account when bought. With all the hate Ticketmaster has gotten and all the other ticketing platforms out there, I'm surprised Ticketmaster still has a hold of pretty much the entire market. How are they doing this? Why haven't the other platforms been able to compete?

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

17. I'm building a parallel internet, and it's called The Thinnernet

Source: https://inavoyage.blogspot.com/2026/06/im-building-parallel-internet-and-its.html
Site: inavoyage.blogspot.com
Submitter: initramfs (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-08 19:45 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 53 points · 57 comments
Length: 2.0K words (~9 min read)
Language: en

Since 2020, I've taken on a Steve Jobs alter-ego (on a very, very part time basis, and often for humor purposes). The first essay I wrote wasn't even related to hardware, or solar powered-conscious operating systems that began around the same time. It was actually about one of my former jobs, regarding Knowledge Bases. Using one every day, I thought there had to be a better way to integrate steps taken into a ticket management system, to show proof of work. I won't say which system and which company, since it doesn't matter. I thought back at the time, where else did someone care so much about not only user experience, but the employee's experience? And I realize it was Steve Jobs. Here is the essay I wrote, on a higher level Knowledge Base called Experience Base, later included in part of a concept CMS called TicketMS.

A month ago, I read an article by Dr. Nathalie Martinek that basically described the exact problem my organization had- inability or unwillingness, or slowness to adopt new or improved changes to a workflow.

If you were a futurist and tried to predict the future using only today's news headlines as a indicator, you might think that the future will consist of a bunch of buzzing drones delivering Doritos and Dr. Pepper. That is for the most part true. However, what isn't really flashy or covered is what the internet will/might look like. Fiber optic tech has seen significant improvements, and it's likely that more households will have access to something like 1Tbps before 2050. But very few people will need that much data- maybe- I suppose 125GB/s might be useful for 16K uncompressed video, but I am not sure what else. Maybe lots of coordination feeds with other autonomous agents.

In 2023, I started thinking and writing about a parallel internet:

You might also be wondering, wasn't Steve Jobs more of a device guy, and not an infrastructure or web design auteur? And the answer is yes! While he was one of the first to include a TCP/IP stack in his Unix OS & hardware in 1987, he wasn't really focused on laying down internet undersea cables. There was plenty of optimizing the user experience on the personal computer alone. Most desktop programs didn't even need an internet connection, and some still don't. Plus, internet traffic at the time was very limited, and there was very little damage any "CDN" or website could do. I say that because there was so little data being transferred, that few limitations could be placed on files, formats, protocols, browsers, and services.

If you were to wonder what a 21st century (post 2011) Steve Jobs "type" wanted to accomplish, he would be focused on the same exact thing: The user experience. But the user experience today is being shaped less by hardware and more the infrastructure and the social networks that many are dwelling on. Often times, still voluntarily. If Steve Jobs really wanted to ensure that users could get the same user experience as they reliably could on a spotty, but flat delivery of data on a 2G or 3G connection, he would be focused much more on ensuring the apps could use limited data. Because internet speed is part of the user experience.

There is a funny email that had been released after before Jobs's passing where a user complained of a spotty signal, and his advice was basically to not hold the phone in that direction (or with his hand over the top part where the antenna was positioned). One of the most influential CEOs at the time was basically suggesting rabbit ears fiddling like on analog television receivers. But I defend his actions, because 3G technology at the time wasn't robust, and one shouldn't have expected him to have all the solutions that were out of his control (even if they tried to build their own modem and it was inadequately developed compared to Qualcomm's, which DID happen, but that's not really a major part of the current issue). It's that all technologies take time to mature, and once a lot of the EMI kinks are worked out, a certain level of reliability becomes expected. And I have absolutely no proof, but I think that would be one new frontier that, had Jobs lived to 70 or 80, might have embarked on.

What am I referring to? In order to ensure the user experience is consistent across every device, the entire transmission of application data/content would have to be completed in a real time deadline. Asynchronous communication is certainly welcome and important, but many features can be standardized to a point where digital interactions become constructable and replicable. Refresh rate is something Iphones have mastered with latency. But internet latency is a different story. It can be important when accessing a website or service and hoping to get the same format view, with the same data loading in the same amount of time. With static HTML, the page might be wide and the text small, because the browser has no auto-resize feature. But at least it might not have any problems loading the text (unlike a browser that can't display Javascript), and the text can be converted into a different view, like Reading View, which modern browsers offer.

I wouldn't say this is leading to a homogenized user experience. What I think is lost in the era where everything requires a ton of bandwidth is that it is very hard to notice how much data is being transferred unless you're on a slow connection. Admittedly, I am testing a slow connection out, not that I am complaining about the connection speed when I have the option to upgrade. But that is not why I want others to try out a Thinnernet. It's because I'm suggesting a fallback in case the infrastructure can't handle an always on, always connected world where hundreds of GB are downloaded a day, yet can't deliver a single byte in an instance where there is an outage or an easily preventable network congestion issue.

So what is Thinnernet? Imagine a fiber optic bundle of undersea cables- maybe a hundred or so 10Gbps cables comprising a large, round internet cable with a diameter of maybe 3 feet (highly weatherproof). These might have been manufactured 15 years ago. Today, they're likely higher capacity. Now imagine you have a very advanced computer from 2040 where your PC's ethernet port can receive that speed all at once with a single cable- maybe 1Tbps or 10Tbps. Now return to the original bundle, and pick one cable. That's your internet connection. It might be 10Gbps, even though the ISP can sell you a service for 10Tbps.

Now instead of that 10Gbps cable, go back to the mid-1990s, and an undersea coaxial cable company is using maybe 10Mbps in each bundle for a total of 100Mbps or 1Gbps. Now connect a single coax cable to your PC (using the right modem or ethernet converter). You have 10Mbps.

If you're Steve Jobs, and you want every application to have the same predictable experience, whether someone is using 1 Mbps, 10Mbps, or 1Gbps, there would need to be a minimized mode of traffic that ensures a certain set of apps can predictably access a subset of websites and "essential data" with known webpage sizes (e.g. under 100KB, or under 10KB), so they are more or less whitelisted for usability, and no guesswork by the user has to be done to figure out what sites can be accessed on a certain connection. The way the web is designed is still open, and rightfully so, with decentralized servers and DNSes. But applications themselves and the servers they access must be able to know where they can be used reliably. This is not really a single website's or network engineer's problem, but everyones. A big fish in a small pond is going to use a lot more data in a place where little data is typically used. In the mid 2010s, you could still find a lot of people using Symbian phones. At one point, I set up a twitter relay service on my phone, which allowed me to read and send tweets using just SMS and without an internet data plan! I recall Facebook offered this in India for relaying to their Messenger services but eventually got rid of it due to the costs.

In theory, using less data shouldn't be much of an issue or cost for a big company. But because it uses legacy infrastructure, or has fewer spam mitigation tools (e.g. with Carriers slow to ban numbers rather than having a software dashboard by a Meta employee) the costs are much higher than when using a higher speed technology such as Fiber. The same reason Verizon and other phone companies gradually phased out copper phone lines.

History may be often boring, but it also offers alternatives and ideas that have long been forgotten. The internet as it was built today includes some very fast and amazing technology, but it also includes a lot of deliberately crummy software designed to get people to upgrade. While some people think this a healthy feature of capitalism doing its job, its also limiting the idea of capitalism to incumbent builders who are prioritizing bandwidth heavy platforms and not really offering an energy-lite way to access the web. An adaptable internet is really the best user experience a company can offer. Which is why I think Steve Jobs would have been the Cornelius Vanderbilt of the Information Superhighway, had he not died of cancer. And by that, I mean that everyone who could afford to ride on one of this trains or railroads would all get the same speed. Thomas Friedman once wrote

“Communism was a great system for making people equally poor. In fact, there was no better system for that than communism. Capitalism made people unequally rich.”

When people try to describe low tech or high tech, they inevitably use an ahistorical starting point to describe slow internet or a slow computer using terms or concepts that are often non-technical. The people who know how to run a fast internet on a slow data connection like me would be considered minimally proficient. The people who cannot get ANYthing to run on a slow data connection are non-proficient. The difference may be subtle, but new technology adoption often depends on a"lie" that something is broken or antiquated. While there are many new technology advances that might not have been possible had too few people adopted a highly profitable new product, it doesn't erase the historical truths of the efficiency and even security (not always) of older systems.

And for that reason, a competent engineer could design five different speeds where the most important data still arives first, allowing the least bandwidth tiered user to still receive a static HTML of their email, while the highest paying customer receives a tacky, luxurious Javascript wrapper around their inbox (arriving at the same time, like that feather and hammer drop experiment on the moon):

"Design reform began with Exhibition organisers Henry Cole (1808–1882), Owen Jones (1809–1874), Matthew Digby Wyatt (1820–1877), and Richard Redgrave (1804–1888),[11] all of whom deprecated excessive ornament and impractical or badly-made things.[12] The organisers were "unanimous in their condemnation of the exhibits."[13] Owen Jones, for example, complained that "the architect, the upholsterer, the paper-stainer, the weaver, the calico-printer, and the potter" produced "novelty without beauty, or beauty without intelligence."[13] From these criticisms of manufactured goods emerged several publications that set out what the writers considered to be the correct principles of design. Richard Redgrave's Supplementary Report on Design (1852) analysed the principles of design and ornament and pleaded for "more logic in the application of decoration."[12]

Computer UX is entering its Arts and Crafts social reform era. Every internet user has witnessed the modern day Great Exhibition. History doesn't repeat, but it often rhymes: AI and Craps.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

18. Confidential submission of draft S-1 to the SEC

Source: https://openai.com/index/openai-submits-confidential-s-1/
Site: OpenAI
Submitter: hackerBanana (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-08 21:22 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 311 points · 234 comments
Length: 127 words (~1 min read)
Language: en-US

We recently submitted a confidential S-1. We expect it to leak so we’re just announcing it. We have not decided on timing yet; it may be a while because there are things we want to do that are likely easier as a private company. But it’s a complicated set of tradeoffs and this gives us the option to go public sooner if that ends up being best.

This announcement is being made pursuant to Rule 135 under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and does not constitute an offer to sell or the solicitation of an offer to buy any securities. Any offers, solicitations of offers to buy, or any sales of securities will be made in accordance with the registration requirements of the Securities Act.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

19. Launch HN: Intuned (YC S22) – Build and run reliable browser automations as code

Source: https://intunedhq.com
Site: Intuned
Submitter: fkilaiwi (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-08 13:35 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 102 points · 44 comments
Length: 1.7K words (~8 min read)
Language: en

Stop writing browser automation

Describe what you need. Intuned Agent builds production-ready Playwright code, deploys it, and fixes it when sites change. You get the reliability of code without writing it yourself.

Usecases

Scrapers

Extract data from any website—e-commerce, government portals, job boards, and more. Use Intuned Agent to generate and maintain your Playwright code. Deploy with built-in stealth, auth, scheduling, and scale.

Key Features:

Intuned Agent — Generate scrapers from a prompt and schema, fix issues with AI when sites change

Your code, your way — Write in TypeScript or Python using Playwright or any compatible library or framework

Stealth & auth — Anti-detection, captcha solving, login handling built in

Scheduled jobs & monitoring — Recurring runs with full logs and session recordings

Auto-scaling — One machine or hundreds, we handle it

Crawlers

Discover, navigate, and collect data across thousands of pages. Build crawlers that follow links, parse sitemaps, and index content—with built-in stealth, scheduling, and scale.

Key Features:

Your code, your way — Write in TypeScript or Python using Playwright or any compatible crawling library or framework

Crawl4AI support — First-class support for Crawl4AI—deploy and scale your crawlers without managing infrastructure

Stealth mode — Anti-detection, proxies, and captcha solving built in

Scheduled jobs & monitoring — Recurring crawls with full logs and session recordings

Scalable infrastructure — Control how many machines to run on, we handle the rest

RPA

Build browser automations that interact with websites on behalf of your users—form submissions, data entry, account actions, and more. Deploy with built-in auth handling, stealth, and concurrency control. Perfect for integrating with services that don't offer APIs.

Key Features:

Built-in authentication support — Write create.ts and check.ts (or .py), Intuned manages the session lifecycle—validating, reusing, and recreating as needed

Your code, your way — TypeScript or Python with Playwright, or AI-driven via Anthropic Computer Use, OpenAI CUA, Stagehand, Browser-use, or Gemini Computer Use

UI actions or network calls — Automate via browser interactions or faster in-browser network requests

Stealth mode — Anti-detection, proxies, and captcha-solving built in

API-first with concurrency control — Deploy as an API endpoint, set parallel limits, we queue and execute

AI Automation

Build AI-powered automations that can navigate, interact, and extract from any website. Whether you're building AI agents as a product or using AI to automate scraping and workflows—deploy with built-in stealth, auth, and scale.

Key Features:

Works with any AI browser library or API — Anthropic Computer Use, OpenAI CUA, Stagehand, Browser-use, Gemini Computer Use, Intuned/Browser SDKs, and more

Mix code and AI — Combine deterministic Playwright logic with AI-driven steps in a single automation

Stealth mode — Anti-detection, proxies, and captcha solving built in

Built-in authentication support — Write create.ts and check.ts (or .py), Intuned manages the session lifecycle - you can use AI for that too

AI usage controls — Monitor and limit AI credit usage across your automations

Scalable infrastructure — Deploy as an API or schedule jobs, control concurrency, we handle the rest

Managed Scraping

Need hundreds or thousands of scrapers? Our solution engineers—powered by Intuned Agent—build and maintain them for you. We've delivered thousands of production scrapers. You tell us what data you need, we handle the rest.

Key Features:

We build, you ship — Tell us the sites and schemas, we deliver production-ready scrapers

Cost-effective delivery — Solution engineers + Intuned Agent means faster builds at lower cost

Ongoing maintenance — Sites change, we update your scrapers so they keep running

Your code, no lock-in — You own the code, switch to self-serve anytime, no reselling or black boxes

Flexible pricing — Flat fee per source or custom arrangements

Built on Intuned infrastructure — Same stealth, auth, scale, and monitoring you'd get building yourself

Web Tasks API

Web Tasks that learn each run

Run any web task from a prompt. Add a reuseKey and it learns —faster and cheaper with every run.

const companySchema = z.array(
  z.object({
    name: z.string(),
    location: z.string(),
  }),
);

await webTasks.run({
  task: "Scrape YC companies. Return name, batch, description, and URL.",
  startUrl: "https://www.ycombinator.com/companies",
  parameters: { batch: "S24" },
  outputSchema: companySchema,
  reuseKey: "yc_companies_scraper",
});

// ✓ created skill yc_companies_scraper
// ✓ wrote reusable helpers
// ✓ returned 247 companies · 6m 12s · $0.84 AI + 0.10 compute hrs

await webTasks.run({
  task: "Scrape YC companies. Return name, batch, description, and URL.",
  startUrl: "https://www.ycombinator.com/companies",
  parameters: { batch: "W24" },
  outputSchema: companySchema,
  reuseKey: "yc_companies_scraper",
});

// ✓ reused skill yc_companies_scraper
// ✓ returned 208 companies · 58s · $0.12 AI + 0.02 compute hrs

class Company(BaseModel):
    name: str
    location: str

await web_tasks.run(
    task="Scrape YC companies. Return name, batch, description, and URL.",
    start_url="https://www.ycombinator.com/companies",
    parameters={"batch": "S24"},
    output_schema=list[Company],
    reuse_key="yc_companies_scraper",
)

# ✓ created skill yc_companies_scraper
# ✓ wrote reusable helpers
# ✓ returned 247 companies · 6m 12s · $0.84 AI + 0.10 compute hrs

await web_tasks.run(
    task="Scrape YC companies. Return name, batch, description, and URL.",
    start_url="https://www.ycombinator.com/companies",
    parameters={"batch": "W24"},
    output_schema=list[Company],
    reuse_key="yc_companies_scraper",
)

# ✓ reused skill yc_companies_scraper
# ✓ returned 208 companies · 58s · $0.12 AI + 0.02 compute hrs

Intuned Web Tasks runs browser automations from natural-language instructions —
scraping, crawling, form filling, multi-step actions, and downloading files. Use it
whenever the user asks to extract data from, act on, or pull files from a website.

## Flow
If no task has been given yet, ask what they want to automate in one line and offer
1–2 examples — e.g. "What would you like to automate? For example, 'scrape all
companies from the YC directory' or 'download every PDF from a site'."

When the user gives you an automation task:
1. Ask whether to trigger via the **Intuned CLI** or the **SDK** (TypeScript or Python).
2. Trigger it, using their request as the `task`. Don't ask anything else
   unless a required input is missing.

## Optional inputs
Include these only when they apply and you can infer them from the task — never ask for them:
- `parameters` — dynamic inputs that change between runs.
- `outputSchema` — JSON Schema, only when extracting structured data.
- `startUrl` — only when known; the agent infers it otherwise.
- `reuseKey` — when you re-run the same or similar task (e.g. to change a limit or
  parameter), reuse the `reuse.key` the previous run returned, or a key the user gives
  you. Only omit it for a brand-new task; the server then generates one — keep it and
  reuse it on follow-ups for the same/similar task. Never ask whether the task is repetitive.

## CLI
Install first if missing: `npm install -g @Intuned/cli`, verify with `intuned -v`.
  intuned platform webtasks run "<task>" --json
Add `--reuse-key <key>` when re-running the same/similar task (the prior run's key) or when the user provided one.

## TypeScript SDK (`npm install @Intuned/client`)
  import { IntunedClient } from "@Intuned/client";

  await client.webTasks.run({
    task: "<what to do>",
    startUrl: "<url, optional>",
    parameters: { /* optional */ },
    outputSchema: { /* jsonSchema, optional */ },
    // reuseKey: the prior run's key on follow-ups, or one the user gave
  });

## Python SDK (`pip install intuned-client`)
  from intuned_client import IntunedClient

  client.web_tasks.run(body={
    "task": "<what to do>",
    "start_url": "<url, optional>",
    "parameters": {}, // optional
    "output_schema": {}, // optional
  })

## Docs
Refer here for more options and details:
https://intunedhq.com/docs/main/07-web-tasks/overview.md

Intuned Agent

The AI agent that builds,updates, and fixes automations

Describe what you need. The agent builds it, fixes it, and keeps it running.

Build any automation

Describe what you need — a scraper, RPA workflow, crawler, or any automation — and the agent builds it as production-ready code.

Edit project

Describe the change. The agent edits the code, validates against the live site, and delivers a diff you can review.

apple-careers

Jobsjobs.apple.com

Deployed

What would you like to edit?

Update this to get only US Jobs

Fix with AI

One click from a failed run. The agent reads the error, analyzes traces, and writes a fix.

Run psLWyn2LyNFailed

Parameters

"job title": "Creative Director"

"url": "jobs.apple.com/..."

Error

Timeout 10000ms exceeded

waiting for

locator("#jobdetails")

Platform Features

Infrastructure that just works

Everything you need to run browser automations in production. Built in, not bolted on.

Built-in authentication

Write create.ts and check.ts (or .py), we handle the rest—validating, reusing, and recreating sessions automatically.

Anti-detection suite

Stealth mode, automatic captcha solving, and proxy support built in. Run automations without getting blocked.

Privacy · Terms

Verify

Online IDE

Zero setup, no dependencies. Write, test, and deploy automations from your browser. Fully integrated environment.

✦

Intuned

untitled

1

Terminal

→Running extract API...

CLI

Local development with full control. CI/CD ready, team collaboration, version control.

Observability

Full logs, traces, and session recordings for every run. See what happened and why.

Traces

Logs

Errors

History

Runs

Metrics

Records

JobRuns

Recordings

Runs

Single execution via API. Set max concurrent requests, we queue the rest. Built for RPA and integrations.

const result = await
intunedClient.project.run.start("rpa-example",
{
    "api": "list",
    "parameters": {
      "cateogry": "books"
    },
    "retry": {
      "maximumAttempts": 4
    },
    "authSession": {
      "id": "test-auth-session",
    }
});

result = await intuned_client.project.run.start(
    "rpa-example",
    {
        "api": "list",
        "parameters": {
            "category": "books"
        },
        "retry": {
            "maximum_attempts": 4
        },
        "auth_session": {
            "id": "test-auth-session",
        }
    }
)

Jobs

Scheduled, batched execution. Control how many machines to run on. Built for scrapers and crawlers.

const result = await
intunedClient.project.run.start("rpa-example",
{
    "api": "list",
    "parameters": {
      "cateogry": "books"
    },
    "retry": {
      "maximumAttempts": 4
    },
    "authSession": {
      "id": "test-auth-session",
    }
});

result = await intuned_client.project.run.start(
    "rpa-example",
    {
        "api": "list",
        "parameters": {
            "category": "books"
        },
        "retry": {
            "maximum_attempts": 4
        },
        "auth_session": {
            "id": "test-auth-session",
        }
    }
)

Built for developers

API-first · No lock-in · Usage-based pricing · Usage monitoring & alerts

Testimonials

Hear from our users

Blog

Latest news

Examples

Examples to getinspired from

starter

Default Intuned project template for browser automation Github

starterintuned-browser-sdkTypeScript

starter auth

Default AuthSession Intuned project template for browser automation Github

starterintuned-browser-sdkauth-sessionsTypeScript

auth with email otp

Authentication example using email-based OTP verification with Resend Github

auth-sessions2faTypeScript

auth with secret otp

Authentication example using secret-based OTP verification Github

auth-sessions2faTypeScript

browser sdk showcase

Showcase of Intuned Browser SDK helper functions for common automation tasks Github

intuned-browser-sdkTypeScript

captcha solving auth

E-commerce scraper with captcha solving and auth sessions Github

captchaauth-sessionsTypeScript

FAQs

Commonly asked questions

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

20. AI is slowing down

Source: https://www.wheresyoured.at/ai-is-slowing-down/
Site: Ed Zitron's Where's Your Ed At
Author: Ed Zitron
Published: 2026-06-08
HN activity: 436 points · 454 comments
Length: 6.3K words (~28 min read)
Language: en

If you liked this piece, you should subscribe to my premium newsletter. It’s $70 a year, or $7 a month, and in return you get a weekly newsletter that’s usually anywhere from 5,000 to 18,000 words, including vast, detailed analyses of NVIDIA, Anthropic and OpenAI’s finances, and the AI bubble writ large (updated to version 3.0 last week). My Hater's Guides To the SaaSpocalypse, Private Credit and Private Equity are essential to understanding our current financial system, and my guide to how OpenAI Kills Oracle pairs nicely with my Hater's Guide To Oracle.

Over a three week period in May, I published an exhaustive three-part guide to how the AI bubble might collapse, the events that might trigger it, and the consequences. For something lighter, check out last week’s premium, where I re-introduce you to the antagonists of the AI bubble (and their fatal weaknesses) in caustic, slightly sweary terms.

Subscribing to premium is both great value and makes it possible to write these large, deeply-researched free pieces every week.

Last week I went on Bloomberg and discussed the state of the AI bubble with a clarity that rattled even the sweatiest boosters, mostly because I spoke with clarity about an investment frenzy whipped up through hype, deceit and mythology. Some were equal parts frustrated and angry that I don’t have money in the market, or, as they’d put it, “skin in the game.”

I get it! When your entire worldview is dictated by what a series of venture capitalists and psuedo-journalists on Twitter want you to believe, it must be difficult to imagine someone having “morals” or “beliefs” or that one might hold a position that wasn’t entirely based on greed or tribalism. It must be confusing — upsetting, even! — to hear that somebody is willing to accurately and vociferously tear into a tech industry largely controlled by people with no regard for their users or workers, who are willing to bathe their products in mediocrity all because it’s the thing that everybody else is doing.

This is a hysterical era perpetuated by liars, cowards, imbeciles, craven boosters and the easily-fooled. Those excited about generative AI are either the victim or the perpetrator of a con centered around a technology to ingratiate at the highest cost possible.

AI Cannot Afford To Slow Down — It Needs $3 Trillion Or More In Revenue By End Of 2030 To Sustain Its Existence

I also think that everybody is a little flippant about what has to happen for me to be wrong.

If we take Sightline Climate’s data from February at face value, there are 190GW of data centers planned. If we take NVIDIA CEO Jensen Huang’s statement that data centers will cost $80 billion to $100 billion a gigawatt at face value, this means that said data centers will cost anywhere from $9.5 trillion to $15 trillion. Bloomberg incorrectly states that this is a “$3 trillion” buildout.

This money will have to come from somewhere. The Financial Times reported in May that banks are concerned they might “choke” on data center debt when I estimate there’s barely $250 billion a year being issued. They will, to actually make these data centers happen, have to start issuing anywhere from $500 billion to a trillion a year.
Jensen Huang has also said that NVIDIA projects a trillion dollars worth of revenue through the end of 2027. 54% of NVIDIA’s revenue comes from three clients, which means that NVIDIA’s future largely depends on three unnamed companies — likely Taiwanese ODMs building servers for Microsoft, Google and Meta — and their counterparties’ ability to raise debt on a near-perpetual basis, as the number of firms that can afford to buy thousands of $7.8 million racks of Vera Rubin GPUs is dwindling.
Even then, every part of this puzzle requires more and more debt or at the market dumps like Google’s $85 billion equity sale or Meta’s planned multi-billion dollar dump.

The fact that hyperscalers are doing equity sales is, as economist Paul Kedrosky raised in our conversation on my show last week, a sign that debt is becoming harder to acquire.
Anthropic has made $330 billion in compute and chip commitments between Google, Amazon, and Microsoft, another $30 billion with CoreWeave and another $15 billion with SpaceX. To pay for this compute, Anthropic must meet its projected revenue of $174 billion a year by 2029.

Anthropic has raised $95 billion across rounds in February, April (from Google and Amazon), and May. These funds will be insufficient to cover Anthropic’s costs, as will Anthropic’s cash flow, meaning that it will have to raise at least another $200 billion in the next year.
OpenAI has projected to burn at least $852 billion through the end of 2030, and has made over $770 billion in compute commitments across Microsoft, Amazon, CoreWeave, Cerebras, and Oracle. The $122 billion funding round from March will be insufficient to cover these costs, and it will require, at the very least, another $250 billion in funding by the end of the year.

Whatever obtuse fantasies you have about the current state of generative AI are irrelevant to a much larger problem: that the infrastructure being built and compute commitments being made are being done so at a level that demands that generative AI and AI compute generate over $2 trillion in annual revenue by 2030. When I say that, I mean it absolutely has to do that otherwise none of the data center capex makes sense, and neither Anthropic nor OpenAI can pay their commitments.

OpenAI expects to spend $50 billion on compute in 2026, and I wouldn’t be surprised if Anthropic spends anywhere from $30 billion to $50 billion. Between them, Anthropic and OpenAI represent the vast majority of all AI compute demand — at a minimum 70%, if not 80% to 90%.

Put another way, there’s barely a few billion dollars of demand outside of two companies that lose billions — or tens of billions — of dollars a year.

Let’s break down these numbers a little further:

190GW of data center capacity assuming a PUE of 1.35 suggests a critical IT load of around 140GW, which, charged at around $12.5 million per megawatt, works out to around $1.75 trillion in annual revenue.

If we assume that half of that gets built, that’s still $875 billion in annual revenue that will be needed to keep these data centers from running out of money as their margins are atrocious and they’re all paid for with onerous debt.
OpenAI and Anthropic project to make $184 billion and $174 billion in revenue in 2029, for a total of $358 billion in annual revenue. While Anthropic claims it will be profitable by then, I do not believe it will be, nor is it profitable at this point outside of financial engineering.
At present, there are no other major purchasers of AI compute outside of NVIDIA, hyperscalers (who are selling it to Anthropic and OpenAI, or they’re Meta, which has no AI strategy), OpenAI, and Anthropic. None. I can’t find a single one outside of Jane Street spending more than a few hundred million. We need a few hundred billion.
That’s already a huge problem, but the other problem is that we also need companies to spend dramatically more on AI services than they already do. While journalists are currently gooning over OpenAI and Anthropic making $6 billion or $10 billion in a given quarter, that’s just not enough! Both Anthropic and OpenAI need to be making $10 billion or more in monthly revenue by Q1 2028, or their growth rates aren’t going to support their compute commitments.

This is not hyperbole! Every single thing I have stated here precisely maps to the projections and promises of the AI industry. No matter how horny or flaccid you are for the potential of AI, it must grow at an astonishing, unstoppable rate from here until the end of time to be anything close to worthy of its costs.

Actually, sorry, let’s put judgments aside for a second, because this isn’t about judgment, but rather the promises that have been made by the software and hardware companies associated with AI. NVIDIA’s place atop the stock market and its ridiculous projections depend on both the continued flow of data center debt and the continued belief that AI services will have the revenue to back it up.

AI cannot, under any circumstances, slow down. In a year, Anthropic and OpenAI’s businesses have to be roughly twice the size they are today, and then double again basically every year until 2029 or 2030. In that time period, they must also both raise hundreds of billions of dollars or, alternatively, turn deeply unprofitable businesses into profitable ones while also doubling their revenues.

Alternatively, both must severely reduce their costs…except if they do that, they won’t have any need for all that compute capacity, which will deprive Oracle, Google, Microsoft, SpaceX, Cerebras, CoreWeave, TeraWulf, Cipher, and Hut8 of the $1.1 trillion in remaining performance obligations.

Also, if OpenAI can’t afford — or doesn’t want — its compute, Oracle will simply run out of money. It is spending anywhere from $340 billion to $700 billion (depending on whether you believe Jensen Huang in September 2025 or May 2026) on the 7.1GW of data centers it’s building for OpenAI. These, again, are not hyperbolic statements, but the actual costs associated with Oracle’s massive buildouts in Michigan, New Mexico, Wisconsin and Texas. I didn’t agree to do this! Larry Ellison did!

Sidenote: Larry Ellison has also got at least $21 billion in loans collateralized by his Oracle shares, and any doubts around Oracle’s ability to pay for its debts or OpenAI’s ability to pay Oracle for its compute will threaten massive margin calls. I wrote about this here. It’s really bad!

Whatever Everybody Is Spending On AI Right Now Is Insufficient, and We Need At Least Two Other OpenAIs To Justify The Compute Being Built

Apparently, Salesforce is planning to spend $300 million on Anthropic in 2026, to which I say “that’s not nearly enough”! Everybody has to be spending even more than that in the next few years, without fail, no ifs, ands, or buts. It is non-negotiable. Anthropic needs to be making over $100 billion in two years or it can’t afford its commitments, so you filthy token-hogs better slurp up your slop this instant, or Dario Amodei gets made part of the permanent underclass!

But seriously folks, the combined compute demand of every single AI company in the world doesn’t currently reach $100 billion — and it needs to be ten times that by 2030 or all those data centers got built for no reason!

And for that to happen, both Anthropic and OpenAI need to be making about $400 billion a year in annual revenue, which means there needs to actually be that much demand for AI services! Right now, Anthropic and OpenAI’s combined projected revenues for 2026 sit somewhere in the region of $60 billion — so, you know, they only need to grow by 496% by the end of 2029!

To make matters worse, it doesn’t seem like anyone else in the AI industry is going to help with the whole “demand for AI services or compute” thing. As The Information reported a few weeks ago, OpenAI and Anthropic make up 89% of all AI startup revenues.

We could include hyperscaler revenues, but that wouldn’t help very much. Microsoft’s $37 billion in AI annual run rate — these fucking cowards never share actual AI revenues! — is predominantly made up of OpenAI’s compute, with the rest of it (maybe $8 billion in annual revenue at best) from Microsoft harassing its permanently-abused customer base into installing Copilot.

Ah, shit, there’s another problem with Microsoft — Microsoft AI CEO Mustafa Suleyman just said that Anthropic’s models were too expensive, and he intended to reduce Microsoft’s use of them to zero! You can’t do that Mustafa! We need every cent of demand, otherwise everything falls apart!

Sidenote: Amazon and Meta barely have AI stories. Mark Zuckerberg just said he “thinks” Meta has a use for the vast amount of compute it’s bought or is developing, if you’re wondering how great things are going over there.

A source tells me Meta is working on a Tamagotchi-like pendant that uses OpenClaw, and when I heard that I felt exactly how I felt the first time I heard No Doubt’s Rock Steady — did I really used to like this dogshit when I was young?

Anyway, eager math-knowers among you might also notice that even if Anthropic and OpenAI spent $500 billion a year in annual compute — an amount that they can’t afford even if they combined both their unsustainable asses — we’d need at least another $250 billion or more in annual compute revenue to justify it.

In other words, they need everybody to be “doing agents” at such a scale that basically every third dipshit you run into on the street is sinking $50 or more a day into them.

I sure hope that’s happe-OH MY GOD!

AI Is Slowing Down Just As It Needs To Speed Up

As I discussed last week, you can’t measure the cost of a particular task with AI, nor can you measure its return on investment. The only reason that we’ve been “doing AI” with such ferocity and veracity is that most companies are beholden to Business Idiots disconnected from production who have no real understanding of their underlying firms’ outputs, and thus have very little way of measuring them.

These multi-millionaire midwits have been “doing AI” because everybody else is doing it, burning millions of dollars to turn their code into slop (see: Zillow) or have their engineers compete to see who can spend the most money (see: Meta and multiple other companies). In one case, a company spent $500 million on Anthropic’s models in a month because it didn’t set up spend controls. In Uber’s case, it burned through its entire annual token budget in a single quarter, which led to its COO saying it was harder to justify spending money on AI tokens because it couldn’t show a link between that spend and a meaningful increase in useful features on Uber. Now Uber has capped its employee spend at $1,500 a month per user, with T-Mobile temporarily following at $2,000 a month per user with the intent to move to a tiered system. Over at Brex, engineers are limited to $500 a week in tokens, with non-engineers getting an astonishingly-low $5 a week.

These are signs that AI’s revenue growth is slowing, and it’s likely going to slow further, because we currently live in an era where Anthropic and OpenAI are straight-up abusing its clients, providing limited-to-no visibility into spend, per the Wall Street Journal:

The shift to pricing based on usage, and measured by tokens—the basic unit of measurement for AI computing—is creating new challenges for even the most experienced finance teams. CFOs used to paying flat amounts for technology are finding costs more unpredictable and harder to model as they build agents and embark on ambitious AI investments.

Twenty-six percent of companies say they have a comprehensive view of their AI costs, while 50% have some visibility and 22% report no visibility or visibility after billing, according to an as-yet-unreleased survey from KPMG. “It’s a new resource that needs to be managed that didn’t exist quite that way, and we’re seeing exponential growth,” said Steve Chase, KPMG’s global head of AI.

How utterly ridiculous! Only in the frothiest, most-disconnected economy in history could we have companies spending millions (or tens or hundreds of millions) of dollars on a service without having any visibility into costs until after billing. This is not a sustainable revenue stream under any circumstances, and anybody who says that it is is either ignorant, a mark or a con artist. This is revenue made entirely by convincing your customers that something is true (AI is the most revolutionary thing ever!) and keeping them in the dark as long as humanly possible as they run up ridiculous bills, all in the hopes that you’ve brainwashed the executives/paypigs well enough that they’ll never stop.

And really, “paypig” is the accurate term for these cretins:

Russell Burke, Life360’s finance chief, said the company doesn’t yet have a real-time monitor of its token spending, but he hopes to have one soon. “We hope that’s right around the corner,” he said.

Russell, you may as well let Dario Amodei put a cigarette out on your forehead! This is pathetic! What a fucking loser! Oohhh, I sure hope that the company I pay all this money to lets me see how much I’m spending! I thought Silicon Valley was meant to be all about meritocracy!

Sidenote: I will say that it’s nice after two years of being called a crank and a doomer to read an outlet say exactly what I’ve been saying for years — that businesses will squeal when they are made to pay the true cost of AI.

Boosters will say that it’s “hard to measure productivity for any job outside of sales,” but that’s simply not true! If you let your engineers spend $1500 or more a month on a service, surely you must have some way of measuring how much actual new stuff went out — new features, customer tickets reduced, projects completed, I don’t know, I’m not the fuckwit spending $1,500 a month per person on this garbage! You’re the one that has to justify it!

But, fundamentally, these are all signs that AI is slowing down.

Remember: Anthropic and OpenAI only moved their customers to token-based billing in Q1 2026. It only took two or three months for us to get headline after headline of big, serious business publications saying “AI costs a lot of money and companies aren’t sure if there’s a return on investment.”

Sidenote: What do you think happens when regular people are forced to pay their token-based rates? Do you think they’ll spend more? If so, please read the many, many complaints from users of GitHub Copilot who have been on token-based billing for less than a week.

If things were going well, these stories would be inverted — companies would be boasting about their remarkable token spend and pointing to all the new, incredible things they were shipping. Their products would be spotless, their features sublime, their engineers sliding entire new stacks of impressive software out the door so fast that it would be changing the very nature of software. I mean…someone would be, right?

Let’s check out the chaAHHH!

What’s actually happening is that these tools are — at a remarkable price — shoving a lot of stuff out the door. Is the stuff good? No. Do people like or use it? No. Does it make money? Also no. While we’ve discovered the shovelware, that’s all that LLMs have given us — “more” apps, with the vast majority being useless, insecure slopware.

This is meant to be the era of agentic coding! This is meant to be the era where any dickhead with a Codex or Claude Code account with $1,000 of free API credits should be able to create the next Salesforce or whatever it was that dimwit Citrini talked about a few months ago.

I’m sorry to be a little surly and dismissive, but the AI industry has burned over a trillion dollars and I’ve spent two years being told I’m a luddite and an ape for not celebrating it. I don’t care! I’m not impressed! I’m not coddling this mediocre, expensive crap!

Like I said earlier: isn’t the tech industry meant to be a glorious bastion of meritocracy? Isn’t this meant to be a cold, harsh community of rationalists?

If so, why are we coddling AI like it’s the kid from that episode of the Twilight Zone? Has Silicon Valley become so decidedly whipped by the forces of capitalism that it can’t see that none of this makes sense? Or was this always just a culture of lemmings drawn in whatever direction venture capital waved a dollar bill?

To make matters worse, both OpenAI and Anthropic are speeding as fast as they can toward IPO — which means that both will have to start looking like real companies, which means both will, inevitably, start charging their customers more and very likely moving the vast majority of them to token-based billing and either kill or vastly limit their subsidized subscriptions.

The AI Companies Are Going To Start Getting Desperate

In a mysterious confluence of events, both Claude Code chief Boris Cherny and OpenAI-owned OpenClaw televangelist Peter Steinberger have both said that their users need to be “designing loops for their agents,” meaning “creating ways to make their agents burn a bunch of tokens doing stuff,” I imagine as part of the ongoing campaign by both Anthropic and OpenAI to make people spend lots of money on tokens to keep their enterprises afloat.

I expect that “loops” will become the next thing that journalists pick up on and start oinking about. To be clear, “loops” already exist, in that you can make an LLM decide to keep taking actions whether or not a user prompts it for as long as you’d like. Whether the output works at the end isn’t Peter or Boris’ problem, as both of them are allowed to burn anywhere from $130,000 to $1.3 million a month in tokens. As I’ve argued before (though referring to subsidized subscriptions):

Think of it like this: if you’re using an AI subscription with rate limits but no actual costs, any mistakes a model makes — such as getting stuck in a loop or just doing the wrong thing — can be dismissed as the troubled nature of early-stage technology, because the “cost” was $20, $100, or $200 for the entire month. Anthropic, OpenAI and every other AI company deliberately obfuscated these costs because they knew that the second a user actually had to pay for the fuckups of an AI model they’d scream like they were being stung to death by bees.

To be clear, this is both OpenAI and Anthropic’s representative stooges actively suggesting that you “shouldn’t be prompting coding agents anymore,” instead letting LLMs that hallucinate the more they “reason” (IE: make plans for themselves, which is how agents work) do as much reasoning as possible without user input.

These men have complete contempt for their users and customers. They do not give a shit that their models break so often that Notion had to cut access to Anthropic’s for several hours or that the costs are so severe that CFOs are a few bad bills from a trip to Budd Dwyer’s Favorite Lunch Spot. You must burn more tokens, because otherwise you won’t be doing AI coding right, whatever that means.

And please, god, stop trying to convince me this shit is impressive. You all sound like you’re in an abusive relationship trying to explain why a guy who rifles through your pockets and half-asses everything he does at an incredible cost is actually super sweet behind closed doors.

I’m distinctly unimpressed!

After hearing a particularly colourful story from Kevin Smith, I came up with the perfect way to explain the AI bubble. Okay, perfect might be a stretch, but I think this gets my point across, and hell, it’s a free newsletter, what’re you going to do? Kill me? Run me over with a truck? Good luck with that, I’m a huge homebody.

Anyway, imagine, if you will, a smaller version of the giant mechanical spider from Wild Wild West — a portable one that you sit in like a chair with big arms and big legs. The giant metal spider costs $1 million, and takes up about $40,000 of fuel every time you use it, but it can sometimes pick stuff up and make you dinner.

The problem, however, is that it’s a giant metal spider — sometimes it precisely grabs a diet coke from the fridge, and sometimes it punches a hole clean through it, requiring both a brand new fridge and for me to pay $40,000 regardless. The good news is that the companies that make the giant metal spider from Wild Wild West also subsidize the giant metal spiders at around $200 a month with free insurance, though businesses are forced to pay for its actual costs.

As I march it around my apartment, the giant metal spider leaves horrible scratch marks on my floor, it sometimes makes a terrible noise, but I, as the user, barely have to do anything — the spider does everything for me, even though whatever it “does” is incredibly costly, convoluted, and often takes far longer than it should.

Every update to the spider widens what it can allegedly do, but each time I use it it’s just as expensive. Can the spider make me a cup of coffee? Yes. It takes five minutes, which is longer than I’d take, and occasionally it throws the coffee in the air or simply fills the cup full of oil, but most of the time I get a cup of coffee. Isn’t that good? We love the giant metal spider.

When I turn on the news, I see a headline about how “THE GIANT METAL SPIDER FROM WILD WILD WEST WILL CHANGE EVERYTHING.” 30 different guys on Twitter write 800-word-long screeds about how we must redesign apartments and office buildings to cater to the spider, that “it’s inevitable that the metal spider from Wild Wild West will be how everybody does everything in the future,” and one guy even suggests that it’s alive because, after adding a $500,000 add-on, the giant metal spider can be scheduled to get up on its own and make the coffee. Sometimes it does so successfully. Sometimes it smashes the coffee maker up into tiny little pieces. Sometimes it mashes its legs through the kitchen island. Sometimes the spider opens up my Amazon packages with ease. Sometimes the spider rips them in two.

Thankfully, the companies behind the giant metal spiders subsidize them, so the average person only experiences the occasional act of destruction, but they also lose billions of dollars a year on training the spiders and the constant maintenance required to run them. There are some workplaces full of the giant metal spiders and they’re absolutely insufferable.

Everywhere I go, somebody is telling me the spider is the future. “The giant metal spider from Wild Wild West will eventually stop destroying stuff! Future innovations in giant metal spiders will make them cheaper and more-reliable! Look, we’ve done a study, and the giant metal spider’s ability to complete a task of a certain length 50% of the time has increased!”

Every time they add a new feature to the giant metal spider from Wild Wild West, it requires several hundred million dollars, and it isn’t always clear whether the giant metal spider learned anything new. It’s really good at opening Amazon packages, so they thought it might be able to make a bed, and spent $100 million training it to do so, only to find it kept karate chopping the bed in half approximately 20% of the time. Another time, the giant metal spider from Wild Wild West showed promise at playing Texas Hold ‘Em, successfully getting through an entire game 50% of the time. Unfortunately, the other 50% of the time it smashed the cards into the table. After another $100 million, they were able to reduce that number to 30%. A day later, The Atlantic ran a story: “Vegas Is Scared Of The Giant Metal Spider From Wild Wild West.”

Technically, the giant metal spider is productive, at least in some households where they give it significant room to maneuver and only give it tasks it’ll excel at. Across the world, private credit funnels billions into giant metal spider factories powered by NVIDIA chips, assuming that everybody will be paying to rent one of them. When you criticize the giant metal spiders, you’re told that you use them in the wrong scenarios, ones where they’re guaranteed to fail. Young graduates are encouraged to learn how to move the giant metal spider, and that if they fail to, they’ll be unable to explore the giant-sized future that will be built for them. Year after year, more people insist that the giant metal spider from Wild Wild West will get cheaper, but the costs only seem to increase along with the vast amounts of damage it causes.

It’s undeniable that the giant metal spider from Wild Wild West can do stuff. Sometimes it even does the stuff as well as a person. For some reason, it’s impossible to tell when it’ll get things wrong, and despite everybody saying that the giant metal spider from Wild Wild West is “smart,” it seems to occasionally do things the user didn’t ask for.

If you say that the giant metal spider from Wild Wild West isn’t going to be the future of anything due to its massive, unsustainable costs, or suggest that its inconsistencies make it unreliable in some way, you’re told you’re a doomer, a skeptic, a luddite and a rube.

One day, someone using one of the giant metal spiders from Wild Wild West steps on your car. Futurism writes an article laughing at you. You scream so loudly that one of your neighbors calls the police.

AI Needs To Keep Growing To Feed The Circular Economy, Except The Con Needed A Real Product At Some Point

No matter how much you dress up whatever AI service has gaslit you into believing it’s sentient, generative AI is inherently limited, impossibly expensive and economically unviable. Its services cost too much to run, its progenitors have no path to profitability, and no amount of rigged benchmarks and anecdotal examples of theoretical engineering teams that are “10x’d” can make up for the fact that you can’t measure the cost of an LLM-driven task or its return on investment.

Anyone claiming that you have to “measure AI’s ROI differently” is attempting to con either you or themselves. While it’s tough to measure the ROI of a particular worker or project, most workers and projects don’t increase your operating expenses by anywhere from 10% to 100% under the vaguest of promises that you might be “doing the future.” AI is calamitously expensive and, despite years of promises of it getting cheaper for both those running AI services and its customers, costs have only ever increased.

I think that’s by design. AI labs want their costs to be high so that they can continue growing at ridiculous rates, all so that they can keep feeding money to their hyperscaler compute partners who then invest that money right back into them, creating further reasons to keep buying NVIDIA GPUs, so that NVIDIA can then invest that money back into either AI compute providers (who OpenAI and Anthropic pay) or the AI labs themselves.

Concepts like “efficiency” or “cost reduction” run counter to the greater narrative of AI’s voracious sprawl of data center capex and still-theoretical AI revenue. If OpenAI or Anthropic were to seek profitability or sustainability (assuming these things were possible), that would create less demand for AI compute, which would mean less demand for Azure or Google Cloud or Amazon Web Services or CoreWeave or Oracle Cloud Infrastructure, which would in turn mean less demand for NVIDIA GPUs.

The problem with this marvelous plan is that at some point there had to be an honest transaction — real, honest, sustainable demand based on a reliable product that people liked paying for because they understood its value. Right now, AI revenues are either chaotically experimental or so thoroughly-subsidized that labs are giving away hundreds of dollars a user in the hopes that at some point said user might want to pay even more money for measurably less value, the kind of proposition you make when you think your customers are fucking idiots.

It only took a few months of token-based billing for the AI conversation to go from “our magical, beautiful agents” to “hmm, are we sure this is worth it?” and I believe it only gets worse from here. AI labs do not have some super secret trick up their sleeves — no, not even Mythos, that was bullshit I’m afraid — that will suddenly provide the kind of ROI that’s impossible to ignore, nor do they have some magical way to bring down their costs while also spending just as much on compute.

From here, we basically need to 10x every part of the AI stack based on the projections and commitments made by effectively every AI firm. Anthropic and OpenAI must grow faster than any company has ever grown before in the space of a few years, and suddenly become profitable, all while somehow raising hundreds of billions of dollars.

On top of that, we need at least another $250 billion in annual AI compute demand, which likely means at least two other OpenAI or Anthropic-scale companies. If this all sounds unreasonable, don’t blame me. I’m not the stupid fucker that agreed to build 100GW+ of data centers or mortgaged the future of Oracle on the off chance that Sam Altman and Dario Amodei, two craven manipulators, somehow work out how to create Google 2 and Amazon 2 in the space of four fucking years.

I Come Bearing Bad News For The AI Industry

I won’t tip my hand too much, but I have a story coming out in the next two weeks that will likely confirm the absolute worst fears of the AI industry. Many have been incredibly brazen about the potential losses of particular AI labs to the point that I made it my mission to talk to as many people in the tech industry as humanly possible, in part because some who have suggested that I “don’t speak to people who work in the tech industry.”

In truth, I speak with tech workers every single day of the week, and they’re in fucking agony.

If you are someone in the executive team of any major tech company, know that your employees are, for the most part, completely and utterly miserable. Your endless death march of “do as much AI as possible or we’ll fire you” and forcing them to use these tools day-in-day-out has radicalized them against you. Every day I hear from someone who is dealing with the wrath of a different Business Idiot who doesn't do anything other than demand more deliverables in a smaller timeframe with less people because you keep laying people off.

If you are a worker at a tech company, I fucking see you. I feel your pain. I hear your sadness. I am enraged and disgusted at the way you are being treated. Reach out to me at ezitron.76 on Signal with anything you’d like to share. I’ll protect your identity, listen to your stories, and if you share something with me that warrants publishing, I’ll make sure I do it justice by understanding the subject matter and reporting it in a way that it never gets back to you.

I’ve done this again and again, and will continue to do so, because I love my sources, I treat them with dignity, respect and empathy, and they, like me, find the current state of the tech industry wretched, its leaders worthless, its road maps directionless and its works mediocre.

Even if I don’t run with the story, I am here to listen, because I hate what you are going through. I feel your pain. So many of you truly love making good software and want to do good things in the world and feel impeded by the Business Idiots and mocked by the boosters who seem to care more about your bosses than anything to do with software or innovation. It sickens me what the industry has done to you and continues to do to you. You deserve better.

I write this newsletter because I deeply enjoy writing and I deeply hate what is being done to the computer. I hate that many people like me are suffering at the hands of the scumbags and freaks birthed from the guts of McKinsey and various MBA programs.

I don’t do this because of a short position. I don’t have one. I don’t hold any stocks, securities, or CFDs.

I do it because it’s my job and because I give a shit. If it’s impossible to comprehend why somebody would do something without a short position, you need to think long and hard about why you bother waking up every morning.

One of my sources has come forward and brought me a story that will possibly burst the AI bubble. The reason they brought this to me is that I’ve shown — and will continue to show — that I actually give a shit about this industry and the people in it.

If you’re wondering what the story is, know that it’s the information I’ve wanted for years, delivered as I have always wanted it, and I will treat it with the reverence it deserves. Imagine what the worst possible thing for me to get would be and you’re probably close.

I expect it to be out in the next two weeks, and you’ll know exactly when it runs. There’ll be a podcast and a newsletter, and very likely follow-on coverage elsewhere.

I can guarantee you it’ll be worth it, and you’ll be stunned by what I report.

If you liked this piece, you should subscribe to my premium newsletter. It’s $70 a year, or $7 a month, and in return you get a weekly newsletter that’s usually anywhere from 10,000 to 18,000 words, including vast, detailed analyses of the biggest events and companies in the AI bubble.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

21. Apple bets cheaper AI will woo small developers

Source: https://techcrunch.com/2026/06/08/apple-bets-cheaper-ai-will-woo-small-developers/
Site: TechCrunch
Author: Sarah Perez
Published: 2026-06-08
HN activity: 28 points · 11 comments
Length: 401 words (~2 min read)
Language: en-US

Image Credits:Apple

1:53 PM PDT · June 8, 2026

Apple is hoping to draw in newer developers with lower AI infrastructure costs, the company announced during its developer keynote at its Worldwide Developers Conference on Monday. The tech giant said that developers with fewer than 2 million first-time App Store downloads will be able to use its Foundation Models running in Private Cloud Compute, with no cloud API cost.

“It’s access to frontier-tier level intelligence with unparalleled privacy protections, because getting started exploring ideas shouldn’t be held back by infrastructure costs,” the presenter noted.

The “under 2 million” figure is another means of capturing the indie developer audience, similar to Apple’s efforts with the Small Business Program, where the company offers lower commission rates to smaller developers who are just starting to build their applications and aren’t yet earning millions.

Apple also noted that the Foundation Models framework is expanding this year to include image input and support for server models. That means the API can now integrate with the cloud model provider of developers’ choice, to ensure getting started with a large cloud model is as “accessible as possible,” as needed for more complex tasks, said Apple.

The move reflects a growing reality in the AI industry that experimentation is no longer cheap. By waiving infrastructure fees for smaller developers, Apple is positioning its models as a lower-cost alternative for those developers who don’t want to take on additional cloud bills.

Small developers aren’t the only ones tightening their belts these days. Tech giants like Meta and Amazon have discontinued their internal AI token usage leaderboards, where developers once competed to burn cash by experimenting with AI tools. Uber, meanwhile, recently said it had run through its 2026 AI budget in just four months, news that some have taken as a need for more fiscal responsibility when it comes to AI.

Topics

When you purchase through links in our articles, we may earn a small commission. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

Sarah Perez

Sarah has worked as a reporter for TechCrunch since August 2011. She joined the company after having previously spent over three years at ReadWriteWeb. Prior to her work as a reporter, Sarah worked in I.T. across a number of industries, including banking, retail and software.

You can contact or verify outreach from Sarah by emailing sarahp@techcrunch.com or via encrypted message at sarahperez.01 on Signal.

View Bio

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

22. Games Between Programs: The Ruliology of Competition

Source: https://writings.stephenwolfram.com/2026/06/games-between-programs-the-ruliology-of-competition/
Site: writings.stephenwolfram.com
Submitter: andromaton (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-05 23:36 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 14 points · 0 comments
Length: 7.4K words (~33 min read)
Language: en

The Basic Setup

Whether one’s dealing with biology, economics, politics or a host of other fields, it’s common to encounter situations that can be modeled as involving two agents that repeatedly compete with each other. One imagines that at each step each agent can take one of a certain set of actions, and that then—in a classic game theory way—each agent (or “player”) gets a certain fixed “payoff” based on the action they and their opponent take. But how do the agents decide what action to take? We imagine that each agent has a certain fixed procedure—or “strategy”—for making its decisions. And we imagine that the input to each of those decisions is the sequence of past actions that the agent and its opponent have taken.

There’s been lots of work done over the course of nearly a century on particular choices of strategies. But something I’ve long been curious about is what happens if one systematically considers all possible strategies. And if we think of strategies as programs this becomes a question to which we can immediately apply ruliological methods. Which is what I’m going to do here.

To be more specific about the setup, let’s assume that at each step, each agent takes one of two possible actions, indicated by and . And for now let’s take the payoffs to be the ones for the classic “match-or-not” (“matching pennies”) game—in which player 1 has the bigger payoff when there’s a match, and player 2 has the bigger payoff when there isn’t a match:

So what happens when agents repeatedly play this game? Well, it depends on their strategies. Here are a few examples for several different choices of each agent’s strategy:

Plotting the cumulative payoffs for the two agents (represented by and ) in each of these cases we get:

Often we’ll consider the “winning agent” to be the one that has the numerically largest cumulative payoff (i.e. is eventually on top in these plots) after a certain number of steps. And with a criterion like this, we’ll be able to rank different programs against each other—and in general explore the ruliology of competition.

With the basic setup we’re using, we can represent all possible sequences of actions by a multiway graph:

For any given sequence of actions, there is then a cumulative payoff for each agent for our match-or-not game:

If each agent adopts a particular strategy, this will define a particular path through the multiway graph. For the strategies used in the examples above, the paths are:

What does it take to have a winning strategy? In what follows, we’ll consider strategies based on several different types of programs. But one basic question we can always ask is whether what turn out to be the winning strategies tend to be based on programs that are more complicated, or less so—or to show behavior that is more complicated, or less so.

In other words, if you want to win, should you typically be trying to build up something complicated? Or should you instead expect to be able to find a “simple hack” that will “crack the game” and—at least usually—let you win? In effect, we’re asking whether competition tends to lead to complexity, or simplicity.

I’ve recently looked at minimal models of both biological evolution and machine learning, in which one is adaptively evolving programs in order to maximize some externally imposed fitness function. And what I’ve found is that even when the fitness function one uses is simple, the behavior of the programs that maximize it is normally quite complex. In other words, adaptive evolution will tend to make even a simple, fixed objective be achieved in a complicated way.

So what if instead of having a fixed, externally imposed objective, our goal is just broadly to win against other agents? Does such—potentially open-ended—competition lead us to more complex behavior (or more complex programs), or not? That’s the kind of question we’re going to be able to explore here by looking at the ruliology of competition.

Strategies from Finite State Machines

Finite state machines can be thought of as defining extremely simple programs (that might model pathways in biology, decision processes in economics, etc.). And to start our investigation of the ruliology of competition we’re going to look at strategies defined by finite state machines.

A typical example of a finite state machine (here with 3 states) is:

We’re going to use this finite state machine to define a strategy for an agent. To see how this works, let’s say that the sequence of actions taken by the agent’s opponent have been:

The idea is to use this sequence of actions to define a path in the finite-state-machine graph, then to determine the next action from the color of the state reached. We start at the vertex with the incoming arrow, then successively follow the edge whose color matches the next move made by the opponent:

At the end of this process we’ll reach some vertex in the graph (i.e. some state in the finite state machine). In the particular case shown here, the state we reach is . And then we take the output of the strategy—i.e. the next action for the agent to take—to be .

It’s sometimes convenient to show the states of the finite state machine arranged on a line:

And then we can summarize the path taken with a certain input by showing the successive states reached:

So what happens if two finite state machines compete? The basic idea is that the successive outputs from one machine become the successive inputs to the other, and vice versa. If our second machine is

then we can represent the behavior of the machines by:

If the payoffs we use are for the match-or-not game, then their cumulative values for these machines are

so that in the end agent 2 can be considered the winner.

It’s important to note here that in the setup we’re using, everything is deterministic: at every step, each agent takes an action that is deterministically computed using its strategy from the past history of moves. It’s a different setup from what’s most often studied in game theory, where each move is in effect considered independently, but where there can be probabilities for different actions (“mixed strategies”)—and where in the end averaging is done over “different possible rolls of the dice”.

The Space of Possible Finite State Machines

The number of possible graphs for finite state machines with s states is (2 s2)s. But some of those graphs correspond to machines with identical behavior—so that the number of distinct machines is smaller:

2-State Machines

In the 2-state case, the 22 distinct machines are

where we’ve identified each machine by a number.

So what happens if pairs of these machines compete? Here are a few examples, where in each case we’re identifying the average payoff (here for 10 rounds of the match-or-not game):

(In all competitions between pairs of finite state machines, the sequence of moves ultimately has to become periodic—with a period equal at most to the product of the number of states in each machine.)

What happens if each of the 22 distinct 2-state machines competes against each of the other ones? We can summarize the results by showing the mean (long-term) payoff for every pair of machines (the payoff is for each machine “playing as agent 1”; in match-or-not, the payoff is negated if “playing as agent 2”):

So what machine is the “overall winner”? One way to assess this is to look at the average of the mean payoffs achieved by a given machine when competing with all other (distinct) machines:

The winner by this measure is then machine 26:

Running this machine against all (distinct) 2-state machines we get the following mean payoffs:

The actual behavior in each case—which doesn’t itself depend on the payoffs, only on the machines involved—is:

What are the “runners-up” to the winning machine? Here are all the distinct machines, ranked by their mean payoffs:

Here’s what happens if we play the top 3 runners-up against all machines:

We can summarize how a machine behaves by showing the history of its behavior when playing against all other machines (or, in effect, by putting together the first columns in pictures like the ones above). Here are the results for all the machines (for 15 steps), ordered from highest average score down:

(Once again, these pictures are completely determined just from the machines involved; the payoffs in the match-or-not game determine only their ordering.)

One footnote to what we’ve been saying here has to do with how many steps of competition we are getting the machines to do. For all finite-state machines, the behavior must eventually become periodic—and for 2-state machines the maximum period is 4 steps, with a maximum transient of 3 steps. But the actual average mean payoffs vary with the total number of steps one considers:

It’s notable that at the least for the first few steps, the rankings move around:

But in this case it doesn’t take too many steps for the ultimate winner to be clear (later on we’ll see examples where it takes much longer).

(There are other subtleties as well. One of them is that we are computing average payoffs by playing every machine against every other distinct machine. In principle we could also include other equivalent machines—which would slightly change the weighting of our averages. But since we’re really concerned with strategies, not machines as such, the scheme we’re using seems more appropriate.)

3-State Machines

For the 956 distinct machines with s = 3 states, the corresponding “competitive array” (after 1000 steps) is:

The average mean payoff for each of the machines (i.e. the average across each row in the “competitive array”) is then

while the distribution of these average mean payoffs is:

The top few machines for the match-or-not game are then:

Running the top machine (s = 3 machine 1164) against all (distinct) 3-state machines we get the following mean payoffs:

The distribution of possible limiting mean payoffs here is:

And the most common forms of behavior seen are:

The maximum possible period for a competition between two 3-state machines is 9. Machine 1164 never quite achieves this; its maximum period of 7 occurs when competing with machines 2546 and 2755 (both giving limiting mean payoff –1):

If one looks at all possible pairs of 3-state machines, there turn out to be 792 that yield period-9 behavior, examples being:

(These have no transients; the maximum transient for 3-state machines turns out to be 8.)

An Aside: What Do We Mean by “Average”?

We’ve talked about how a machine does “on average” when competing with all other (distinct) machines. But what do we mean by “on average”? So far, we’ve taken the “average” to be the mean of the payoffs obtained by competing with each other machine (and the payoffs here are themselves means across successive steps). But what if we use the median instead of the mean? Here are the median payoffs from running each machine for 1000 steps against all other machines:

The standout winning machine here is machine 1172:

The mean payoffs and their distributions in this case are:

And the median is “anomalously high” because with this machine exactly 1/2 of all mean payoffs are +1. (The corresponding mean is pulled down by the “left tail” in the distribution of mean payoffs.)

The Complexity of Winning

Let’s look (basically as above) at the actual behavior of each of the distinct 2-state finite state machines when competing against all other 2-state machines, ordered from smallest average mean payoff to largest:

The cases with 0 average mean payoff look simple in their behavior. But for other average mean payoffs, the behavior of a given machine competing against all others seems more complicated.

We can get some sense of this complexity by looking at the compressed size (as obtained from Compress) of the array of behavior shown above:

Here’s the corresponding result for the 956 distinct 3-state machines—showing no strong correlation between average mean payoff and our estimate of the complexity of behavior:

And indeed among machines with the highest average mean payoffs there is still quite a diversity of levels of complexity in behavior

with the “behavior traces” of the machines indicated being

and

In other words, at least in this case, we really can’t say that winning machines are characterized either by being particularly complex in their behavior, or particularly simple. It seems that it’s detailed structure, rather than overall features, that determines what machines will win.

Competitions between Machines of Different Sizes

Can finite state machines with more states systematically do better (i.e. achieve larger payoffs) than ones with fewer states? The best average mean payoff any 2-state machine can achieve when competing with all other 2-state machines is about 0.151. But if, for example, we consider 3-state machines competing (for 1000 rounds) against 2-state machines, the best average mean payoff is instead 0.593:

Looking at the distribution of possible average mean payoffs, we see that the distribution of average mean payoffs is wider for 3-state machines than for 2-state ones—a fact that is at least partly just a consequence of there being many more possible 3-state machines than 2-state ones:

But something that’s notable is that the very broadest distribution is for 3-state machines competing against 2-state ones: in effect it seems that with their larger collection of possible strategies, the 3-state machines can do better at “outmaneuvering” the 2-state ones.

The 3-state machine that does the best overall against 2-state machines is machine 1234:

It doesn’t always definitively win (with mean payoff +1), but does so the majority of the time:

How does it achieve this? Basically, for lots of different 2-state machines, this particular 3-state machine manages to behave just as they do:

In some sense, there are facets of the 3-state machine that “resonate” with many 2-state ones:

How about 4-state machines? The 4-state machine that does best overall against 2-state machines is machine 109828:

Out of the 22 2-state machines, it only gets less than payoff +1 in 6 cases:

Here’s the behavior for all 22 cases:

And once again we can think of the 4-state machine as successfully “covering” most of the 2-state behaviors:

Adaptive Evolution of Finite State Machines

In many practical situations where there’s competition, there’s a way for the agents that are competing to evolve. So can we make a minimal model of this using finite state machines?

In what we’ve done so far, we’ve always been looking at a space of all possible finite state machines. But what about sequences of machines found by adaptive evolution? Is there, for example, a way to adaptively evolve machines to do progressively better in competitions?

The first step in doing this is to see how we might make successive mutations to finite state machines. A simple approach is to say that any given mutation can affect either a random vertex or a random edge in the graph of a machine. For a vertex, the mutation just reverses its color. For an edge, it either reverses the color, or “reroutes” the edge to a different vertex (with the constraint that doing so doesn’t disconnect the graph). Applying a sequence of such mutations at random gives for example

or, with a different graph rendering:

(Note that we’re mutating machines in whatever form we find them; we’re not worrying about equivalences between machines, or the canonicalization of machines.)

Imagine we have an opponent machine—like 3-state machine 1165—that usually forces a lose, i.e. limiting payoff –1 (for example about half the time when competing with other 3-state machines):

Now we can ask whether we can adaptively evolve a machine that will win against this opponent. In order to give our adaptive evolution process some “room to maneuver” we’ll use a 4-state machine. We can start with a random such machine, say

which “loses” (always having payoff –1) against machine 1165:

To do adaptive evolution, we now make successive random mutations to this machine, “accepting” a mutation if it doesn’t decrease the mean payoff, and otherwise rejecting it. The result is a typical “fitness curve” in which most mutations (indicated by red dots) don’t lead to improvement in the payoff—but there are some that lead to “breakthroughs” where the payoff increases (sometimes only by a small amount), with the payoff eventually reaching the maximum value of +1:

The various “breakthroughs” progressively converge on a “perfect solution” with payoff +1:

Concatenating the successive results over the course of the adaptive evolution process, we can see the eventual convergence to the perfect solution where the actions of the two agents always match:

With different random mutations, the “fitness curve” will be different in detail, though will have the same general form. And the same is true with different specific opponents.

By the way, using our way of numbering finite state machines, we can make a plot of how the process of adaptive evolution “moves the machine around in rule space”:

But what happens if we do as we have done above, and ask about the mean payoff averaged over all possible finite-state-machine opponents of a given size? For example, how well can 4-state machines do against all possible 2-state machines?

Starting with the same random 4-state machine as before, a typical fitness curve is:

The fitness here increases, but never reaches +1. The behavior of successive “breakthrough” machines playing against all size-2 machines is:

And we can see that even the best machine we get still loses to some of the 2-state machines, yielding in the end an average mean payoff of about 0.62.

So what happens if we look at machines that have more states? With 10 states, for example, it is possible to adaptively evolve to a machine that achieves limiting payoff +1 against every single 2-state machine:

The final machine obtained in this case

can be thought of as a kind of (2-state) “universal winner”—that ultimately wins against all 2-state machines:

How does it do it? In some sense the machine is big enough that it can have different “specialized parts” for different opponents. And if we look at how the machine behaves we indeed see that with different opponents the machine settles into different subsets of its complete space of states:

And even if we consider all 956 3-state machines as opponents, our machine continues to do well. It doesn’t win in all cases, but it still achieves an average mean payoff of +0.603:

Some examples where the machine doesn’t win—in effect because it doesn’t contain as a submachine something to deal with a particular opponent—include:

So far we’ve considered the adaptive evolution of a single machine competing either against a single fixed opponent, or against a collection of fixed opponents. But what if both the machine and its opponent are undergoing adaptive evolution?

For example, let’s say that on alternating adaptive evolution steps we do a mutation on a machine and on its opponent. We keep the mutation for each machine if the (mean) payoff for that machine does not decrease; otherwise we reject it.

With this setup, here’s the evolution of mean payoffs for two (initially identical) 4-state machines:

There are periods where one machine wins, and periods where its opponent wins—as visible in the actual successive behaviors of the machines:

The actual machines found by adaptive evolution move around in rule space—soon losing memory of what they initially were:

Not much changes if the number of states in the machines change, or aren’t the same—though there is typically less alternation of winners for machines with more states, presumably because each individual mutation tends to have less effect on behavior if there are more states.

What About Prisoner’s Dilemma?

Everything we’ve done so far has been based on the particularly simple game of match-or-not (“matching pennies”). So what happens with other games? And in particular with the famous “prisoner’s dilemma” game? Here are the payoffs for this game

where in the usual narrative for the game one interprets as “defect” and as “cooperate”.

Just as above, we can imagine defining strategies for the prisoner’s dilemma game based on finite state machines. Here are a few examples of iterated games between 2-state machines—now with payoffs determined by the prisoner’s dilemma game:

In the case of match-or-not, it was visually easy to tell whether a particular payoff was ±1 or 0 just by seeing whether the actions of the agents matched at a particular step. Here it’s not quite so visually obvious.

But using the payoffs for the prisoner’s dilemma game we can compute the cumulative payoffs for these examples (and, unlike in match-or-not, which is a zero-sum game, the payoffs for the two agents don’t sum to zero at each step):

Much as we did before, we can now consider competitions between agents whose strategies are based on all possible 2-state finite state machines (for match-or-not the zero-sum nature of the game makes the resulting array of payoffs symmetrical; here there’s symmetry only from the fact that the payoffs remain the same if one interchanges the roles of agent 1 and agent 2):

With this setup, we can now ask what machine is the “overall winner”—say in the sense that it has the largest average mean payoff playing against all other (distinct) 2-state machines:

The answer turns out to be machine 30:

In the literature of prisoner’s dilemma this is often called “grim trigger”, because it yields a strategy that starts with , then repeats this until its opponent first gives —after which it always gives .

Running this machine against all other 2-state machines we get the following behaviors

corresponding to the following mean payoffs:

Looking at the average mean payoff for all 2-state machines, the ranking of these machines is:

It’s notable that machine 22 (which corresponds to the famous “tit-for-tat” strategy)

is quite far down in this ranking, even though it’s often identified as the most successful in collections of human-suggested strategies.

The rankings we’ve just given are based on average mean payoffs obtained after many iterations of the prisoner’s dilemma game. But if we do only a few iterations, the rankings can be different:

Zooming in at the beginning we can then see that machine 30 only starts to win after 13 steps:

Machine 20 gives a constant average mean payoff of –1 obtained from

while machine 30 yields an average mean payoff given by – – , limiting to – ≈ –0.86.

So what about 3-state machines? This gives the average mean prisoner’s dilemma payoff for each of these machines:

The distribution of these average mean payoffs is:

The machines with the highest ultimate average mean payoffs are:

But this ordering emerges only after more than 500 steps

with the crossover of average mean payoffs being surprisingly complex:

(The seemingly quite random variation of average mean payoffs reflects the combining of many different periods in the always-ultimately-periodic behavior of competitions between machines.)

So how do 3-state machines do compared to 2-state machines in the prisoner’s dilemma game? Running 2-state machines against each other, machine 30 gets the highest average mean payoff of about –0.866. Meanwhile, for 3-state machines running against each other, the highest average mean payoff achieved is the very slightly smaller –0.885. What about 2-state machines running against 3-state ones? They don’t do well. Machine 30 does the best—but now it gives an average mean payoff not of –0.866 but instead of about –0.97.

But now, running 3-state machines against 2-state ones, the best average mean payoff is larger—about –0.80, as achieved by machine 2743

with the mean payoffs obtained by running it against each possible 2-state machines being:

How about 4-state machines? Running all these against 2-state machines, the overall winner is machine 336766 with average mean payoff –0.77:

The mean payoffs against each 2-state machine in this case

are very similar to those for the winning 3-state machine, the only different behaviors occurring when the opponents are 2-state machines 20 and 30:

Summarizing these results, the winning machines with small numbers of states that we’ve found for prisoner’s dilemma are:

But what about machines with more states—that we might find by adaptive evolution? Here’s an example of adaptive evolution for 10 states, competing against all 2-state machines:

After 1000 steps of this adaptive evolution, we get the 10-state machine

with average mean payoff –0.73.

The behavior of this machine competing with all 2-state machines is:

The Space of All Possible Games

We’ve now looked at two specific examples of games—match-or-not and prisoner’s dilemma—and we’ve seen very similar phenomena in both cases. But what about other games?

If we allow payoffs –1 and +1 (as in match-or-not) there are a total of 256 possible games:

Of these, 16 are zero sum (like match-or-not)—in the sense that the sum of the payoffs for the two agents is always zero), and 16 are symmetric (like prisoner’s dilemma)—in the sense that the payoff for the two agents is always the same.

For each of the 256 possible games, we can compute the average mean payoffs for each possible 2-state finite state machine competing with all 2-state machines:

The winning average mean payoffs for these 256 games are always –1, 0 or +1:

In most cases, many machines achieve the maximum payoff; across all games, this is the number of times each machine is a winner:

What about when we look at more games—for example ones with payoffs –1, 0, +1? There are 6561 such games. And the story is very much the same, with some slight differences:

Cellular Automaton Strategies

Everything we’ve done here so far has been based on using finite state machines as our source of strategies. Now we’re going to turn to another source of strategies: cellular automata.

The setup we’re going to use takes the actions of our agents to be determined by running cellular automaton rules. The basic idea is that at each step the initial conditions for the cellular automaton are given by the sequence of actions taken by the opponent so far. The next action of our agent is then determined by the value of the cell obtained by running the cellular automaton for as many steps as there were actions taken so far by the opponent.

More specifically, let’s say the rules for our cellular automaton are:

And let’s say the actions taken by the opponent so far have been:

Then the idea is to run the cellular automaton with these as initial conditions

and to extract the final cell value to determine the next action to take.

So, for example, if our two competing cellular automata have rules

then the successive steps in running them against each other give

where in our pictures everything about the second rule has been reversed. The actions taken on each step can now be read off either from the opponent initial conditions, or from the outer diagonals of the final pattern generated:

To analyze “competition” between rules we can assign payoffs, say from the match-or-not game:

And in this case we get the following cumulative payoffs:

There are altogether 16 possible cellular automaton rules of the kind we’re using here:

Running each one against every other we get the following array of limiting mean payoffs:

Some notable “competitions” include:

The cumulative mean (match-or-not) payoffs in these cases are:

For most of these pairs of rules the winner quickly becomes clear. But for the case of rule 6 vs. rule 7 it’s more complicated—and after 500 steps it’s still not at all clear which rule will win:

The underlying behavior is:

On their own, these two rules behave in rather simple ways (indeed, rule 7 is just XOR):

But when they’re set up in competition, the effective rule that emerges has much more complex—and apparently unpredictable—behavior, with no sign, for example, of periodicity.

Looking across all the rules, the one with the largest average mean payoff turns out to be rule 14:

In a sense, rule 14 finds a very “simple solution”, generating either constant or period-2 behavior, and forcing its opponent to do likewise—and in the end giving an average mean payoff of exactly – ≈ –0.69:

What about with more complicated cellular automaton rules? Are the winners still ones with simple behavior?

Let’s look at the 3-color analogs of our cellular automaton rules. There are 332 = 19683 of these. And in each case we can “make a decision about the next action” by looking at the final value mod 2. Running all these rules against the 16 2-color rules the distribution of scores is:

And once again the best-performing rules (such as rule 15911) behave in rather simple ways:

Looking—as we did for finite state machines—at the compressed size of patterns versus the average mean payoff in the corresponding competition

we see that the highest payoff rules tend to behave in simpler ways.

The rules with the most complicated behavior (at least by this measure) have average mean payoffs near zero. A typical example is rule 11948:

Some of the more complicated competitions in this case are:

What about different games with different payoffs? The underlying behavior of particular rules competing with each other will always be the same. But their payoffs will be different. And so, for example, in prisoner’s dilemma, the cumulative payoffs for 2-color rule 6 vs. 2-color rule 7 are now:

Playing each 2-color rule against all others the average mean payoffs obtained are:

Rule 13 has the highest average mean payoff (of –1), and shows fairly simple behavior:

Looking at compressed size versus average mean payoff for games between 3-color and 2-color rules, the phenomenon of high payoff being associated with simpler behavior seems even more marked for prisoner’s dilemma than for match-or-not:

Cellular Automata vs. Finite State Machines

We’ve looked at finite state machines competing with finite state machines, and cellular automata competing with cellular automata. But what about cellular automata competing with finite state machines?

Here’s an example of a particular step in a competition between a cellular automaton and a finite state machine

and here are the cumulative payoffs in this case for the match-or-not game:

Running all 16 cellular automaton rules of this type against all 2-state finite state machines the mean payoffs are:

Averaging over all finite state machines, the mean payoffs for the possible cellular automata are:

Rather boringly, the winning cellular automaton is rule 0, which generates in response to anything any finite state machine does:

This yields an average mean payoff of only +0.181. But what if we use 3-color cellular automata? Here are the average mean payoffs in that case—with the winning case highlighted:

Summarizing the various competitions between different types of strategies, we see that—running against 2-state finite state machines—the most successful competitors are, by a small margin, 3-color cellular automata:

Adaptive Evolution of Cellular Automaton Strategies

Just as we did above for finite state machines, we can consider adaptive evolution of cellular automaton rules (which is also something I’ve studied in other contexts somewhat extensively elsewhere). As a first case, let’s consider adaptively evolving a 4-color cellular automaton rule to get the best mean payoff against the most successful 3-state finite state machine above, machine 1165. At each step of adaptive evolution, we’ll randomly change one of the 42 = 16 cases in the cellular automaton rule, keeping this mutation if it gets us at least the payoff we had before. We get a typical adaptive evolution fitness curve, with the mean payoff limiting to +1:

The “breakthroughs” correspond to the following rules:

And as is often the case, the early breakthroughs are somewhat complicated, but in the end the “solution” that emerges shows rather simple behavior—something we can see at least some evidence for if we put the results at successive mutation steps together:

What about adapting cellular automata to compete with other cellular automata? As an example, let’s use adaptive evolution to find a 6-color cellular automaton with the largest average mean payoff when competing with all 16 of the 2-color cellular automata we’ve considered. Here’s a typical fitness curve for this case:

After 1000 mutation steps, it’s reached a rule that gives average mean payoff 0.91. And here’s what happens when that rule competes with all our 2-color rules:

What if (as for finite state machines above) both a rule and its opponent are undergoing adaptive evolution—say on alternating steps? Here’s an example of the successive payoffs one gets with a pair of 4-color rules:

And here are the corresponding actual behaviors:

What are the underlying cellular automata doing? Here are results at a sequence of mutation steps—illustrating that adaptive evolution can select both rules with very simple behavior and ones with somewhat more complex behavior:

Turing Machine Strategies

We’ve looked at strategies based on finite state machines and strategies based on cellular automata. Now let’s talk about strategies based on Turing machines. For our purposes, we can think of Turing machines as in some ways interpolating between finite state machines and cellular automata—though they also introduce some entirely new features.

Our basic setup will be to use the opponent’s actions as initial values on a Turing machine tape, with the latest value on the right, which is where the Turing machine head is initially placed. We then run the Turing machine until its head goes further to the right than it’s ever gone before, at which point we determine the next action from the value that appears at the initial head position.

For example, consider a Turing machine defined by the rule:

Then imagine that the sequence of opponent actions so far is:

Running the Turing machine with this as its initial condition we get the following:

And from this we can then read off “the next move” according to our “Turing machine strategy”, in this case .

In our finite state machine and cellular automaton setups we did just one step of evolution for each step in our game. In our Turing machine setup, at every step in our game we’re running the Turing machine for as many steps as it takes for the head to go further to the right than it started.

Here’s what happens if we take a particular sample 3-state finite state machine

and have it compete with the Turing machine above:

With match-or-not the cumulative mean payoffs here are:

There are a total of 4096 Turing machines of the type we’re using here (with s = 2 states and k = 2 colors). Running each of these against our sample 3-state machine the mean payoffs in the match-or-not game for all the Turing machines are:

There are several Turing machines that have limiting mean payoffs of +1. An example is machine 2529:

There’s a tricky issue that comes up here, though. Our Turing machine strategy works by running a Turing machine until its head goes further to the right than it started—so that we can consider that it halts. But what if it never halts, as in:

For our purposes we’re just saying that in this case, the payoff is undefined. And if such an undefined payoff ever occurs in a particular game, we assume the mean payoff for the whole game is undefined—leaving a gap in the plot above.

What if we have Turing machines compete against, say, all distinct 2-state finite state machines? Here are the average mean payoffs in that case (the gaps are for machines that don’t halt):

The maximum of +0.4 is achieved for Turing machine 2403

which yields the following behaviors and limiting payoffs when competing with each of the 22 distinct 2-state finite state machines:

So what about Turing machines competing with Turing machines? To keep things manageable, we can look at 1-state Turing machines, of which there are only 16 (with k = 2). Running each of these machines against each other, the array of mean payoffs is (the gray entries correspond to cases where one of the Turing machines doesn’t halt):

The average mean payoff for each of these machines is given by:

The “winner” among the machines is Turing machine 13:

Running this machine against all other s = 1, k = 2 Turing machines the behaviors we get are:

If we look at the cumulative payoffs, we see that many give mean payoffs that approach 1, though some do not, yielding in the end an average mean payoff of about +0.81:

A typical competition between 2-state Turing machines is

which yields a slightly more complicated pattern of cumulative payoffs:

What happens if 2-state and 1-state Turing machines compete? Here’s the array of mean payoffs for all 4096 2-state machines running against the 16 1-state machines:

The average mean payoffs for 2-state machines are as follows—again with maximum 0.81:

Discussion

We’ve now seen many examples of the ruliology of competition. And, perhaps more than anything else, it’s now clear that if we look—ruliologically—at all possible programs of particular types, the picture of how competition works is quite complicated, even when all the programs involved are simple.

In a sense, this is a typical result of computational irreducibility: to know how competitions between programs will work out, there’s basically no choice but to run them and see what happens.

Sometimes the programs that win do so in very simple ways—in effect “exploiting simple hacks”. But in other cases, things are more complicated. Sometimes two competing programs with both show complex behavior, and in a sense, it’ll “just so happen” that one of them wins. But sometimes the win will be more systematic. And typically this happens because the behavior effectively plugs into some pocket of computational reducibility that systematically out-competes opponents of a certain type.

We’ve mostly looked at extremely simple programs which in some sense inevitably have to “expose the same rules” to every competitor. But particularly if we have a fairly small collection of competitors, a sufficiently large program can in effect expose a different part of its rules for different competitors, and so have a “customized substrategy” that separately wins against different possible competitors.

In looking at adaptive evolution of strategies we’ve often dealt with larger programs. And we’ve typically seen that the adaptive evolution can be quite successful at finding winning strategies. But—as is typically the case with adaptive evolution—there’s no obvious way to “describe the mechanism” of the strategies that are produced. Instead, it’s more like what we’ve seen in other studies of adaptive evolution: the process of evolution puts together certain “lumps of irreducible computation” that in our case here in effect “just happen” to be competitively successful.

Different games—corresponding to different patterns of payoffs—lead to results that are different in detail. And if one constructs a detailed narrative about the course of a game, it may well seem different for different games. But at an overall level, there seems to be remarkable similarity between different games—and the key phenomena seem very much the same.

What does this all say about practical situations where there’s competition between agents? One thing is that it’s typically going to be difficult to “predict in advance” or “prove a theorem” about what the best strategy will be. There’s enough computational irreducibility that one will basically just have to try running different competitions and seeing what happens. And in a sense the very diversity of behavior we’ve seen here supports the idea that ruliological investigation is critical. Finding some simple parametrization of possible strategies won’t be enough to get an accurate sense of everything that can happen. There’s no choice but to systematically enumerate some version of “all computationally possible strategies”. Which is what we can do in our ruliological investigations.

And, yes, what we’ve done here just scratches the surface of studying the ruliology of competition. For a start, one can scale up the size of the programs, and see what new phenomena occur. One can expect that mostly things will be the same—with computational irreducibility the dominant force. But there may be new and unexpected pockets of reducibility, perhaps each with their own “paths to competitive success”.

One can also imagine investigating different kinds of computational systems—that serve as metamodels appropriate for different applications. The Principle of Computational Equivalence suggests that there’ll be a certain universality to the overall results. But details will be different. And those details will potentially be important, particularly in interpreting results for very different domains. Even if what matters for ultimate purposes of competition is well captured by finite state machines—or a cellular automata—the way one gets to these from microscopic biology, human decision making, societal interactions, AI competition, etc. may be very different.

Historical & Personal Notes

There’s a long history to formal studies of games—and indeed early developments in areas like combinatorics and probability were largely driven by them. The modern field known as game theory emerged in the 1940s, concentrating on the question of optimal strategies given particular patterns of payoffs. Most often the idea is to analyze what happens when each player makes a single move—albeit perhaps a probabilistic one, with averages taken over many instances. Fairly complete (though sometimes complicated) mathematical results have been derived for this kind of setup (and are now, for example, implemented in the Wolfram Language). But what about repeated, or iterated, games of the kind we’ve been discussing here? In the early days of game theory there was discussion about defining strategies as arbitrary mappings from histories to actions—and various rather abstract mathematical results were proved, particularly for applications in economics.

But by the 1970s there started to emerge the idea that one should model agents as having “bounded rationality”, and corresponding to limited computational systems. And by the end of the 1970s computer experiments were being done on competition between what amounted to simple programs. A notable example was the tournament organized by Bob Axelrod for the prisoner’s dilemma game. In this tournament, a collection of particular programs were submitted by different individuals, and run against each other. The conclusion was that the “tit-for-tat” strategy (that can be thought of as a finite state machine) came out best—a result from which much has been made about the value of cooperation, etc.

I must admit that I was always suspicious of the result. It seemed very unscientific to have just looked at programs people happened to have submitted for the tournament. Why not instead systematically enumerate all possible programs and see what happens? In my own work—starting at the beginning of the 1980s—I was routinely doing this kind of thing, particularly for cellular automata. I always found the setup for game theory a little arbitrary, and fiddly, and I was discovering more than I could keep up with just investigating the behavior of individual programs, without trying to have them compete with each other. Still, finally, in the mid-1990s, I did have a look at what happens when a range of possible programs (in that case, cellular automata) compete with each other. I summarized the result in a small note at the end of my book A New Kind of Science:

I always meant to come back and look at this in more detail. And finally my recent work in the foundations of biological evolution made me think it was time to do it. I found out that there was some literature on using models like finite state machines as strategies for iterated games. But so far as I could tell, the kind of systematic ruliological investigation I had imagined had never been done. Which is why I recently decided it was finally time to do it…

Thanks

Thanks to Willem Nielsen, Brian Ashiundu and Júlia Campolim of the Wolfram Institute for their extensive help. Several participants at our summer programs have done projects about games between programs that I’ve suggested: Rodrigo Bazaes, Kantaporn Danchaivijitr and Aziz Sahibnazarov. Over the course of many years, I’ve discussed game theory and related ideas with quite a few people, including Brian Arthur, Bob Axelrod, Seth Chandler, Roger Germundsson, Paul Harrald, Jozsef Konczer, Pedro Marquez-Zacarias, Eric Maskin, Zsombor Méder, Chrystopher Nehaniv, Scott Page, Jordan Pollack, John Maynard Smith, Stan Reiter, Nassim Taleb, Valeriu Ungureanu and Marc Vicuna. (Notable game theorist John Nash was a long-time user of what’s now Wolfram Language, and attended conferences about it, but I never personally met him.)

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

23. Passing DBs through continuations

Source: https://remy.wang/blog/cps.html
Site: remy.wang
Submitter: remywang (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-07 01:17 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 3 points · 0 comments
Length: 2.2K words (~10 min read)

Passing DBs Through Continuations

Dedicated to the Minnowbrook Analytic Reasoning Seminar with special thanks to Kris Micinski and Michael Ballantyne

Suppose you want to write a database. You'd probably start by implementing relational algebra operators — projection, filter, join, etc. The easy way is to implement them as functions that take in tables and return tables, and assemble them into a larger expression. That was how Prela worked in its first incarnation. The code was clean, but it was hella slow! Which was not surprising, because every operator materialized every intermediate result. The standard solution to this is the iterator model, where each operator implements an Iterator interface that streams intermediate tables row by row instead of materializing them. But implementing the iterator model naively still incurs overhead: every call to Iterator.next() triggers a dynamic dispatch, which costs vtable lookups and destroys cache locality. There are two standard remedies: vectorization and compilation. A vectorized database amortizes the overhead by implementing Iterator.next_batch() which returns a whole batch of data that can be processed together; a compiled database, well, compiles the incoming query directly to fast machine code that runs without any dynamic dispatch. Either approach takes a lot of very smart people spending their entire working life to build, and it's why systems like DuckDB and Umbra exist. I'm moderately smart but don't have a lot of time, so I was looking for a shortcut. The shortcut I stumbled upon was so beautiful that I literally cried1 when I finally understood it, and I hope my explanation below will make you cry too :' )

To keep things simple, let's suppose we're just dealing with lists of numbers, and we want to do two very simple things to them: inc adds 1 to every number, and dbl doubles them. That's pretty easy to write:2

inc(xs) = [x + 1 for x in xs]

dbl(xs) = [2 * x for x in xs]

Now, we can chain them together with dbl(inc(xs)) which will do two steps in sequence. Problem is, because each function takes in a list and returns a list, our program produces an intermediate, namely inc(xs). This allocates a new list only to be thrown away by the call to dbl. Things only gets worse when we chain together multiple calls to inc and dbl. A more efficient implementation would fuse together the operations:

inc_n_dbl(xs) = [2 * (x + 1) for x in xs]

Of course, we can't write down every possible combination of operators like this. Is there a way to define each operator modularly, yet still have them compose into tightly fused operations automatically? Yes, if we use a bit of magic from functional compilers — continuation-passing style (CPS).

The key idea of CPS is to define operators that do things instead of making things. inc and dbl as defined above each takes in a list and makes a list. Instead, the CPS version of each operator takes in a list and an additional input k: this k is a function that the caller passes in, specifying what it wants to do with each element after the operator's work is done. k is called the continuation. Let's look at some code:

function inc(xs, k)
  for x in xs
    k(x + 1)
  end
end

Now suppose k is the print function, then inc as defined above will add 1 to each number, then print the result. Note that nothing is returned, and inc only does its job (adding 1) then performs what it's told to (apply k). As an exercise, you can try and write down dbl in CPS style.

But currently each of inc and dbl still takes in a list, and there's no obvious way to compose multiple operators. To do that, we replace xs with a "child" operator op:

inc(op, k) = op(x -> k(x + 1))

dbl(op, k) = op(x -> k(x * 2))

function scan(xs, k)
  for x in xs
    k(x)
  end
end

Intuitively, inc now trusts its child op to do its job, namely, that op will apply the continuation it receives to each item. So instead of iterating over xs, inc simply tags the + 1 step onto the continuation and passes it to op. I've also defined a "source" operator scan that connects the input list to the operators. Let's see the code in action.

Start by calling inc(scan(xs), print).3
According to the definition of inc, this will call scan(xs, x -> print(x + 1))
Plugging in the definition of scan, this gets us for x in xs; print(x + 1); end

So chaining together inc and scan indeed does what we want! Now let's try a longer chain dbl(inc(scan(xs)), print):

Expanding dbl gets us inc(scan(xs), x -> print(x * 2))
Expanding inc gets us scan(xs, x -> print((x + 1) * 2))
Finally, expanding scan gets us for x in xs; print((x + 1) * 2); end

Notice how I used the word expand — if we annotate every operator definition with @inline, the compiler will actually unfold the code as we did above, and an operator chain gets compiled down to a fused loop in the end! You can try expanding longer chains like dbl(inc(dbl(inc(scan(xs)))), print) to get some practice thinking about CPS. Julia also has handy tools like @code_typed that lets you inspect the compiled code, or the aptly named Cthulhu.jl that does that interactively. In summary, the example shows that if we define operators modularly with CPS, inlining the definitions will automatically produce tightly fused compiled code.

None of these is really new, and have been known to functional programmers for decades by the name of deforestation. But when implemented in Prela, something incredible happens: a clean CPS-style interpreter for Prela automagically recovers fast columnar execution when compiled!

The central design principle behind Prela is "everything is a binary relation". This means Prela maps cleanly to both a logical Entity/Relationship data model, as well as to a columnar physical storage. I won't go into details here, but encourage you to play with the language to get a feel for that. Practically, this means we fully normalize every wide table with m attributes to m binary relations. For example, a table movie with columns ID, year, title becomes:

The identity relation (which I'll call movie) over ID (you can think of this as a unary table over ID)
A table mapping each ID to year
A table mapping each ID to title

But now the issue is, even for a simple SELECT * FROM movie we need to join together 3 different tables! Whereas a column store would simply run:

for i in 0:n
  print(id_col[i], year_col[i], title_col[i])
end

In other words, the column store co-iterates the columns in one pass to compute the query.

Let's first look at how Prela used to run this query. The most important operator in Prela is the relation composition \rightarrow, which generalizes function composition the same way relations generalize functions. In standard relational algebra: R \rightarrow S = \pi_{x, z}(R \Join_{R.y = S.y} S) where R's schema is over x and y, and S's schema is over y and z. The second most important Prela operator is the product \times which takes two binary relations and joins them: R \times S = R \Join_{R.x = S.x} S where R's schema is over x, y, and S's schema is over x and z.

So SELECT * FROM movie is spelled \text{movie} \rightarrow \text{year} \times \text{title} in Prela. Now, this requires first joining year with title, whose result is joined with movie. We can make this a bit cheaper if we can assume the primary key IDs are dense and continuous, in which case we can just store year as an array of integers and title as an array of strings; and for IDs, we only need to store one single number n which says how many IDs there are. But even with this, we still need to do the work to join the tables.

Instead, let's define compose and product in CPS:

compose(lhs, rhs, k) = lhs((x, y) -> rhs(y, (z -> k(x, z))))

product(lhs, rhs, x, k) = lhs(x, (y -> rhs(x, (z -> k((y, z))))))

scan_id(n, k) = for i in 0:n; k(i, i); end

probe(col, i, k) = k(col[i])

Let's go over each line carefully. Semantically compose is supposed to return a (binary) relation by composing the lhs and rhs relations. In CPS, its job is to apply k to every pair in this composition. Its first argument, lhs, represents a binary relation and applies the given continuation to every pair. The rhs is a little different: it represents a relation that supports lookup, i.e., rhs(key, k) will look up the values associated with key, then apply k to each such value. Now going back to compose — we're saying that, for each (x, y) tuple in the LHS, we will look up y from the RHS, then for each matching z, we apply k(x, z). In loops this will be:

for (x, y) in lhs
  for z in rhs[y]
    k(x, z)
  end
end

Which is exactly a hash join and a projection that throws away y.

Next, product itself is a relation supporting lookup, and so are its arguments. To lookup x in a product, we first look it up from the lhs which gets us a bunch of ys. Then for each y, we now look up x from the rhs, getting a bunch of zs. Finally, for each (y, z) pair, we apply the continuation k((y, z)). In loops:

for y in lhs[x]
  for z in rhs[x]
    k((y, z))
  end
end

This is what will happen if you look up x in R \Join_{R.x = S.x} S.

Finally, we have the "source" operators scan_id and probe. scan_id is scan but specialized for a dense ID relation where we only store n: it simply increments i from 0 to n and applies k to (i, i). probe represents an input relation that supports looking up a primary key i and which is backed by a dense vector, so looking up an ID i simply indexes col[i] and applies k to the value.

We're now ready to put everything together and pull the trigger: the Prela query \text{movie} \rightarrow \text{year} \times \text{title} desugars to compose(scan_id(n), product(probe(year), probe(title))) where n is the number of movies. Here are the definitions again for reference:

compose(lhs, rhs, k) = lhs((x, y) -> rhs(y, (z -> k(x, z))))
product(lhs, rhs, x, k) = lhs(x, (y -> rhs(x, (z -> k((y, z))))))
scan_id(n, k) = for i in 0:n; k(i, i); end
probe(col, i, k) = k(col[i])

Expand compose:

scan_id(n, (x, y) -> product(probe(year), probe(title), y, (z -> k(x, z))))

Expand scan_id:

for i in 0:n
  product(probe(year), probe(title), i, (z -> k(i, z)))
end

Expand product:

for i in 0:n
  probe(year, i, (y -> probe(title, i, (z -> k(i, (y, z))))))
end

Expand probe:

for i in 0:n
  k(i, (year[i], title[i]))
end

And taking k = print, we finally have:

for i in 0:n
  print(i, (year[i], title[i]))
end

Spectacular!!

To keep the examples small, I've made several simplifications. The actual Prela implementation defines two methods drive and probe for each operator which fire depending on how the operator is accessed — scanned or probed. But that's pretty much it, and the complete source is around 1000 lines of Julia code in a single file, supporting select, project, join, groupby, aggregation, CTEs, UDFs, and with performance matching DuckDB on TPCH and Join Order Benchmark. I should note that the performance numbers are riding on lots of assumptions though, the strongest ones being:

Currently I don't care about compile time, and Julia does take some time to JIT the queries
The engine aggressively takes advantage of the fact that PKs are dense in both TPCH and JOB, which may or may not hold in the real world

Nevertheless, the CPS approach cleanly separates the responsibility of the data engine — which is to map queries to efficient code in some target language — and the responsibility of the compiler which is to produce fast code quickly, and we see there's a lot of room for the compiler to improve. The assumption that PKs are dense can also be relaxed with the help of B-trees, bitmap filters, and other data structures.

But perhaps the biggest strength of the CPS style is that it makes Prela extensible, as users can write their own operator in a natural way with a few lines of code, with the assurance that it will be compiled and fused with the rest of the query for efficient execution.

Long before AI psychosis, there was FP psychosis, clinically defined as the intense psychological response to understanding functional programming concepts like recursion, higher order functions, monads, or in this case, continuation passing style.↩︎

All code in this post is in Julia.↩︎

scan(xs) stands for k -> scan(xs, k), i.e., it is the curried application of scan to xs. Similarly for inc(scan(xs)) below which curries inc with scan(xs).↩︎

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

24. 1worldflag: A blue dot on a transparent background

Source: https://1worldflag.com/
Site: 1worldflag
Submitter: davidbarker (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-08 01:37 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 176 points · 151 comments
Length: 882 words (~4 min read)
Language: en-US

unity
across
borders

A symbol for our home the blue planet no matter
where we live in. One possible way – One possible
flag design to show that we feel united with the
whole earth and all its inhabitants.

a blue dot,
the symbol For
our home,
the blue planet

In a world characterized by geographical, social and political differences, the One World Flag is a reminder that we all live on the same planet and have a common future. Flags usually symbolize nations, regions or groups, i.e. differences. The One World Flag, on the other hand, has a message for humanity: More unites us than divides us.

The One World Flag does not want to replace the other flags, but to show that beyond the differences there is also unity. The One World Flag shows a blue sphere in the center, symbolizing our common home, the blue planet. The background of the flag is made of transparent material, which means that it always adapts to its surroundings.

A Loop
around
the world

For the seventh issue of the nomad magazine, we have
send handcrafted One World Flags, made in Bavaria, to the
readers as part of an established ambassador program.
The readers can show their place on earth where they feel at
home. After a few weeks they will receive an address from
another reader, where the flag will be sent in an small envelope.

We were invited by the German NGO ARTHELPS in order to give workshops in Ukraine called "Flag Your ID."
Together, we explored the meaning behind flags — and how they can represent identity.
Each participant got to ask: What do I stand for? Who am I? What values shape me? And what would my own flag look like?

It turned into a powerful and personal experience — and into a workshop concept we are really proud of.

Contact us if you want us to give such an workshop in your local group, school, company or other places.

FLAG WORKSHOPS

We are one

To most people on this planet it is common sense that we
need unity. We believe that we have to unite as mankind in
order to tackle the future challenges ahead of us. We are
stronger together. But why do we need a world flag?
We believe that one common symbol can help to create a
sense of unity and belonging to all people. Through a world
flag every citizen on this planet can display a sense of
togetherness. Watch the video from Arthelps with
reflections of unity out of the perspective of the space kid.

Overview of
the exhibitions

In the past years we had the privilege to exhibit the topic of the One World Flag in different countries. School projects, group exhibitions, flag installations or even long term art projects. We have gathered a small collection of our exhibitions.

JOIN US –

Let’s make
friends across
the globe and
create
memories and
stories of unity
together.

unity
across
borders

A symbol for our home the blue planet no matter where we live in. One possible way – One possible flag design to show that we feel united with the whole earth and all its inhabitants.

a blue dot,
the symbol For
our home,
the blue planet

In a world characterized by geographical, social and political differences, the One World Flag is a reminder that we all live on the same planet and have a common future. Flags usually symbolize nations, regions or groups, i.e. differences. The One World Flag, on the other hand, has a message for humanity: More unites us than divides us.

The One World Flag does not want to replace the other flags, but to show that beyond the differences there is also unity. The One World Flag shows a blue sphere in the center, symbolizing our common home, the blue planet. The background of the flag is made of transparent material, which means that it always adapts to its surroundings.

For the seventh issue of the nomad
magazine, we have send handcrafted
One World Flags, made in Bavaria,
to the readers as part of an established
ambassador program. The readers
can show their place on earth where they
feel at home. After a few weeks they
will receive an address from another
reader, where the flag will be sent in an
small envelope.

We were invited by the German NGO ARTHELPS in order to give workshops in Ukraine called "Flag Your ID."
Together, we explored the meaning behind flags — and how they can represent identity.
Each participant got to ask: What do I stand for? Who am I? What values shape me? And what would my own flag look like? It turned into a powerful and personal experience — and into a workshop concept we are really proud of. Contact us if you want us to give such an workshop in your local group, school, company or other places.

In the past years we had the privilege to exhibit the topic of the One World Flag in different countries. School projects, group exhibitions, flag installations or even long term art projects. We have gathered a small collection of our exhibitions.

JOIN US –

LET’S MAKE FRIENDS ACROSS THE GLOBE AND CREATE MEMORIES AND STORIES OF UNITY TOGETHER.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

25. How much do amd64 microarchitecture levels help in Go?

Source: https://lemire.me/blog/2026/06/06/how-much-do-amd64-microarchitecture-levels-help-in-go/
Site: lemire.me
Submitter: zdw (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-07 21:10 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 3 points · 0 comments

Scrape failed: http 403

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

26. Old'aVista – The most powerful guide to the old Internet

Source: https://oldavista.com/
Site: oldavista.com
Submitter: abnercoimbre (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-08 16:02 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 6 points · 2 comments

Scrape failed: fetch: Get "https://oldavista.com/": context deadline exceeded

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

27. The Grate Cheese Robbery

Source: https://longreads.com/2026/05/28/the-cheese-theft-food-crime/
Site: Longreads
Author: Olivia Potts
Published: 2026-05-28
HN activity: 16 points · 0 comments
Length: 5.1K words (~23 min read)
Language: en-US

Thoughtful stories for thoughtless times.

Longreads has published hundreds of original stories—personal essays, reported features, reading lists, and more—and more than 14,000 editor’s picks. And they’re all funded by readers like you. Become a member today.

Olivia Potts | Longreads | May 28, 2026 | 4,872 words (17 minutes)

For a cheese lover, Neal’s Yard may be heaven on earth. Enter the Covent Garden branch through its distinctively inky blue front, and you can be in no doubt as to what awaits. An enormous picture-frame window shows off at least a dozen truckles and wheels of cheese. Inside, low-hanging orb lamps glow softly, illuminating the startling array. Huge wheels of Stichelton and Stilton stand stacked on top of one another, their steel-blue veins facing out. Baron Bigod—the British Brie de Meaux (and, whisper it, better than the French equivalent)—oozes suggestively. Yorkshire Pecorino gleams pale, smooth, and yogurty. Wrinkly little Yr Afr, a raw-milk goat’s cheese, fresh from the foothills of Snowdonia, sits alongside bright orange pucks of Yarlington, its cider-washed rind sticky to the touch. Neat writing on large and small blackboards displays the cheese names, origins, and prices.

Randolph Hodgson, a food scientist, and Nicholas Saunders, an activist and entrepreneur, founded the Neal’s Yard dairy in 1979. In the earliest of days, it just produced Greek yogurt, the only thing they’d truly gotten the hang of. British cheese wasn’t really known in the UK, let alone on the world stage, and raw-milk cheeses were viewed with a healthy dose of skepticism—not least by those in charge of environmental health. But Neal’s Yard persevered.

Now there are five brick-and-mortar stores, each nestled in a different buzzy, food-loving part of London. Underneath the railway arches in Bermondsey, the cheeses of Neal’s Yard sit maturing in a beloved institution that has nurtured, connected, championed, educated, and sold around 550 tons of British cheese a year in every corner of the cheese world.

So it wasn’t beyond the realms of belief when a big, fat order came in for artisanal cheddar in 2024. A French supermarket wanted to purchase 950 truckles of the stuff, an order worth around $400,000. Three different dairies were called upon to help fulfil the massive request: Westcombe Dairy, making their eponymous cheddar in Somerset; the Trethowan Brothers, making Pitchfork Cheddar, also in Somerset; and Holden Farm Dairy, making Hafod Cheddar in West Wales. “British cheese has had a massive revival over the past 30 years, but unfortunately, it does feel like that has plateaued off a little bit,” Tom Calver, head cheesemaker at Westcombe Dairy, says. “To keep going, keep surviving, all throughout the whole chain, when an offer like that comes on, you jump on it.”

Twenty-two tons of artisanal British cheese, some of the most expensive cheese made in the UK. A huge order for Neal’s Yard. It seemed too good to be true.

Food fraud is big business. People have been adulterating and stealing food for as long as we’ve been eating it—from smuggling to counterfeiting, hijacking lorries to run-of-the-mill theft. The World Trade Organization estimates that food crime costs the global food industry as much as $50 billion US a year.

Famously, in 2012, around $18 million worth of maple syrup was siphoned from a warehouse in Canada. The Federation of Quebec Maple Syrup Producers discovered during a routine check that their maple syrup barrels were depleted, throwing the global supply into jeopardy. In 2013, it was Nutella’s turn, with thieves in Germany stealing 6,875 large jars of the stuff. That same year, while a lorry driver was asleep in his cab in a layby in Worcestershire, England, thieves cut a hole in the side of the lorry and extracted 6,400 tins of Heinz baked beans with sausages. West Mercia police asked for information “about anyone trying to sell large quantities of Heinz baked beans in suspicious circumstances.”

In 2023, in Shropshire, Joby Pool hitched a trailer containing 200,000 Cadbury Creme Eggs, estimated to be worth around $41,000, to a stolen tractor unit and towed the Easter chocolate away. He was caught driving northbound on the M42 and walked toward the police with his hands up. That same year, 37 tons of olive oil were stolen from a mill in Halkidiki, Greece, costing the cooperative growers $348,000. “They don’t go for jewellery anymore, they go for olive oil,” one local reporter told The Guardian.

And on March 26, 2026, headlines (and memes) exploded with the news that 413,793—12 tons—of chocolate KitKat bars had been stolen in transit from Italy to Poland.

But the most stolen food in the world?

Cheese.

Cheesemakers are really, really strong. Ben Ticehurst is the head cheesemaker for Trethowan Brothers, the Somerset dairy that produces Pitchfork Cheddar: “It’s very physical. It’s an old-fashioned job. If you were designing it with modern health and safety standards in mind, you wouldn’t make cheeses that weigh 25kg.”

Artisanal cheese is a very different beast from commodity or “block” cheese—and the production processes are completely different. Block cheese is industrially mass-produced; it’s the stuff you find in the supermarkets, vacuum-packed, and always square or rectangular because it has been cut and repacked through automated processes, hence the nickname. The point of block cheese is uniformity and consistency. Artisanal or farmhouse cheese, on the other hand, cannot be made industrially. Those who make it use traditional, often manual methods, just producing small batches. It’s often seasonal, made from a single herd of cows, sheep, or goats, and can only be made using unpasteurized or raw milk. It’s slow, labor-intensive, and the cheese is bound in cloth or allowed to develop a natural rind. Cheese aficionados will tell you it’s a far superior product: a more developed flavor, with the ability to capture the terroir of the farm on which it is made. It is also enormously diverse. Artisanal cheeses, even those similarly made from nearby farms, are distinctively different from one another. For all these reasons, it commands a significantly higher price than the supermarket equivalent.

Joby Pool hitched a trailer containing 200,000 Cadbury Creme Eggs, estimated to be worth around $41,000, to a stolen tractor unit and towed the Easter chocolate away.

“The big difference is, when we say handmade, it genuinely is handmade. Literally everything is done by hand,” Ticehurst explains. While supermarket cheddars can call themselves handmade if not every element is automated and machine-led, the artisanal dairies are doing things the hard way. “When we’re mixing the salt in, we don’t have mechanical mixers, we have great big metal pitchforks, which is where our name comes from, and we do it by hand. We fling the curd around, we mill the sheets by hand, the cheddaring is done by hand, the moving and setting the presses, the cheeses are moved and lifted up. It is incredibly labor-intensive.”

“Cheddaring” is a unique step in the cheddar-making process: To achieve the distinctive dense texture and intense, sharp, hits-you-in-the-back-of-the-nose flavor that makes you go back for another piece, the curd blocks are cut into “loaves,” stacked, turned, and piled on top of one another. This stacked weight forces extra whey out, increasing the acidity and creating a firm, layered structure to the finished cheese. On a cheesemaking day at the dairy, each cheese mold—a great, big metal tin weighing around 10kg—has 27kg of curd poured into it. Those tins have to be moved. “You’re talking about nearly 40kg of tins moved by hand, lifting them up, putting them down. Obviously, where possible, we try to lift one tin with two people, but there are certain points when you might be loading a press, where it just isn’t possible.” All this physical labor equates to just 12 cheeses a day. Twelve-and-a-half tons of Pitchfork were sent to help complete the Neal’s Yard order—about 40 days of hard dairy labor.

Fifteen years earlier, 1,000 miles away, Northern Italy.

In the dead of night, a group of armed thieves creeps toward a locked vault. They successfully disarm the security system, set up their truck by the warehouse to receive their spoils, and use axes to break through the facility wall. Days before, they had laid the groundwork: planks of wood covered streams, and perimeter fencing had been opened with wire cutters in case a quick getaway on foot was needed.

Were they looking for jewels or priceless artwork? Gold bullion, perhaps?

No—Parmesan.

And they almost managed it. Around 400 wheels of Parmigiano Reggiano were loaded onto their getaway vehicle before police—who had been alerted by security—apprehended the thieves.

Credito Emiliano SpA, where the attempted robbery happened, is, in fact, a local bank in the Emilia-Romagna region, the only place where Parmigiano Reggiano can be produced. Local Parmesan-makers, who have been subjected to multiple organized large-scale thefts over the years, have turned to the bank to store and protect their cheese. Such is the cheese’s worth that the bank also permits the wheels of cheese to be used by producers as collateral against loans. The cheese is in a purpose-built, climate-controlled storage facility that can hold 300,000 wheels (which take at least a year to mature, and are worth $950–$1,900 each). Roving patrols, motion-sensor lights, barbed-wire fencing, and a continuously manned camera control center provide strong security. Fabrizio Giberti, head of the facility, calls it the “Fort Knox of cheese.”

It’s a very popular place: The small, rural warehouses where the Parmesan is made are a constant target for organized crime. Between 2012 and 2018, the Consorzio del Formaggio Parmigiano Reggiano—the official, nonprofit protection body that represents all producers of Parmigiano Reggiano—estimated that $3 million in cheese was stolen each year.

Patrick Holden probably isn’t how you picture a dairy farmer. He wasn’t born into it. Arguably, he was called to it. After spending time in the San Francisco Bay Area as a 20-year-old in the 1970s, he became involved in the green movement. When he returned to the UK, he worked on an intensive dairy farm and then studied biodynamic agriculture. At 23, he joined the back-to-the-land effort and set up a community farm in Bwlchwernen Fawr, Wales. This later became Holden Farm Dairy, where Hafod cheese is produced. It was Hafod Cheddar that the initial enquiry to Neal’s Yard was about.

“An email popped up in my inbox with the subject line ‘Enquiry for a lot of cheese,’” Holden explains. “[Neal’s Yard] came to us and said, ‘Can we have 22 tons of Hafod cheese?’ and we said no.” Twenty-two tons represents three-quarters of the dairy’s annual production: “The most we could spare was two and a half tons.” Westcombe Dairy and the Trethowan Brothers Dairy were recruited to fill the rest of the order.

The quality—and price—of Hafod comes down to the holistic farming practices: “The cows are loved,” Holden says, “they’re fed real food from organic pastures, herb-rich, they’re not fed any genetically modified soy, and they’re a native breed. You know the phrase ‘you are what you eat?’ In the case of cheese and dairy products, it’s ‘you are what you eat ate.’”

“An email popped up in my inbox with the subject line ‘Enquiry for a lot of cheese[.]’”

As small dairies don’t produce vast quantities of cheese, they had to scramble to get the two and a half tons together. “Even for a wholesaler like Neal’s Yard, this was a huge order,” Ben Ticehurst explains. “It took quite a bit of to-ing and fro-ing to arrange so many pallets to leave the dairy all at the same time. The order had to be split into three collections.” Artisanal cheesemakers try not to keep an oversupply, and forecasting can be hard, as can logistics: The cheddar has to be aged for 12 months, and storage space is tight. “With cheddar, what you have is what you have. We just get the milk from the farm, turn the milk into cheese, and then sell what we’ve made. It’s a much more basic and old-fashioned way of doing business.”

But Holden was pleased with the huge order—happy about its international nature and that British cheddar was translating to foreign markets: “We were just rather proud. We thought, ‘How about that? The French are buying our cheese.”’

Cheese crime is an international problem. In 2016, Wisconsin dubbed their dairy thieves “cheese pirates”: 20,000 lbs of cheese worth $46,000 was stolen from a parking lot. Just a few months earlier, 100 wheels of Comte were stolen from a warehouse in Goux-les-Usiers—each wheel would cost around $2,500 today. In 2019, $187,000 worth of cheese was stolen from Saputo Dairy Products in Tavistock, Ontario: A man arrived at the business, presented paperwork, and the cheese was loaded onto a truck, only to disappear into the ether.

Four years ago, in Fijnaart, a town in the Netherlands, thieves broke into a cheese storage room and stole 3,500 lbs of cheese. Theo Dekker, then-chairman of the Dutch dairy farmers association, told The New York Times, “We’re worried about how professional this has become. These people come at night and take everything with brute force. It’s almost like organized crime.”

Last year, the Pieve Roffeno cooperative cheese factory was targeted, with 200 cheese wheels, valued at €100,000, stolen. The factory’s president noted the oldest, most valuable cheeses were targeted; local Bologna newspaper Il Resto del Carlino described the thieves as “industry experts.”

Neal’s Yard did not immediately smell a rat. Having gathered together their top cheddar producers, they were confident they could fulfil the order. The three dairies pulled out all the stops and got the order completed in double-quick time. The artisanal cheddars were brought together in the storage chambers beneath those railway arches in Bermondsey. Everything was going exactly to plan.

And on October 14, 2024, the cheese was collected, just like it was supposed to be. But neither the cheese nor the buyer was ever seen again. The 950 truckles—roughly the weight of a fully grown whale shark—disappeared without a trace. “We thought everything was legitimate, so we went on with it, Tom Calver recalls. “We loaded up the pallets for [Neal’s Yard], sent them to them, and they paid us. It was only about two or three weeks after we’d actually sent all the cheese up that they got in contact with us and said it was a scam.”

Shortly after the theft, a 63-year-old man was arrested for fraud by false representation and handling stolen goods, and was released on bail pending further enquiries. Several further arrests have since been made, but no charges have yet been brought; the investigation is a world away from convictions. The Metropolitan Police confirmed that there are no updates on the case at this stage: “The six arrested men remain released under investigation. Enquiries are ongoing.”

“Wisconsin dubbed their dairy thieves “cheese pirates”: 20,000 lbs of cheese worth $46,000 was stolen from a parking lot.”

A recent piece by The Guardian reported that cargo theft costs the UK economy around $950 million a year. The problem is that once things are moving, they are very hard to catch. The window to apprehend the culprits is a matter of hours, often closing before the crime is even noticed. And after that, the trail goes dark. The Guardian reported that in the UK, arrests are “almost exclusively made at road level, catching criminals as they attempt to drive stolen goods away. Until now, no serious investigations have taken place to look at the criminal networks above them.”

When he heard about the Neal’s Yard cheese theft, celebrity chef Jamie Oliver jumped onto his Instagram to appeal to his followers: “If anyone hears anything about posh cheese going for cheap, it’s probably some wrong ’uns . . . I don’t know—it feels like a really weird thing to nick.” But, as we know, it actually isn’t.

It’s September 1998, and the week before the British Cheese Awards. Jamie Montgomery of Montgomery’s Cheddar is the one to beat. Last year and the year before, his Somerset Cheddar won Best Cheddar and Best Traditional British Cheese. Can he make it a hat trick? But it wasn’t just the judges who had their eye on his cheese: That night, six tons of artisanal, matured cheddar were stolen from their warehouses. In one fell swoop, $58,000 of stock (roughly the equivalent of $92,000 today) just disappeared.

It wasn’t unheard of for this time of year: opportunist thieves looking for a cash injection before Christmas take off with trailers of cheese to pass off to repackers. But the target has always been bog-standard “block” cheese. Montgomery’s cheddar is about as far from that as you can get: round, aged, handmade, and cloth-bound. “Obviously,” Jamie says, “they’d heard about the premium Montgomery Cheddar, and they thought they would nick something that they could get more money for with less handling.”

But it turned out not to be that simple for the cheddar thieves. Making the most of the small world of cheesemaking, Jamie put the word out: “Mum just got the Yellow Pages out and rang every pub and restaurant in the South-West and said, ‘Look, if anybody comes to you with cheap, quality cheese, just let us know.’ So that made it quite tricky for them to start with.” His cheddar is hard to miss—beautiful clothbound truckles, a distinctive rind, a nutty, rich taste, and slightly crystalline texture. No one was going to be able to pass this off as “block” cheddar. And now everyone was on the lookout for it.

The cheese was first offered to block-cutters down South—but they turned it down. Block-cutters do what it says on the tin; they cut blocks, and Montgomery Cheddar’s shape meant their equipment literally could not cut it. Next, it appeared up North: a cheese dealer was offered the lot. He knew what he was dealing with and proposed $4,000 as a ruse to trap the thieves. But they got cold feet and went quiet. And that, really, was it. The thieves were never heard from again. The cheddar wasn’t found. No arrests were made. Jamie’s best guess is that this award-winning, highly sought-after, handmade cheese was shredded and sold off as regular grated cheddar after Christmas.

“Mum just got the Yellow Pages out and rang every pub and restaurant in the South-West and said, ‘Look, if anybody comes to you with cheap, quality cheese, just let us know.’”

The cheese had already been submitted to the awards, but it didn’t scoop the prize that year. Not that it mattered for Jamie Montgomery. “The timing was extraordinary,” he recalls. The PR company promoting the British Cheese Awards got hold of Montgomery’s misfortune and put out a very tongue-in-cheek story, saying it was one of Montgomery’s competitors trying to stop them winning again. Neither he nor anyone else ever really thought it was a jealous competitor who swiped the cheese. It was simply a nifty, throw-away PR comment. But the effect was huge. “Every paper ran it,” recalls Jamie, and they put the dairy’s number in the article. We played a game where we’d put the phone down and count to 10 [before it rang again]. All these people were saying, ‘Where can we buy the cheese?’”

The cheese itself wasn’t insured. It was a dead loss. But the column inches garnered by the PR agency generated an estimated $2.7 million of name-recognition, all describing Montgomery’s as “probably the best cheddar in the world.”

The thieves were never apprehended. So we’ll never know precisely what motivated them, or how they ultimately disposed of the cheese. What we can be confident of—they didn’t think their plan through. They had no buyer. They didn’t reckon on the smallness and tightness of the artisanal cheese world.

But times have changed. Cheese thieves aren’t so naive now: they’re organized.

Cheese isn’t an easy product to shift. It’s big. It’s heavy. It’s unwieldy. It’s smelly. It also needs to be held at very specific temperatures and humidity. It is its own microbiome: fat, enzymes, salt, bacteria, proteins, yeasts, molds. All of these—plus time—conspire to change the nature of the cheese. That’s why maturation is so important to the flavor and texture; it is an art form. Storing and transporting the cheese is technical and controlled. So if you’re suddenly going to find yourself in possession of tons of artisanal cheese, you’d better be prepared. Even a refrigerated van, or a temperature-controlled storage facility, is unlikely to cut it. Smash-and-grab, opportunistic cheese theft is a fool’s errand.

The Neal’s Yard thieves—who, after all, specifically asked for Hafod Cheddar—knew what they were dealing with. They likely had a plan, and we can make some guesses as to where their cheese ended up.

In August 2015, following sanctions imposed for the war in Ukraine, Russia began an aggressive ban on importing food from the US, the European Union, and other countries. Western foods had already been banned the previous year, after Putin retaliated against economic sanctions imposed by several states after the 2014 annexation of Crimea. But this first ban had been ineffective: After a roundup, authorities performatively crushed, buried, and burned 900 tons of contraband food, broadcasting the footage on state television.

As a consequence of the initial 2014 ban and doubling down in 2015, there is a thriving black market in Russia for high-end foods that are no longer legally available—chief among them, cheese.

Wild attempts have been made to circumvent the counter-sanctions. One chancer, who was stopped at the Russian border near Kaliningrad, was found to be carrying 1000 lbs of imported cheese. He valiantly claimed personal use, but the authorities didn’t buy it. Another, traveling from Finland, had stuffed 67 wheels of cheese into the side compartments of his Volkswagen.

And in May 2020, with the help of sniffer dogs, Russian customs seized 70 tons of contraband European cheeses that were being smuggled into the country. The cheese was hidden in four industrial containers purporting to hold a component used to produce rubber. The Organized Crime and Corruption Reporting Project reported that Dorblu (a Bavarian, blue-veined cheese), Retinato Leone, Chèvrano XO (a Dutch goat’s cheese), and Grana Padano were all found in the shipment.

So if you’re suddenly going to find yourself in possession of tons of artisanal cheese, you’d better be prepared.

Russia is where many cheesemakers believe the Neal’s Yard haul ended up. Jamie Montgomery draws a clear line between the theft he suffered and the more recent heist: “There’s no point nicking that kind of cheese and trying to flog it [in the UK], because people would know immediately. That’s why the latest one had to be so sophisticated and get it out of the country.” Dr. Jonathan Davies, a criminologist from Manchester University, agrees: “You can’t just turn up with a van in front of a supermarket and say, ‘Hi, would you be interested in buying this?’ and easily sell it on if you’re not a trusted or verified supplier. Black market activity is probably the most likely indication.”

Professor Christopher Elliott, the founder of the Institute for Global Food Security and a senior scientific advisor to the UN, told the BBC, “Cheese and wine are two of the most common products being transported illegally into Russia.” He believes that cheese is making its way to Russia via Belarus and other former Soviet states, likely relabelled or branded to appear legal in Russia. “So much money is involved that officials, including border guards, can be paid off. Sanctioned goods are bought and sold through digital networks, and these online orders also make it into shops.”

The Neal’s Yard cheese could also have found its way across the pond.

America has a long history of cheese-conservatism. In 1949, the US Food and Drug Administration banned domestic production and subsequently the import of raw-milk cheeses aged for fewer than 60 days, after a typhoid outbreak in Canada was linked to young cheeses made with raw milk. This means that soft, raw-milk cheeses like Brie de Meaux, Camembert, Reblochon, Saint Nectaire, Baron Bigod, Morbier, Tomme de Savoie, Époisses, and many others can not be sold in America in their traditional versions. These are some of the most prized cheeses in the world.

There are pasteurized alternatives: regular bries and camemberts, certain Époisses and Vacherins, but cheese-lovers sniff at their supposed inferiority. Many of the other cheeses simply cannot be made with pasteurized milk, as they hold AOC (Appellation d’Origine Contrôlée) status, which dictates their components and production methods—and their unpasteurized nature. In 2014, authorities significantly lowered the threshold for acceptable bacteria levels in cheese, further restricting American access to unique and desirable cheese.

Even for those cheeses which can be imported into the US—like Parmiggiano Reggiano and pasteurized Vacherin and Camembert—things are looking bleak. Under the previous US trade deal with the EU, importers paid 15% on European cheeses. But President Trump’s new 15% tariff will sit on top of this, making the cheeses prohibitively expensive. Of course, cheese finds a way: Underground channels exist, and a black market for FDA-flouting and eye-wateringly expensive cheese exists in the US. As long ago as 2002, The New Yorker was reporting on a “raw-milk cheese underground.”

When Neal’s Yard was defrauded, they bore the losses themselves. The three dairies, who had worked so hard to provide the cheddar, were still paid. While this is commendable, many cheesemarkers rely on Neal’s Yard’s viability as a part of the industry. Tom Calver expressed anxiety over what the theft meant for them: “We were hugely concerned for that business. We are so reliant on Neal’s Yard. We’ve worked with them for such a long time. We were really concerned that having such a massive hit, the effect of that on all the other suppliers they have would be catastrophic.”

It can all sound like a bit of a joke: making off with hundreds of cloth-bound cheeses and evading the authorities has an air of slapstick about it. But aside from the financial loss— usually felt by small, heritage producers—it also speaks to wider systemic problems in the food chain. Many factors have converged to compromise supply chains and drive up food prices over the last decade: the pandemic, Brexit, the cost-of-living crisis, US tariffs, climate change, the war in Ukraine, and Russian counter-sanctions. So while food theft has always occurred, as the world gets more fragmented, global food security is becoming increasingly vulnerable. Last year, the British Standards Institute (BSI) reported a 79% spike in recorded food supply chain thefts, which accounted for a third of all global hijackings. Reginald Bevan, Deputy Head of the Food Standards Agency’s National Food Crime Unit in the UK, told me, “The drivers and motivations for food fraud are evolving . . . Food businesses should remain alive to food thefts.” And Professor Elliott, writing in December last year, sets out the gravity of the situation: “Food crime is not a trivial issue orchestrated by a few chancers. It is, in many cases, a well-organized, highly lucrative form of serious criminality.”

President Trump’s new 15% tariff will sit on top of this, making the cheeses prohibitively expensive.

These thieves know the industry. They know the jargon. Dr. Jonathan Davies explains that this suggests a nuance which is often missed when looking at organized food crime, that “there’s got to be a point where [the organized criminals] have a reliance on legitimate actors who are sometimes complicit, other times, unwittingly complicit. They know who’s a contact, how to pass yourself off as legitimate or trustworthy, a certain language.” Cheese as a product opens itself up to this kind of abuse: “Cheese relies on intermediaries—it doesn’t go directly from the farm necessarily to the buyer. There are distributors, wholesalers, importers . . . the more people you have involved in the process, the more difficult it is to keep track of what’s going on.”

And while bootleg cheese may not have the price tag that smuggled drugs or weapons can command, it carries both less danger and milder penalties if caught. The product is, in itself, legal and harmless. Whether the charged crime is cargo theft, handling stolen goods, or conspiracy to defraud, the sentence is always going to be lower than, say, supplying cocaine or possessing sawn-off shotguns. It’s a lower-stakes crime with good profit margins. Mike Dawber, the UK’s leading detective in freight crime, told The Guardian, “Your switched-on villains don’t do [drug crime] anymore, because if you get caught doing that, you’ll get 15 years. So they’ve moved on to less risky crimes.” Hard to track, in high demand, and literally eaten once passed on. Cheese is in the criminal crosshairs.

With the advances in digital technology, there are ways for cheesemakers to protect themselves. Parmesan producers have begun embedding salt-grain-sized, edible microchips into the rinds of their cheese to fight counterfeiting, unique IDs that will also combat redistribution through theft. But, as the producers’ technology improves, so will the fraudsters’. Professor Elliott voiced concerns about the potential for AI to make deceptions all the more convincing: “Voice cloning, automated negotiation bots and deepfake video calls can be used to impersonate legitimate suppliers, laboratories, certification bodies or regulators.” The artisanal food supply chain—like so many others in other industries—has become almost entirely digitalized, with most, if not all, of the communication and negotiation carried out remotely. We trust an e-signature more than a handshake, and in an industry where business associates once knew each other personally for decades, huge deals can now be done without the parties ever meeting. There have been suggestions following the Neal’s Yard theft that we should revert to the old ways of doing business: meet in person, visit sites, rely on personal relationships. But this is trickier when the appetite for cheese is now global.

Neal’s Yard doesn’t want to talk about the theft anymore. When I reached out to their director, David Lockwood, he told me they’ve stopped giving interviews about it: “We see it as a distraction from our work selling British cheese.” But it seems inevitable that cheesemakers, mongers, and other luxury food producers are treating their experience as a cautionary tale. Tom Calver admits, “It’s that age-old thing: if it seems too good to be true, it is.”

Olivia Potts is a food writer and chef. After a career as a criminal barrister, she retrained in patisserie at Le Cordon Bleu. Her latest cookbook, Butter: A Celebration, is published by Headline. Her first book, A Half Baked Idea: How grief, love, and cake took me from the courtroom to Le Cordon Bleu won the Fortnum & Mason Debut Food Book Award and is published by Fig Tree, Penguin. She was this year’s winner of the Guild of Food Writers’ Award for cookery writing.

Editor: Carolyn Wells
Fact-checker: Julie Schwietert Collazo
Copyeditor: Krista Stevens

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

28. Federal judge blocks H1B visa $100K fee

Source: https://www.alaskasnewssource.com/2026/06/08/federal-judge-blocks-h1-b-visa-100k-fee/
Site: KTUU
Author: Hannah Lee
Published: 2026-06-08
HN activity: 89 points · 158 comments
Length: 537 words (~3 min read)
Language: en

ANCHORAGE, Alaska (KTUU) - A federal judge ruled on Monday to block President Donald Trump’s policy on imposing a $100,000 fee for new H1-B visas, a ruling that could save hundreds of education jobs in Alaska.

The H-1B visa is a non-immigrant, employer-sponsored visa for foreign professionals in “specialty occupations” requiring at least a bachelor’s degree, commonly in STEM, healthcare, or education fields. It is valid for up to six years, but must be renewed in three-year increments.

Judge Leo Sorokin ruled that the fee violated the federal Administrative Procedure Act and the Constitution. He states in his ruling that the Trump administration did not explain the decision to implement the fee and found that it was a tax.

Alaska’s delegation and the Alaska Legislature were urging the federal government to waive the new H-1B Visa fees for teachers in the state.

MORE: Sen. Murkowski introduces legislation asking for school districts to be exempt from H1-B visa fees

Lisa Parady, director of the Alaska Council of School Administrators, which supports districts with hiring and recruitment efforts, says there are 573 international teachers working in Alaska, and 341 of them use H-1B visas.

“In some rural districts, visa teachers make up 50% to nearly 80% of the teaching staff. School districts already invest $6,000 to $12,000 per teacher to recruit and sponsor educators through the H-1B visa process. Adding a $100,000 federal visa fee has made it financially impossible for many districts to continue hiring the teachers their students depend on. Without an exemption for K-12 public education, rural schools across Alaska would face severe staffing shortages and significant disruptions to student learning,” Parady said in a press release.

Sens. Dan Sullivan, R-Alaska, and Lisa Murkowski, R-Alaska, have both independently written letters to the former U.S. Department of Homeland Security Sec. Kristi Noem asking for exemptions.

Murkowski introduced a bill in March — S.4087 — that would exempt public school employees from the non-processing-related fees for H-1B visas. Sullivan is a co-sponsor of the bill.

Murkowski released a public statement on Monday saying that the judge’s ruling is a welcome relief for Alaska’s schools.

“Today’s decision from a U.S. District Judge to vacate the policy implementing the Presidential Proclamation mandating a $100,000 fee for H-1B visa applicants—a 5,000% increase in some cases—came at a critical time for Alaska’s schools that are in the midst of hiring before next fall,“ Murkowski said. “Many school districts in rural and remote parts of the state rely on the H-1B visa program to bring quality teachers to their communities. In Alaska, this isn’t a partisan issue: the state legislature unanimously passed a resolution last month urging the federal government to waive the fee for educators.”

She also states that she plans to work on eliminating the fee permanently so that “Alaska’s students receive the best education possible, regardless of the outcome of future legal challenges.”

The Alaska Legislature passed a joint resolution in May asking for the exemptions, saying that the fees would have resulted in the state making “the difficult choice of paying millions of dollars for visa recipients or going without these needed teachers.”

See a spelling or grammar error? Report it to web@ktuu.com

Copyright 2026 KTUU. All rights reserved.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

29. OCaml Onboarding: Introduction to the Dune build system

Source: https://ocamlpro.com/blog/2025_07_29_ocaml_onboarding_introduction_to_dune/
Site: ocamlpro.com
Author: Raja Boujbel, Dario Pinto
Submitted: 2026-06-04 17:52 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 143 points · 21 comments
Length: 2.8K words (~12 min read)
Language: en

Date: 2025-07-29


A camel sitting atop a dune in the middle of the desert. He wears his hard hat as he takes a break from all the building and running of OCaml code. Want to start building your own? Follow the tracks below.

Welcome to all Camleers

We are back with another practical walkthrough for the newcomers of the OCaml ecosystem. We understand from the feedback we have gathered over the years that getting started with the OCaml Distribution can sometimes be perceived as challenging at first. That's why we keep it in mind when planning each post - to make your onboarding smoother and more approachable.

Case in point: today's topic, which came to us during the making of our latest opam deep-dive: Opam 103: Bootstrapping a New OCaml Project with opam.

It occured to us that we were assuming a level of familiarity with the toolchain that we had never explicitly explained or clarified. We decided to put together a short, practical guide for the newer developers, looking for quick, on-the-fly tutorials for OCaml. 🛠️

A Camleer's basics: Dune

If you're new to OCaml, or any other programming language for that matter, the first necessities you'll encounter are building, running, and testing your code. Fortunately, there is a powerful build system called dune that we can use. It is widespread and makes project setup and compilation straightforward. Understanding how dune works is a key step towards becoming productive in the OCaml ecosystem.

In this article, we’ll walk you through the essentials of using dune to build libraries, executables, and tests, and to manage your project structure. Whether you're writing your first OCaml program or stepping into a new dune-based codebase, this guide will help you get up and running quickly.

We strongly believe that starting from scratch is key when approaching a brand new technical topic — and today's topic is no exception. Anyone who has ever felt lost exploring a new codebase knows that minimal, toy examples are often the best way to build intuition.

Table of contents

A Camleer's basics: Dune
Ressources
Project metadata and build specification files

dune-project
dune file

Key stanzas
Build and run your project

dune build
dune build @doc
dune exec --
Test your project with Dune

Cram tests
dune runtest
Scaffolding with dune init

Ressources

As said previously, this article was written in the context of the latest Opam 103: Bootstrapping a New OCaml Project with opam. That article explained how an OCaml developer should go about structuring an OCaml project when they intend to use it with opam.

The point of today's topic is to focus on the other defining parameter of the structure of an OCaml project: your build system. The goal is to show how the workflows of opam and dune fit together, while giving you a solid introduction to the fundamentals of dune.

We're using the same toy project helloer as basis for this rundown. It's a simple, well-scoped example with a structure that's idiomatic to both opam and dune, making it a great fit for illustrating the fundamentals without unnecessary complexity.

Note that helloer was not created using dune init that we will introduce at the end of this article. First, it's important to understand how Dune works under the hood - so you know what it's generating for you, how to modify it confidently, and how it fits into your overall build workflow.

Consider checking Dune's official reference manual or visiting the official OCaml Discuss forum to reach out to the OCaml Community.

Project metadata and build specification files

dune-project

Let's first start with the dune-project file since every Dune-driven project should have one at its root.

This file is the entry point for your project and its contents are its metadata — which Dune uses to understand how your project is structured.

Said metadata includes things like:

the version of dune you're using;
important URLs for your projects lifecycles;
optional settings like dependencies licensing, documentation;
and even configuration for automatic opam file generation. More on that in Opam 103.

This information not only guides Dune, but also helps tools like opam understand how to build, distribute, and document your project.

$ cat dune-project
(lang dune 3.15)
(package (name helloer))

(cram enable)


Note: The first line must be (lang dune X.Y) - with no comments or extra whitespace. This line determines which features and syntax dune will recognize.

NB: You will find all complementary information in the official docs 👈.

dune file

A dune file is a build specification file that tells Dune how to compile the OCaml code within a specific directory.

Usually there's one dune file per subdirectory, with the description of what's there - library, executable, or some tests. Since our toy helloer project is flat in structure, we’ll place this file at the root of the project.

$ cat dune
(library
 (name helloer_lib)
 (modules helloer_lib)
)

(executable
 (public_name helloer)
 (name helloer)
 (libraries cmdliner helloer_lib)
 (modules helloer)
)

(test
 (name test)
 (libraries alcotest helloer_lib)
 (modules test)
)


In effect, this tells dune:

how to build the OCaml files in that directory;
how libraries, executables, and test targets are defined.

Key stanzas

In the context of Dune, a stanza is just a fancy word for a block of configuration. It tells the build system what kind of artifact you want to define — be it a library, an executable, a test, a documentation alias, or even an installable binary. Each stanza lives inside a dune file and follows a structured, declarative syntax.

They’re usually grouped by purpose, and each type comes with its own expected fields. Each of these stanzas deserves a deeper dive, but here's a quick overview to get you started.

library stanza

(library
 (name helloer_lib)
 (modules helloer_lib)
)


A library stanza tells Dune how to compile a set of modules into a reusable package.

Purpose of this stanza:

defines a library named helloer_lib;
which will be built from the module helloer_lib.ml (by default, each .ml file defines a module with the same name);
and only the exposed modules should be listed here - that is, the modules that are meant to be part of the library's public API and usable by other parts of the project or by external code.

OCaml module names should match the filename, so helloer_lib.ml is expected to exist in this directory.

executable stanza

(executable
 (public_name helloer)
 (name helloer)
 (libraries cmdliner helloer_lib)
 (modules helloer)
)


An executable stanza explains how to bundle up some code into a runnable binary.

Purposes:

name: builds an executable named helloer;
needs libraries: external cmdliner (for CLI parsing) and internal helloer_lib (our own library);
public_name helloer: this makes the executable available publicly. It is used for dune install helloer in the opam file for instance.

You can learn about how to find and install cmdliner in opam in the latest Opam 103 blogpost, you'll find a simple breakdown of opam files there too .

test stanza

(test
 (name test)
 (libraries alcotest helloer_lib)
 (modules test)
)


What it does:

declares a test target named test, defined in the file test.ml. A test stanza registers the executable as part of the runtest rule alias, meaning it will be compiled and run automatically when you invoke dune runtest (or its alias dune test);
uses the alcotest testing library;
also uses helloer_lib to test its functionality.

Now your project is setup and structured. Next, let’s see how to build it.

Build and run your project

dune build

As you can see below, the dune build @all command will build all targets defined in your dune files, it's the default behaviour of the dune build command.

$ tree
.
├── dune
├── dune-project
├── helloer_lib.ml
├── helloer.ml
├── helloer.opam
└── test.ml
$ dune build @all

$ tree -L 2
.
├── _build
│   ├── default
│   │   ├── helloer.exe      // executable in its build dir
│   │   ├── helloer_lib.cmxs // built library
│   │   ├── test.exe         // test executable
│   │   └── [...]
│   ├── install
│   └── log
├── dune
├── dune-project
├── helloer_lib.ml
├── helloer.ml
├── helloer.opam
└── test.ml


Explanation:

@all is an alias that includes all buildable targets defined in your dune files: executables, libraries, tests, docs, etc;
it is useful for doing a full build to ensure everything compiles.

You can also use custom aliases (like @doc, @runtest, etc.), or define your own in your dune files.

dune build @doc

Once your code builds and your project has a proper dune-project file, you can generate documentation using:

$ dune build @doc


What it does:

uses odoc behind the scenes to build API docs from your OCaml code. This implies that installing odoc is mandatory to benefit from this feature, a simple opam install odoc will do just fine;
builds HTML files in _build/default/_doc/_html/.

Make sure your dune-project file includes a (package ...) stanza, and that your libraries are properly documented using OCaml comments (** your comment *).

You can see generate the doc for the toy project here

NB: You will find all complementary information in the official docs 👈.

After building, you can view the generated docs:

$ open _build/default/_doc/_html/index.html


This is great for checking your module interfaces or publishing documentation online.

dune exec --

This command is used to run executables defined in your project.

So, something like:

$ dune exec -- ./helloer.exe
Hello OCamlers!!                   
$ dune exec -- ./helloer.exe --gentle
Welcome my dear OCamlers.          


This tells dune to build the executable if necessary, then run it. The -- separates the dune options from the executable and its arguments. The first item after -- is the executable to run

This can be:

A relative path to a built target, so: dune exec -- ./path/to/executable
A public name of an installed executable, meaning: dune exec -- ./helloer.

All additional arguments after the executable name (like --gentle) are passed to the executable itself.

Essentially, dune exec -- COMMAND behaves the same way as calling dune install first and then COMMAND sequentially.

NB: If you'd like to copy the executable to your project root (outside _build/), you can add (promote (until-clean)) to your executable stanza.

Great, our little project builds and runs smoothly, now onto testing it.

Test your project with Dune

In our helloer project, we use the alcotest library on our internal helloer_lib. This is quite standard. However testing the executable itself can be done without depending on an external tool with the help of cram tests.

Cram tests

Dune supports a special kind of test called a cram test, inspired by the original Cram, which checks that command-line examples produce the expected output.

The "expected output" is the shell-session itself and whatever your executable prints, during its test run for that specific call, is checked against it.

To create a cram test, you just write a .t file that contains a succession of shell-like sessions separated by empty newlines like so:

$ helloer
Hello OCamlers!!

$ helloer --gentle
Welcome my dear OCamlers.


How it works:

it runs the commands in .t files;
it compares what is printed to stdout by our binary to the expected output written in the cram file;
fails if the outputs differ. However, you can use dune promote whenever you wish to replace all the failed tests with the new output, which will most often happen when you make changes to your binary's printing to stdout.

You can test it here.

dune runtest

You can run all your tests using:

$ dune runtest


it builds test targets defined in your project;
it looks for files ending in .t or .ml files marked as tests;
it executes the tests, often using expect style testing (like ppx_expect or alcotest).

It's quite straightforward: if you have an inline_tests stanza or an expect test, it will run them and tell you if anything failed.

For example, a valid cram test will output something like:

$ dune runtest
Testing `Tests'.                 
This run has ID `N39NJ5ZE'.

  [OK]          messages          0   normal.
  [OK]          messages          1   gentle.

Full test results in `~/ocamler/dev/helloer/_build/default/_build/_tests/Tests'.
Test Successful in 0.000s. 2 tests run.


However, if one of these tests were to fail, you would see something like:

$ dune runtest
File "test.t", line 1, characters 0-0:
diff --git a/_build/.sandbox/e6d6dcfb864b62e42104889af2a44f23/default/test.t b/_build/.sandbox/e6d6dcfb864b62e42104889af2a44f23/default/test.t.corrected
index f79b63c..70c7a17 100644
--- a/_build/.sandbox/e6d6dcfb864b62e42104889af2a44f23/default/test.t
+++ b/_build/.sandbox/e6d6dcfb864b62e42104889af2a44f23/default/test.t.corrected
@@ -3,7 +3,7 @@ Default behaviour
   Hello OCamlers!!
 Gentle behaviour
   $ helloer --gentle
-  Welcome my deer OCamlers.
+  Welcome my dear OCamlers.
 Unknown behaviour
   $ helloer --unknown
   helloer: unknown option '--unknown'.
File "dune", line 16, characters 7-11:       
16 |  (name test)
            ^^^^
Testing `Tests'.
This run has ID `1OS0H3WP'.

  [OK]          messages          0   normal.
> [FAIL]        messages          1   gentle.

┌──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│ [FAIL]        messages          1   gentle.                                                                                              │
└──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
ASSERT same string
FAIL same string

   Expected: `"Welcome my deer OCamlers."'
   Received: `"Welcome my dear OCamlers."'

Raised at Alcotest_engine__Test.check in file "src/alcotest-engine/test.ml", lines 216-226, characters 4-19
Called from Alcotest_engine__Core.Make.protect_test.(fun) in file "src/alcotest-engine/core.ml", line 186, characters 17-23
Called from Alcotest_engine__Monad.Identity.catch in file "src/alcotest-engine/monad.ml", line 24, characters 31-35

Logs saved to `~/ocamler/dev/helloer/_build/default/_build/_tests/Tests/messages.001.output'.
 ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

Full test results in `~/ocamler/dev/helloer/_build/default/_build/_tests/Tests'.
1 failure! in 0.000s. 2 tests run.


At this point in the development process, we can assume that you know how to use the most basic dune command-lines to make your OCaml projects a reality!

Now that we’ve explored how Dune works at a foundational level — writing stanzas by hand, managing libraries and executables, building, running, testing — you’re probably starting to see patterns. These project ingredients don’t change much from one small OCaml project to the next. That’s exactly where dune init comes in.

Scaffolding with dune init

dune init is the starting point for creating a new OCaml project using Dune. It scaffolds a working directory structure and sets up the essential files you’ll need.

Rather than writing every file from scratch, Dune offers a command-line scaffolding tool that sets up a complete, minimal project for you — so you can jump straight to writing code with a solid structure already in place.

This means the following command is all you need to scaffold a basic project:

$ dune init project helloer


What it does:

creates a new directory helloer with a working OCaml project inside;
sets up the dune-project file;
adds sample source files and their associated dune build files.

The structure you'll get looks like this:

$ tree
helloer/
├── bin/
│   ├── dune
│   └── main.ml
├── dune-project
├── lib
│   ├── dune
├── test
│    ├── dune
│    ├── test_helloer.ml
└── [...]


From here, you can build on this template by adding libraries, tests, and more.

If your project is only a library or binary, you can use the other project template with dune init lib helloer or dune init exec helloer.

Sharp-eyed readers may notice differences between our toy project and the layout generated by dune init.

You can see the end result in this branch.

Conclusion

Indeed, you should be comfortable with the basic building blocks of a dune-based OCaml project: from initializing it, defining libraries and executables, to running it and writing tests, and even generating documentation. dune takes care of a lot of the heavy lifting, letting you focus on writing code rather than fiddling with build scripts. As you grow more confident with OCaml and Dune, you’ll discover even more powerful features—but for now, you’re well-equipped to start building real-world OCaml applications.

About OCamlPro:

OCamlPro is a R&D lab founded in 2011, with the mission to help industrial users benefit from experts with a state-of-the-art knowledge of programming languages theory and practice.

We provide audit, support, custom developer tools and training for both the most modern languages, such as Rust, Wasm and OCaml, and for legacy languages, such as COBOL or even home-made domain-specific languages;
We design, create and implement software with great added-value for our clients. High complexity is not a problem for our PhD-level experts. For example, we helped the French Income Tax Administration re-adapt and improve their internally kept M language, we designed a DSL to model and express revenue streams in the Cinema Industry, codename Niagara, and we also developed the prototype of the Tezos proof-of-stake blockchain from 2014 to 2018.
We have a long history of creating open-source projects, such as the Opam package manager, the LearnOCaml web platform, and contributing to other ones, such as the Flambda optimizing compiler, or the GnuCOBOL compiler.
We are also experts of Formal Methods, developing tools such as our SMT Solver Alt-Ergo (check our Alt-Ergo Users' Club) and using them to prove safety or security properties of programs.

Please reach out, we'll be delighted to discuss your challenges: contact@ocamlpro.com or book a quick discussion.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

30. Doing something that’s never been done before (2025)

Source: https://talglobus.com/p/doing-something-thats-never-been-done-before/
Site: Tal Globus
Submitter: surprisetalk (Hacker News)
Published: 2025-11-14
HN activity: 31 points · 27 comments
Length: 442 words (~2 min read)
Language: en-us

I’ve found recently that I’ve been a bit hesitant to take on new projects, especially of the interesting variety, largely out of a fear that I’m doing something unoriginal. As anyone who has spent any substantial amount of time in the markets will tell you, being second to an idea isn’t necessarily terrible, but being 50th generally is, and I’d really rather avoid being 50th whenever possible. How do you guarantee, or at least maximize the odds, that whatever you’re doing, you’re the first?

It seems there are actually a few good rules of thumb to this.

First and foremost, people have lives. They only have so much time they can give a project, and the more time a project takes up, the more likely they’ll either decide not to take it on, or that they’ll run out of time and not come back to it later.

The same goes for difficulty. While I wouldn’t say that people, by their nature, are lazy, I would say that evolution has favored this behavioral pattern where people tend to be less likely to do things that are more difficult, or involve a greater number of steps. As a result, the greater the degree of difficulty an endeavor requires, or the greater the number of steps, the less likely that someone has done it, or that they’ve finished after starting.

Next, obscurity. I don’t think it should come as much of a surprise that the more obscure the thing that you’re thinking of doing, the lower the likelihood that someone has stumbled on it and done it.

Finally, there seems to be this fourth factor combining obscurity and the number of steps in cases of progressive dependency, where later steps require previous steps to be completed to even be discovered. Say one in 10 people in your industry will stumble on whatever idea you happen to have first. Then maybe one in 10 people who complete the step following the first idea will discover the second idea, and then one in 10 of those who complete the second will also discover the third. It stands to reason that the more steps your project requires, the less likely it is that someone else will have stumbled on all of them.

So if you want to truly do something that no one has done before, do something obscure, do something time-consuming, do something difficult, and do something that has unknowns you’ll only resolve once you complete the first bits. The more of these your project involves, the lower the number of people who will have done it. Enough, and it’s probably fairly likely you’ll be the first.

