Hacker News Top 30 — 2026-04-20

Generated on 2026-04-20 09:55 UTC

1. OpenClaw isn't fooling me. I remember MS-DOS

Source: https://www.flyingpenguin.com/build-an-openclaw-free-secure-always-on-local-ai-agent/
Site: flyingpenguin.com
Submitter: feigewalnuss (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-04-20 07:49 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 75 points · 38 comments
Length: 1.6K words (~7 min read)
Language: en-US

OpenClaw isn’t fooling me. I remember MS-DOS.

The sad days of DOS. Any program could peek and poke the kernel, hook interrupts, write anywhere on disk. There was no safety.

The fix wasn’t a wrapper, or a different shell. It was a whole different approach to what was being done. The world already had rings, virtual memory, ACLs, separate address spaces. Thirty years of separations that Unix had from the start were ignored, and it finally caught up to the world of DOS.

I’m not saying DOS wasn’t wildly popular. Oh my god. I remember one dark night in a bar in Chicago, a drunk Swedish IT consultant jumped onto a table and said “listen up everyone!”. As he waved his beer mug around, sloshing carelessly, with wobbly legs, he said he was in town to work on Wal-Mart Point-of-sale (POS) devices running MS-DOS. Why was he acting like this? He was happy, very, very happy. He wanted us to know he loved his work, something like “CAN YOU BELIEVE WAL-MART HAS HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS OF DOS MACHINES WITH ALL YOUR F$%#$%NG PAYMENT CARD DATA?! HAHAHA! AND IT ALL HAS ONE PASSWORD THAT EVERYONE SHARES! YOU WANT IT?! I GOT IT RIGHT HERE! FREEDOM, AMERICA, F$#%$K YEAH!”

True story. Both the guy and Wal-Mart put ALL customer information on MSDOS with exactly zero safety.

NCR had just announced a new MS-DOS-based PC…we decided to build a custom solution for Wal-Mart. I managed to connect a cash drawer and a POS printer to the new PC and wrote a dedicated Layaway application in compiled MS Basic. For the first time, Wal-Mart could store customer info on a disk. A clerk could search by name in seconds, and more importantly, the system tracked exactly where the merchandise was tucked away in the backroom. It was a massive efficiency win, and NCR ultimately rolled it out to all Wal-Mart stores.

Personal identity information was never breached faster! Massive efficiency win, indeed. When Wal-Mart was breached in 2006 they naturally had to wait three long years to notify anyone. So efficient.

Agent gateways feel like we are racing backwards into the MS-DOS era. At any minute in a bar I expect a drunk Swedish IT consultant to be standing on a table waving a lobster around, swearing about his single token for all agents. Because, let’s face it, when you look at gateways out there they can hand the model an exec tool and trust it. One process, one token, with the LLM holding the line.

NVIDIA clearly has seen the storm brewing and therefore published a thoughtful tutorial walking through a “NemoClaw” self-hosted agent setup on DGX Spark.

Use NVIDIA DGX Spark to deploy OpenClaw and NemoClaw end-to-end, from model serving to Telegram connectivity, with full control over your runtime environment.

I appreciate this effort. Real engineering, carefully done. I took the tutorial to learn and I followed it in Wirken, a gateway I’ve been building, to document what each step looked like.

The tutorial has you bind Ollama to 0.0.0.0 so the sandboxed agent can reach it across a network namespace. Then it pairs the Telegram bot by sending a code through the chat channel. It next approves blocked outbound connections in a separate host-side TUI. Each of those seem to be steps to address a real problem, which is how to put security around something that doesn’t work when it has security around it. It’s what an architecture requires when the sandbox sits around the whole agent.

Call me old-fashioned but I anticipated a lot of this in Wirken by giving the agent more safety by shrinking the boundaries. Each channel is a separate process with its own Ed25519 identity. The vault runs out of process. Inference stays on loopback because the agent is on the host. Shell exec runs in a hardened container configured at the tool layer, rather than trying to wrap around the whole agent. Sixteen high-risk command prefixes prompt on every call; others are first-use with a 30-day memory.

Here’s what I found, step by step

Step NemoClaw Wirken.AI
1. Runtime Register the NVIDIA container runtime with Docker, set cgroup namespace mode to host. Foundational setup because the agent runs inside a container. No equivalent step. The gateway runs as a host process. Docker appears only as a per-tool-call sandbox for shell exec, provisioned lazily.
2. Ollama Override OLLAMA_HOST to 0.0.0.0 so the sandboxed agent can reach inference across its own network namespace. Ollama stays on 127.0.0.1. The agent is a host process, so loopback is enough.
3. Install curl-pipe-bash from an NVIDIA URL. curl-pipe-sh as well. The installer verifies the release signature with ssh-keygen against an embedded key, fail-closed on every failure path. The installer’s own SHA is pinned in the README for readers who want to check the script before piping.
4. Model ollama pull the model, then ollama run to preload weights into GPU memory. Same pattern. Both delegate inference to Ollama.
5. Onboarding Wizard produces a sandbox image with policy and inference baked in, as a named rebuildable unit. Wizard writes provider config and channel registrations. The permission model lives in the binary; runtime state is which action keys have been approved.
6. Telegram Pairing code sent through the chat channel; user approves from inside the sandbox. Binds a platform user to the agent at first contact. Bot token into an encrypted vault, fresh Ed25519 keypair for the adapter, no in-chat pairing. Approval granularity is per action and per agent rather than per channel user.
7. Web UI Localhost URL with a capability token in the fragment, not shown again. Localhost URL, loopback-bound, no token required.
8. Remote access Host-side port forward started through OpenShell, then SSH tunnel. The extra hop is because the UI lives inside a netns. SSH tunnel only. The WebChat listener is already on host loopback.
9. Policy Enforces at the netns boundary. Outbound connections are surfaced in a TUI with host, port, and initiating binary. Approve for the session or persist. Enforces at the tool dispatch layer. Sixteen high-risk command prefixes always prompt; others are first-use, remembered 30 days. Approved commands run inside a hardened Docker container with cap_drop ALL, no-new-privileges, read-only rootfs, 64MB tmpfs at /tmp, and no network.

Looking at my audit logs

The architectural claims above are recorded in the logs of the tutorial work. Wirken uses a hash-chained audit database of the webchat session, so here’s what that looked like in version 0.7.5.

First, the Tier 3 denial on curl:

[ 4] assistant_tool_calls
     call: exec({"command":"curl https://httpbin.org/get"})
[ 5] permission_denied
     action_key='shell:curl'  tier=tier3
[ 6] tool_result
     tool=exec success=False
     output: Permission denied: 'exec' requires tier3 approval.
[10] attestation
     chain_head_seq=9
     chain_head_hash=ff57c574ab503a74fa942ddb164def0df5bfbff05e5d5d6ecadcf127bce7e021


The tool call never reached the sandbox. The denial is recorded as a typed event in the audit chain, covered by the per-turn attestation.

Second, the hardened sandbox on sh. With shell:sh pre-approved at Tier 2, the same agent runs a compound command that probes three locations:

[14] assistant_tool_calls
     call: exec({"command":"sh -c \"touch /cannot_write_here 2>&1; ...\""})
[15] tool_result
     tool=exec success=True
     output:
       touch: cannot touch '/cannot_write_here': Read-only file system
       ws_ok=1
       tmp_ok=1
[19] attestation
     chain_head_seq=18
     chain_head_hash=6bf35f22df02b496244091e54b4dbf9b3ffdcf6a03485413f0522b84e2eb08a8


Read-only file system is the kernel refusing to open a new file against a read-only mount. Not a DAC check, the rootfs itself. ws_ok=1 confirms the workspace bind-mount stayed writable. tmp_ok=1 confirms the tmpfs at /tmp did too.

Both receipts are consecutive rows from the same session, hash-chained through to the attestation signatures at seq 9 and seq 18. wirken sessions verify replays the chain and confirms every leaf hash matches its payload and every chain hash matches SHA-256(prev_hash || leaf_hash).

How big is your boundary?

The workarounds in the tutorial are trying to make the best of a foundation that doesn’t separate concerns the way engineers typically like. Bind to 0.0.0.0 because the sandbox can’t reach loopback. Pair through the chat channel because there’s no separate identity plane. Wrap the whole agent in a container because the agent itself isn’t yet trusted. Approve at the netns boundary because the tool layer has no concept of permission.

Each of those is a compromise; response to a constraint. The constraint is worth revisiting like it’s 1985 again and we can stop Bill Gates.
Abort, Retry, Fail today but tomorrow I promise there will be a better shell.

In 1973 Unix got process separation, user separation, file permissions, and pipes between small programs. By 1995 I was all-in on Linux, building kernels by hand and starting this blog named flyingpenguin, because it had inherited them and made them the default.

In 2020 Microsoft finally admitted Linux was their better future, which everyone knows today.

Back in 2001, former Microsoft CEO Steve Ballmer famously called Linux “a cancer” … During a [2020] MIT event, [Microsoft president Brad] Smith said: “Microsoft was on the wrong side of history”

The agent space is still early and some people never learn the past. Wirken is one take on what it looks like when you remember. Like, remember the sheer horror of trying to protect anything in DOS? Remember the Wal-Mart breach of 2006, reported in 2009?

It’s just a question of whether we apply what computer history already knows to how we make agents safe for daily use. There are dozens of others doing versions of their own Wirken, and I’d genuinely like to hear from people working on the same problem; the architectures can converge in more than one way.

Repo: wirken.ai

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

2. GitHub's Fake Star Economy

Source: https://awesomeagents.ai/news/github-fake-stars-investigation/
Site: Awesome Agents
Author: Elena Marchetti
Published: 2026-04-13
HN activity: 73 points · 44 comments
Length: 3.0K words (~14 min read)
Language: en-us

TL;DR

A peer-reviewed CMU study (ICSE 2026) found 6 million fake stars across 18,617 repositories using 301,000 accounts - with AI/LLM repos the largest non-malicious category
Stars sell for $0.03 to $0.85 each on at least a dozen websites, Fiverr gigs, and Telegram channels - no dark web required
VCs explicitly use stars as sourcing signals: Redpoint found the median star count at seed is 2,850, and firms run automated scrapers to find fast-growing repos
We ran our own analysis sampling 150 profiles per repo across 20 projects and found repos where 36-76% of stargazers have zero followers and fork-to-star ratios 10x below organic baselines
The FTC's 2024 rule banning fake social influence metrics carries penalties of $53,088 per violation - and the SEC has already charged startup founders for inflating traction metrics during fundraising

A GitHub star costs $0.06 at the low end. A seed round unlocks $1 million to $10 million. The math is obvious, and thousands of repositories are exploiting it.

This investigation maps the full ecosystem: from the peer-reviewed research quantifying the problem, to the marketplaces selling stars openly, to the venture capital pipeline that converts star counts into funding decisions. We ran our own analysis on 20 repositories using the GitHub API, sampling thousands of stargazer profiles to independently verify which projects show fingerprints of manipulation - and which don't.

The picture that emerges is a mature, professionalized shadow economy operating in plain sight.

Six million fake stars

The definitive account comes from a peer-reviewed study presented at ICSE 2026 by researchers at Carnegie Mellon University, North Carolina State University, and Socket. Their tool, StarScout, analyzed 20 terabytes of GitHub metadata - 6.7 billion events and 326 million stars from 2019 to 2024 - and identified approximately 6 million suspected fake stars distributed across 18,617 repositories by roughly 301,000 accounts.

The problem accelerated dramatically in 2024. By July, 16.66% of all repositories with 50 or more stars were involved in fake star campaigns - up from near-zero before 2022. The researchers' detection proved accurate: 90.42% of flagged repositories and 57.07% of flagged accounts had been deleted as of January 2025, confirming GitHub itself recognized these as illegitimate.

AI and LLM repositories emerged as the largest non-malicious category of fake-star recipients, ahead of blockchain/cryptocurrency projects in absolute volume at 177,000 fake stars. The study notes that "many of which are academic paper repositories or LLM-related startup products." Critically, 78 repositories with detected fake star campaigns appeared on GitHub Trending, proving that purchased stars successfully game the platform's discovery algorithm.

Earlier foundational work includes Dagster's March 2023 investigation, where engineers purchased stars from two vendors to study the phenomenon. They found services via basic Google search. A premium vendor - GitHub24, a registered German company (Moller und Ringauf GbR) - charged EUR 0.85 per star and delivered reliably, with all 100 stars persisting after one month. A budget service (Baddhi Shop) sold 1,000 stars for $64, though only 75% survived.

The marketplace

The star-selling ecosystem spans dedicated websites, freelance platforms, exchange networks, and underground channels. At least a dozen active websites sell GitHub stars directly, including SocialPlug.io, Buy.fans, Boost-Like.store, GitHubPromoter.com, Followdeh.com, and Vurike.com.

Tier	Price per star	Delivery	Account quality
Budget (disposable accounts)	$0.03 - $0.10	Days	New, empty profiles
Mid-range	$0.20 - $0.50	1-2 weeks	Some activity history
Premium (aged accounts)	$0.80 - $0.90	Gradual, "natural" delivery	Years-old profiles with repos and contributions

On Fiverr, 24 active gigs sell GitHub promotion, with packages from $5 for basic stars and forks to $25+ for "organic promotion." Many use obfuscated language to evade platform filters. Star exchange platforms like GithubStarMate.com and SafeStarExchange.com - both live and operational - enable free mutual starring through credit-based systems.

The infrastructure extends beyond stars. At least seven open-source tools on GitHub (fake-git-history, commit-bot, Commiter, and others) exist specifically to fabricate GitHub contribution graphs. Pre-built GitHub profiles with five-year commit histories and Arctic Code Vault Contributor badges sell for approximately $5,000 on Telegram.

Some vendors offer replacement guarantees - Followdeh advertises 30-day coverage, and premium services promise "non-drop" stars that survive GitHub's detection systems. SocialPlug claims 3.1 million stars delivered across 53,000+ clients and offers a formal API for programmatic purchasing.

A Tsinghua University study (ACSAC 2020) documented Chinese QQ and WeChat promotion groups with 1,020+ members processing roughly 20 repos per day, generating an estimated $3.4 to $4.4 million annually in promoter profits.

Our analysis: what fake stargazers look like

To move beyond reported statistics, we built a GitHub API analysis tool and ran it against 20 repositories: projects flagged by StarScout, fast-growing AI repos from the Runa Capital ROSS Index, and known organic baselines. For each repo, we sampled 150 stargazer profiles and measured account age, public repos, followers, and bio presence.

The fingerprints of manipulation are unmistakable once you know what to look for.

The baseline: what organic looks like

Metric	Flask (71K stars)	LangChain (133K)	AutoGPT (183K)
Median account age	4,801 days	2,967 days	4,022 days
Zero public repos	5.3%	5.9%	2.0%
Zero followers	10.0%	11.8%	5.9%
Ghost accounts	1.3%	-	-
Suspicious accounts	0.0%	0.0%	0.0%
Fork-to-star ratio	0.235	0.155	0.090
Watcher-to-star ratio	0.029	0.006	0.005

Organic repositories are starred by developers who have been on GitHub for years, maintain their own projects, and follow other users. Ghost accounts - zero repos, zero followers, no bio - make up about 1% of a healthy project's stargazer base.

The manipulated: blockchain repos

Metric	Union Labs (74K)	Shardeum (32K)	FreeDomain (157K)	Anoma (34K)
Median account age	1,180d	997d	1,042d	1,071d
Zero public repos	32.7%	38.0%	28.0%	35.3%
Zero followers	52.0%	59.3%	81.3%	62.0%
Ghost accounts	19.3%	28.7%	28.0%	26.7%
Fork-to-star ratio	0.052	0.022	0.017	0.121
Watcher-to-star ratio	0.022	0.009	0.001	0.006

These repos share a distinctive fingerprint. The accounts aren't obviously new - median ages of 1,000+ days - so they pass simple "young account" filters. But they're empty: a third have zero repos, half to four-fifths have zero followers, and a quarter are complete ghosts. These are aged accounts purchased or farmed specifically for star campaigns.

The fork-to-star ratio is the strongest signal. Flask has 235 forks per 1,000 stars. Shardeum has 22. FreeDomain has 17. When nobody is forking a 157,000-star repository, nobody is using it. The watcher-to-star ratio tells the same story: FreeDomain's 0.001 means that for every 1,000 people who starred the repo, just one actually watches it for updates.

FreeDomain is worth isolating: 157,000 stars, but only 168 watchers and 2,676 forks. That's a watcher-to-star ratio 26x lower than Flask. 81.3% of sampled stargazers have zero followers. This is a repository where almost nobody who starred it has any visible presence on GitHub.

Union Labs is the most consequential case. It was ranked #1 on Runa Capital's ROSS Index for Q2 2025 - a widely cited VC industry report identifying the "hottest open-source startups" - with 54.2x star growth and 74,300 stars. Our analysis found 32.7% zero-repo accounts, 52% zero-follower accounts, and a fork-to-star ratio of 0.052. The StarScout analysis flagged it with 47.4% suspected fake stars. An influential investment-sourcing report that VCs rely on was topped by a project with nearly half its stars suspected as artificial.

The AI sector: a mixed picture

Metric	RagaAI (16K)	openai-fm (3K)	Langflow (147K)	hermes-agent (74K)
Median account age	484d	116d	2,859d	2,932d
Zero public repos	38.8%	38.0%	11.2%	10.7%
Zero followers	76.2%	66.7%	20.0%	32.0%
Ghost accounts	28.0%	36.0%	-	6.0%
Suspicious	0.0%	66.0%	0.0%	8.0%
Fork-to-star ratio	0.224	2.794	0.060	0.133

RagaAI-Catalyst and openai-fm show clear manipulation signals. RagaAI has 76.2% zero-follower accounts and 28% ghosts - nearly identical to the blockchain pattern. openai-fm is the most extreme case in our dataset: 66% suspicious accounts, 36% ghosts, and a median account age of just 116 days. Two-thirds of its stargazers are less than a year old with virtually no GitHub activity. (The StarScout analysis notes this is likely third-party bots, not OpenAI itself.)

Langflow - flagged by StarScout at 47.9% fake - showed clean metrics in our profile sample, with a median age of 2,859 days and low ghost rates. This likely reflects improved account quality since the StarScout scan. The 0.060 fork-to-star ratio is still notably low - roughly a quarter of Flask's - suggesting less genuine adoption relative to star count.

For comparison, NousResearch's hermes-agent looks relatively organic: median age 8 years, 6% ghosts, fork-to-star ratio of 0.133. Despite Reddit accusations of astroturfing, the stargazer population is mostly real developers. The project's crypto-adjacent audience includes more casual GitHub users, which explains slightly elevated zero-follower rates, but the fundamental engagement pattern is legitimate.

How stars become dollars

The connection between GitHub star counts and startup funding is not speculative - it is explicitly documented by the investors themselves.

Jordan Segall, Partner at Redpoint Ventures, published an analysis of 80 developer tool companies showing that the median GitHub star count at seed financing was 2,850 and at Series A was 4,980. He confirmed: "Many VCs write internal scraping programs to identify fast growing github projects for sourcing, and the most common metric they look toward is stars."

Those numbers set an implicit target. For $85 to $285 in budget stars, a startup can manufacture the 2,850-star seed median. For $990 to $4,500, it can reach Series A territory. Against typical seed rounds of $1-10 million, the ROI ranges from 3,500x to 117,000x.

Runa Capital publishes the ROSS (Runa Open Source Startup) Index quarterly, ranking the 20 fastest-growing open-source startups by GitHub star growth rate. Per TechCrunch, 68% of ROSS Index startups that attracted investment did so at seed stage, with $169 million raised across tracked rounds. GitHub itself, through its GitHub Fund partnership with M12 (Microsoft's VC arm), commits $10 million annually to invest in 8-10 open-source companies at pre-seed/seed stages based partly on platform traction.

Documented examples of the star-to-funding pipeline:

Lovable (formerly GPT Engineer): 50,000+ stars, $7.5M pre-seed, $200M Series A at $1.8 billion valuation with 45 employees
Pangolin: 1,000 stars in January 2025, Y Combinator acceptance, $4.7M seed round by August 2025
Browser-use: 50,000 stars in 3 months, Y Combinator W25 batch, $17M seed
LangChain: $10M from Benchmark at seed stage

Dagster's Fraser Marlow, who led the fake star investigation, admitted directly: "In the run-up to the fundraising, I spent a fair amount of time preoccupied with GitHub stars." An academic paper in Organization Science provided rigorous statistical evidence that GitHub engagement correlates with startup funding outcomes - startups active on GitHub are 15 percentage points more likely to have raised a financing round.

The incentive loop is self-reinforcing: VCs use stars as sourcing signals, so startups manipulate stars, so VCs see inflated traction, so more VCs adopt star-tracking, so more startups manipulate. Redpoint's own published benchmarks give startups an exact target to buy toward.

The fork-to-star ratio: a simple detection heuristic

Our analysis revealed the fork-to-star ratio as the strongest simple heuristic for identifying potential manipulation. The logic is straightforward: a star costs nothing and conveys no commitment. A fork means someone downloaded the code to use or modify it.

Category	Repos	Avg F/S ratio
Organic baselines (Flask, LangChain, AutoGPT)	3	0.160
AI tools (crewAI, dify, agno, mem0, browser-use)	5	0.124
Suspected manipulation (blockchain cluster)	4	0.053
Extreme cases (Shardeum, FreeDomain)	2	0.020

Any repository with a fork-to-star ratio below 0.05 and more than 10,000 stars warrants scrutiny. The watcher-to-star ratio is even more telling: organic projects average 0.005 to 0.030; FreeDomain registers 0.001.

These ratios aren't perfect - educational repos and curated lists naturally have low fork rates. But as a first-pass filter, they catch the most egregious cases that raw star counts miss entirely.

Fake popularity beyond GitHub

The problem extends to every platform where popularity metrics influence trust.

npm downloads are trivially inflatable. Developer Andy Richardson demonstrated this by using a single AWS Lambda function (free tier) to push his package is-introspection-query to nearly 1 million downloads per week - surpassing legitimate packages like urql and mobx. Zero actual users. The CMU study found that of repos with fake star campaigns, only 1.23% appeared in package registries, but of those 738 packages, 70.46% had zero dependent projects.

VS Code Marketplace extensions are similarly vulnerable. Researchers demonstrated 1,000+ installs of a fake extension in 48 hours. AquaSec found 1,283 extensions with known malicious dependencies totaling 229 million installs.

X/Twitter promotion amplifies artificial GitHub virality through engagement pods - private groups where members agree to like, repost, and comment on each other's content. Growth Terminal sells this as a product feature. NBC News and Clemson University researchers identified a network of 686 X accounts that posted more than 130,000 times using LLM-generated content, some containing telltale artifacts like "Dolphin here!" from the uncensored Dolphin model they employed.

The Higgsfield AI case documents cross-platform astroturfing at industrial scale: over 100 confirmed spam posts across 60+ subreddits, combined with mass template DMs to content creators offering payment for promotion.

The legal exposure nobody talks about

The FTC Consumer Review Rule, effective October 21, 2024, explicitly prohibits selling or buying "fake indicators of social media influence" generated by bots or fake accounts for commercial purposes. Penalties: up to $53,088 per violation. The FTC issued its first warning letters to 10 companies in December 2025. A GitHub star purchased to promote a commercial product fits this framework.

The SEC precedent is more direct. HeadSpin's CEO was charged with wire fraud (maximum 20 years) and securities fraud for inflating metrics to deceive investors out of $80 million. ComplYant's founder faced charges for claiming $250,000 monthly revenue when actual revenue was $250.

The SEC's message: "Startup fundraisers cannot use the 'fake it until you make it' ethos to whitewash lying to investors."

If a startup buys fake GitHub stars to inflate perceived traction during a fundraising round, and investors rely on those metrics to deploy capital, the wire fraud framework applies: using electronic communications to misrepresent material facts for financial gain. No one has been charged specifically for fake GitHub stars yet. Given the CMU research documenting the practice at scale and the FTC rule explicitly covering fake social influence metrics, it may only be a matter of time.

GitHub's response

GitHub's Acceptable Use Policies explicitly prohibit "inauthentic interactions, such as fake accounts and automated inauthentic activity," "rank abuse, such as automated starring or following," and "creation of or participation in secondary markets for the purpose of the proliferation of inauthentic activity." The policies even specifically prohibit starring incentivized by "cryptocurrency airdrops, tokens, credits, gifts or other give-aways."

Enforcement is reactive and asymmetric. GitHub removed 90.42% of repositories flagged by StarScout, but only 57.07% of the accounts that delivered those stars. The infrastructure for future campaigns largely remains intact. When Dagster published its investigation, fake star profiles were deleted within 48 hours - but only after public embarrassment, not proactive detection.

GitHub has never published an engineering blog post about its detection methods or enforcement statistics. No transparency report exists for star manipulation. The company's VP of Security Operations told Wired only that they "disabled user accounts in accordance with GitHub's Acceptable Use Policies," declining to elaborate - though that comment was specifically about the Stargazers Ghost Network malware operation, not vanity metric manipulation.

The CMU researchers recommended GitHub adopt a weighted popularity metric based on network centrality rather than raw star counts. A change that would structurally undermine the fake star economy. GitHub has not implemented it.

What VCs should use instead

Bessemer Venture Partners calls stars "vanity metrics" and instead tracks unique monthly contributor activity - anyone who created an issue, comment, PR, or commit. Fewer than 5% of top 10,000 projects ever exceeded 250 monthly contributors; only 2% sustained it across six months.

Jono Bacon at StateShift recommends five metrics that correlate with real adoption: package downloads, issue quality (production edge cases from real users), contributor retention (time to second PR), community discussion depth, and usage telemetry.

The fork-to-star ratio our analysis surfaced is the simplest first-pass filter. A healthy project has roughly 100-200 forks per 1,000 stars. Projects below 50 forks per 1,000 stars with high absolute counts deserve a closer look.

As one commenter put it: "You can fake a star count, but you can't fake a bug fix that saves someone's weekend."

The structural problem

Three dynamics make this self-reinforcing.

First, the incentive loop. VCs use stars as sourcing signals. Startups manipulate stars. VCs see inflated traction. More VCs adopt star-tracking. More startups manipulate. Redpoint's published benchmarks - 2,850 at seed, 4,980 at Series A - effectively give startups a price list for how many stars to buy.

Second, the AI sector's specific vulnerability. The combination of extreme hype, crypto-adjacent funding models that reward token price over product quality, and a reviewer ecosystem on X/Twitter populated partly by fabricated personas creates a perfect environment for manufactured credibility. Our analysis confirmed this: the repos with the worst manipulation signals were overwhelmingly blockchain and crypto-adjacent AI projects.

Third, GitHub's enforcement asymmetry. Removing repos but leaving 57% of fake accounts intact preserves the labor force of the fake star economy while doing little to deter repeat offenses. Until GitHub implements structural changes - weighted popularity metrics, account-level reputation scoring, or transparent enforcement reporting - the gap between star counts and genuine developer adoption will continue to widen.

The star economy is a $50 problem with a $50 million consequence. Until the platforms, investors, and regulators catch up, the market will keep paying the $50.

Sources:

He et al. - Six Million (Suspected) Fake Stars in GitHub (ICSE 2026)
Dagster - Detecting Fake GitHub Stars
Du et al. - Understanding Promotion-as-a-Service on GitHub (ACSAC 2020)
Segall, Redpoint Ventures - So How Many Stars Is Enough?
TechCrunch - Which open source startups rocketed in 2022?
Runa Capital ROSS Index
GitHub Fund
heathdutton - StarScout Fake Stars Analysis (GitHub Gist)
Check Point - Stargazers Ghost Network
FTC - Final Rule Banning Fake Reviews
SEC - HeadSpin Fraud Charges
Conti et al. - Beefing IT Up for Your Investor? (Organization Science, 2025)
BVP - Measuring OSS Community Engagement
Richardson - How I Exploited npm Downloads
NBC News - Republican bot campaign on X
GitHub Acceptable Use Policies
Marlow, Technical.ly - Should Startups Worry About GitHub Stars?

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

3. SDF Public Access Unix System

Source: https://sdf.org/?ssh
Site: sdf.org
Submitter: neehao (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-04-18 20:48 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 67 points · 25 comments
Length: 102 words (~1 min read)

[ SDF Public Access UNIX System .. Est. 1987 ] join welcome faq status members store tour gopher abuse dialup minecraft
social tilde europa webmail gallery usermap irc tutorials telnet git ssh

Connecting to Vintage Systems at SDF
MacOS X users, click here: ssh://menu@tty.sdf.org
Linux/UNIX users can type 'ssh menu@tty.sdf.org' at their shell prompts.
Microsoft Windows we recommend the free SSH client putty.exe.
Web Browser SSH For new users WeTTY SSH in browser client

To connect to your user account substitute a username for menu

©1987-2065 SDF Public Access UNIX System, Inc. 501(c)(7)
(this page was generated using ksh, sed and awk)

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

4. Up to 8M Bees Are Living in an Underground Network Beneath This Cemetery

Source: https://www.discovermagazine.com/up-to-8-million-bees-are-living-in-an-underground-network-beneath-this-cemetery-48977
Site: Discover Magazine
Author: Anastasia Scott
Published: 2026-04-16
HN activity: 48 points · 5 comments
Length: 713 words (~4 min read)
Language: en

At first glance, it looks like any other quiet cemetery, with rows of gravestones set against freshly cut grass and the occasional visitor passing through. But just beneath the surface, it is anything but quiet. Millions of bees have built an immense underground city, where they live out their entire lives below ground, building nests, raising young, and going mostly unnoticed.

In a study published in Apidologie, researchers at East Lawn Cemetery in Ithaca, New York, uncovered one of the largest known aggregations of ground-nesting solitary bees ever recorded, estimating that an average of about 5.6 million bees emerge from a single section of lawn each spring, with totals ranging from roughly 3.1 to 8 million. Records show the species has been present at the site since the 1930s, raising the possibility that this population has remained active for decades beneath the same patch of ground.

The species at the center of it is Andrena regularis, a native, ground-nesting bee known for pollinating crops like apples and blueberries.

“Our study documents one of the largest, and possibly oldest, nesting aggregations of solitary bees ever recorded,” the authors wrote in their study.

One of the Largest Ground-Nesting Solitary Bee Populations

What is especially notable about this discovery is not just the number of bees, but how concentrated they are in a space that looks completely ordinary.

To measure that density, researchers placed mesh emergence traps over sections of ground before the bees appeared in early spring, capturing insects as they surfaced and allowing the team to estimate the population below.

Each female digs a small nest underground, usually about 10 to 20 centimeters deep. Inside, she builds a few chambers, fills them with pollen, and lays a single egg in each one. Those nests sit side by side, forming a tightly packed network beneath the soil.

At peak density, researchers estimated more than 800 bees per square meter, meaning the ground itself is layered with activity.

And yet, most of that activity goes unnoticed. These bees do not form hives or swarm like honeybees. They live alone, emerging quietly in early spring, with activity surging as temperatures climb above about 68 degrees Fahrenheit (20 degrees Celsius), before disappearing just as quickly.

Read More: Bumblebee Queens Can Survive and Breathe Underwater For Over a Week By Cutting Energy Demands

How Timing Gives Parasitic Bees an Edge

Where there are this many bees, there are also opportunists. Among the millions of A. regularis, researchers found parasitic bees, primarily Nomada imbricata. These bees do not build their own nests. Instead, they enter the burrows of other bees and lay their eggs inside, leaving their offspring to consume the stored food.

Even so, the overall parasitism rate was relatively low, at about 1.4 percent, lower than what is typically seen in similar systems.

Part of that may come down to timing. The host bees tend to emerge in a short, concentrated window early in the season, while the parasites appear more gradually over time. That delay may actually be strategic.

“Delayed emergence makes sense as a way to maximize reproductive success,” the researchers stated in their study.

Why This Cemetery Has Become a Refuge for Millions of Bees

As unusual as it might seem, a cemetery can offer the kind of stability these bees need.

Places like this are often left undisturbed for decades, creating consistent conditions for ground-nesting species.

A. regularis is one of the most effective pollinators of apple trees in the region, and studies have shown that individual visits from solitary bees can deposit more pollen than those from managed honeybees. Large populations like this can rival or even exceed the pollination power of entire honeybee colonies.

“Our study highlights the importance of identifying and preserving large nesting aggregations of solitary bees for both ecosystem health and agricultural pollination,” the researchers wrote.

Read More: Ancient Bees Found Nested Inside Fossilized Bone — A Behavior Never Seen Before

Article Sources

Our writers at Discovermagazine.com use peer-reviewed studies and high-quality sources for our articles, and our editors review for scientific accuracy and editorial standards. Review the sources used below for this article:

This article references information from a study published in Apidologie: Emergence dynamics and host-parasite associations in a large aggregation of Andrena regularis (Hymenoptera: Apoidea: Andrenidae)

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

5. Vercel April 2026 security incident

Source: https://www.bleepingcomputer.com/news/security/vercel-confirms-breach-as-hackers-claim-to-be-selling-stolen-data/
Site: BleepingComputer
Author: Lawrence Abrams
Published: 2026-04-19
HN activity: 743 points · 432 comments
Length: 824 words (~4 min read)
Language: en-us

Update 4/19/26: Added additional information from Vercel that was disclosed after publishing.

Cloud development platform Vercel has disclosed a security incident after threat actors claimed to have breached its systems and are attempting to sell stolen data.

Vercel is a cloud platform that provides hosting and deployment infrastructure for developers, with a strong focus on JavaScript frameworks.

The company is known for developing Next.js, a widely used React framework, and for offering services such as serverless functions, edge computing, and CI/CD pipelines that enable developers to build, preview, and deploy applications.

In a security bulletin published today, the company said a limited subset of customers was affected by a security breach.

"We've identified a security incident that involved unauthorized access to certain internal Vercel systems," warns Vercel.

"We are actively investigating, and we have engaged incident response experts to help investigate and remediate. We have notified law enforcement and will update this page as the investigation progresses."

The company says its services have not been impacted and that it is working with impacted customers.

Vercel says it is taking steps to protect its customers, advising them to review environment variables, use its sensitive environment variable feature, and to rotate secrets if needed.

After publishing this story, Vercel updated its advisory to state that the breach stemmed from the compromise of a third-party AI tool's Google Workspace OAuth application.

Vercel is advising Google Workspace administrators and Google account owners to check for the following application:

OAuth App: 110671459871-30f1spbu0hptbs60cb4vsmv79i7bbvqj.apps.googleusercontent.com

Vercel CEO Guillermo Rauch later shared additional details on X, stating that the initial access occurred after a Vercel employee's Google Workspace account was compromised via a breach at the AI platform Context.ai.

According to Rauch, the attacker then escalated access from the compromised account into Vercel environments, where they were able to access environment variables that were not marked as sensitive and therefore not encrypted at rest.

While intended to contain non-sensitive information, the attacker gained further access after enumerating these variables.

"Vercel stores all customer environment variables fully encrypted at rest. We have numerous defense-in-depth mechanisms to protect core systems and customer data," Rauch said.

"We do have a capability, however, to designate environment variables as 'non-sensitive.' Unfortunately, the attacker got further access through their enumeration."

The company's investigation has confirmed that Next.js, Turbopack, and its other open-source projects remain safe.

Vercel has also rolled out updates to its dashboard, including an overview page of environment variables and an improved interface for managing sensitive environment variables.

Customers are strongly advised to review environment variables for sensitive information and enable the sensitive variable feature to ensure they are encrypted at rest.

If you have any information regarding this incident or other undisclosed attacks, you can contact us confidentially via Signal at 646-961-3731 or at tips@bleepingcomputer.com.

Hacker claims to be selling stolen Vercel data

The disclosure comes after a threat actor claiming to be "ShinyHunters" posted on a hacking forum that they had breached Vercel and were selling access to company data.

It should be noted that while the hacker claims to be part of the ShinyHunters group, threat actors linked to recent attacks attributed to the ShinyHunters extortion gang have denied to BleepingComputer that they are involved in this incident.

In the forum post, the hacker claimed to be selling access keys, source code, and database data allegedly stolen from Vercel, along with access to internal deployments and API keys.

"This is just from Linear as proof, but the access I'm about to give you includes multiple employee accounts with access to several internal deployments, API keys (including some NPM tokens and some GitHub tokens)," reads the forum post.
A screenshot of a forum post shared by the threat actor on Telegram

The attacker also shared a text file containing Vercel employee information, which consists of 580 data records containing names, Vercel email addresses, account status, and activity timestamps. They also shared a screenshot of what appears to be an internal Vercel Enterprise dashboard.

BleepingComputer has not been able to independently confirm if the data or screenshot is authentic.

In messages shared on Telegram, the threat actor also claimed they were in contact with Vercel regarding the incident and that they discussed an alleged ransom demand of $2 million.

BleepingComputer contacted Vercel with additional questions about the breach, including whether any sensitive data or credentials were exposed and if they are negotiating with the attackers, and will update this story if we receive a response.

Update 4/19/26 6:14 PM ET: Updated article to add further information disclosed by Vercel.
Update 4/19/26 7:21 PM ET: Updated article with additional information from Vercel's CEO.

99% of What Mythos Found Is Still Unpatched.

AI chained four zero-days into one exploit that bypassed both renderer and OS sandboxes. A wave of new exploits is coming.

At the Autonomous Validation Summit (May 12 & 14), see how autonomous, context-rich validation finds what's exploitable, proves controls hold, and closes the remediation loop.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

6. Ben Lerner's Big Feelings

Source: https://www.vulture.com/article/ben-lerner-transcription-interview.html
Site: vulture.com
Submitter: prismatic (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-04-16 05:43 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 28 points · 12 comments

Scrape failed: readability: failed to parse input: transform: short internal buffer

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

7. Claude Token Counter, now with model comparisons

Source: https://simonwillison.net/2026/Apr/20/claude-token-counts/
Site: Simon Willison’s Weblog
Author: Simon Willison
Submitted: 2026-04-20 00:56 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 110 points · 42 comments
Length: 358 words (~2 min read)
Language: en-gb

20th April 2026 - Link Blog

Claude Token Counter, now with model comparisons. I upgraded my Claude Token Counter tool to add the ability to run the same count against different models in order to compare them.

As far as I can tell Claude Opus 4.7 is the first model to change the tokenizer, so it's only worth running comparisons between 4.7 and 4.6. The Claude token counting API accepts any Claude model ID though so I've included options for all four of the notable current models (Opus 4.7 and 4.6, Sonnet 4.6, and Haiku 4.5).

In the Opus 4.7 announcement Anthropic said:

Opus 4.7 uses an updated tokenizer that improves how the model processes text. The tradeoff is that the same input can map to more tokens—roughly 1.0–1.35× depending on the content type.

I pasted the Opus 4.7 system prompt into the token counting tool and found that the Opus 4.7 tokenizer used 1.46x the number of tokens as Opus 4.6.

Opus 4.7 uses the same pricing is Opus 4.6 - $5 per million input tokens and $25 per million output tokens - but this token inflation means we can expect it to be around 40% more expensive.

The token counter tool also accepts images. Opus 4.7 has improved image support, described like this:

Opus 4.7 has better vision for high-resolution images: it can accept images up to 2,576 pixels on the long edge (~3.75 megapixels), more than three times as many as prior Claude models.

I tried counting tokens for a 3456x2234 pixel 3.7MB PNG and got an even bigger increase in token counts - 3.01x times the number of tokens for 4.7 compared to 4.6:

Update: That 3x increase for images is entirely due to Opus 4.7 being able to handle higher resolutions. I tried that again with a 682x318 pixel image and it took 314 tokens with Opus 4.7 and 310 with Opus 4.6, so effectively the same cost.

Update 2: I tried a 15MB, 30 page text-heavy PDF and Opus 4.7 reported 60,934 tokens while 4.6 reported 56,482 - that's a 1.08x multiplier, significantly lower than the multiplier I got for raw text.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

8. Stripe's Payment APIs: the first 10 years (2020)

Source: https://stripe.dev/blog/payment-api-design
Site: stripe.dev
Author: /About the author
Submitted: 2026-04-20 05:05 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 46 points · 25 comments
Length: 45 words (~1 min read)
Language: en

/Metadata

Date:2020.12.15

Reading time:20 min read

Categories:

Engineering

Payments

Share:

/Article

About the author

/About the author

Michelle Bu

Michelle Bu is the Business Lead of Developer Experience and Product Platform

/Additional resources

/Related Articles

[ Fig. 1 ]

10x

[ Fig. 2 ]

10x

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

9. Zero-copy protobuf and ConnectRPC for Rust

Source: https://medium.com/@iainmcgin/zero-copy-protobuf-and-connectrpc-for-rust-69bda8ac0f02
Site: Medium
Author: Iain McGinniss
Published: 2026-03-25
HN activity: 54 points · 20 comments
Length: 2.6K words (~12 min read)
Language: en

11 min read

Mar 25, 2026

--

As part of my work at Anthropic, I open sourced two Rust crates that fill a gap in the RPC ecosystem: buffa, a pure-Rust Protocol Buffers implementation with first-class editions support and zero-copy message views, and connectrpc, a Tower-based ConnectRPC implementation that speaks Connect, gRPC, and gRPC-Web on the same handlers. We’re nominating connect-rust as the canonical Rust implementation of ConnectRPC — if you’re using Connect from Go, TypeScript, or Kotlin, this is intended to be the peer implementation for Rust. This code is already in production at Anthropic. For those who want to jump straight to the code, see buffa and connect-rust on GitHub.

Both crates pass their full upstream conformance suites — Google’s protobuf binary and JSON conformance for buffa, and all ~12,800 ConnectRPC server, client, and TLS tests for connect-rust — though as I’ll cover later, a green conformance run turned out to be necessary but far from sufficient for production. They were built in six weeks with Claude Opus 4.6 doing most of the work under my direction — an experiment in specification-driven development for performance- and correctness-sensitive library code.

This post covers the Rust-specific design decisions: how protobuf editions map to codegen, why zero-copy views need an OwnedView escape hatch, the type-level choices for mapping protobuf’s semantics onto Rust, and what the conformance suites didn’t catch. A separate post on the AI-assisted development process will follow.

Why another protobuf crate?

The short answer: editions, and leaning into the specific capabilities of Rust.

The schism caused by proto2 / proto3 semantic divergence is being healed by switching to a feature-flag-driven approach to the wire format, defined by editions. Each edition specifies a default feature set. Messages defined in files from older editions (e.g. proto2) can be used from newer editions. If you are defining new message types, these details are mostly irrelevant, but if you are porting legacy systems from the proto2 era, this is likely to make your migration significantly easier.

The Rust ecosystem hasn’t caught up. Prost is the de facto standard, and it’s excellent at what it does — but it targets binary proto3, with JSON bolted on via pbjson, and the library is now only passively maintained. Google’s official Rust implementation (protobuf v4) supports editions but is built around upb, so it needs a C compiler and there is not yet an RPC layer implementation above it.

Buffa treats editions as the core abstraction, and is also designed to work well with the current best available tooling: buf CLI for language-agnostic code generation (though protoc is of course also supported), a buffa-build crate for build.rs integration for those who prefer cargo-oriented build pipelines, and careful definition of crate features and generated code that allow the library to be used in no_std, or to select the features that matter to your use case (e.g. excluding JSON support).

Zero-copy message views

Rust provides an interesting opportunity that does not exist for implementations in other languages: we can support message “views” where data does not need to be copied from an input buffer to be used, reducing allocation cost.

The need for this wasn’t purely speculative. In an early prototype of connect-rust that used prost, profiling showed that per-field String allocation and HashMap construction for map fields significantly contributed to allocator pressure. For string and bytes fields, copying data is avoidable and safe with Rust’s borrow checker, referencing the content directly in the input buffer.

Buffa generates two types per message: MyMessage (owned, heap-allocated, similar to what you’d expect in most implementations) and MyMessageView<'a> (borrows directly from the wire buffer). The view type’s string fields are &'a str, its bytes fields are &'a [u8], and its map fields are a flat Vec<(K, V)> scan — no hashing on the decode path.

// Owned decode - allocates per string field
let msg = LogRecord::decode_from_slice(&bytes)?;
println!("{}", msg.message); // String

// View decode - zero-copy
let view = LogRecordView::decode_view(&bytes)?;
println!("{}", view.message); // &str, borrowed from `bytes`

The catch with views is correctly handling lifetimes. A FooView<'a> can’t cross an await point if the buffer it borrows from doesn’t live long enough — which is exactly the situation in an async RPC handler. OwnedView<V> solves this by bundling a view with its backing Bytes buffer:

// 'static + Send, still zero-copy
let owned = OwnedView::<LogRecordView>::decode(bytes.into())?;
tokio::spawn(async move {
    println!("{}", owned.message); // &str, borrowed from the owned Bytes
});

This is what connect-rust provides to service handlers. On a decode-heavy workload — 50 structured log records per request, ~22 KB batches with varints, strings, nested messages, and map entries — it’s about 33% faster than tonic+prost at high concurrency, with allocator pressure at 3.6% of CPU versus 9.6%.

Configurable safety controls

There are some aspects of protobuf that can be unsafe or enable attacks when used in an RPC framework that deserve special consideration. Depending on your use case and environment, it is useful to be able to tune the safety controls around these issues.

Buffa provides a DecodeOptions type to control both recursion limits and message size. Prost enforces a fixed recursion limit of 100 nested messages; buffa uses the same default, but allows for overriding this via with_recursion_limit(n) to a smaller or larger value as needed. For message length, Prost does not apply a limit (this is handled within Tonic for RPC considerations), while buffa provides control at the protobuf level, with a default that matches the protobuf spec (2 GiB). The connect-rust library applies a 4 MiB default limit for messages and HTTP bodies that is more typical for HTTP servers.

Rust String / &str values must be valid UTF-8, whereas proto2 strings do not have this restriction and later editions provide an opt-out for UTF-8 verification. Regardless, the natural user expectation is that a string field should be a String in the Rust struct, so buffa chooses to perform UTF-8 validation for all strings by default. The library also provides an opt-out that changes string fields with utf8_validation = NONE (all proto2 strings by default, or editions fields that explicitly opt out) to Vec<u8> / &[u8] instead, allowing validation during decode to be bypassed without misleading the user as to the safety of the content. The user can then call from_utf8 or from_utf8_unchecked as they deem fit, taking responsibility for the decision.

Ergonomics

Protobuf makes some very opinionated choices around message semantics, which can be quite different from the typical behavior of primitive data types in most languages. Two examples of this semantic mismatch that require careful resolution in Rust are optional message fields and enums.

Message fields have default value semantics, that combined with recursive message types, can be difficult to represent cleanly. Prost uses Option<M> or Option<Box<M>> for optional message fields, depending on whether the message type is recursive. This results in some awkward code when attempting to dereference or assign to those fields:

let name = msg.address.as_ref().unwrap().street.as_str();

msg.address = Some(Address {
    street: "123 Main St".into(),
    ..Default::default()
});

Buffa defines MessageField<T> that handles all message fields, and this provides Deref and From trait implementations. This produces more natural field interaction:

let name = &msg.address.street;

msg.address = Address {
    street: "123 Main St".into(),
    ..Default::default()
}.into();

Protobuf enums in the current editions are “open”, due to the possibility of unknown enum values from future evolutions of the enum definition. Prost uses raw i32 for enum values; for buffa we define EnumValue<T> as a proper Rust enum, while preserving unknown values for round-trip fidelity:

use buffa::EnumValue;

pub struct Contact {
    pub phone_type: EnumValue<PhoneType>,
    // ...
}

// Match directly - the type carries the known/unknown distinction:
match contact.phone_type {
    EnumValue::Known(PhoneType::MOBILE) => { /* ... */ }
    EnumValue::Known(PhoneType::HOME) => { /* ... */ }
    EnumValue::Known(PhoneType::WORK) => { /* ... */ }
    EnumValue::Unknown(v) => { /* v is the raw i32 from the wire */ }
}

// Or compare directly (PartialEq<E> is implemented):
if contact.phone_type == PhoneType::MOBILE { /* ... */ }

For closed enums (from proto2), fields are directly the enum type, with no middle EnumValue<T> layer.

Supporting no_std

The core runtime is no_std + alloc, with optional JSON serialization via serde. Enabling std adds std::io integration and std::time conversions, but the wire format, views, and JSON all work without it. Rust is well suited to embedded systems and constrained environments, and I believe that protobufs can also be beneficial in such scenarios. The encoding is efficient, and makes it easier for these systems to integrate with the broader ecosystem. While we have not yet pushed this to the logical conclusion of a partial ConnectRPC implementation that works with embassy, reqwless, and/or picoserve, the door is open for others to implement this.

There are some small ergonomic consequences when using no_std — the JsonParseOptions that are normally scoped via a thread-local for deserialization (as serde provides no mechanism to provide a deserialization context for the entire operation) are instead a global OnceBox. This is usually fine, as most applications do not vary the parse options over the lifetime of the process, but it is a loss of flexibility compared to std.

connect-rust: the RPC layer

Connect-rust is a Tower-based implementation of the ConnectRPC protocol, including support for handling gRPC and gRPC-Web requests, and JSON/binary encoded messages, all from the same handler, as the ConnectRPC specification intends. Unary and all three streaming RPC types (client streaming, server streaming, and bidirectional) are supported for both clients and servers. The client transports can use HTTP/1.1 and HTTP/2, with or without TLS as appropriate.

The architecture is straightforward: codegen emits a monomorphic FooServiceServer<T> per service, with a compile-time match on the method name. No Arc<dyn Handler> vtable or per-request allocation is required for dispatch. It drops into any Tower-compatible HTTP framework like Axum, or you can use the built-in standalone server that uses hyper directly:

impl GreetService for MyGreetService {
    async fn greet(
        &self,
        ctx: Context,
        request: OwnedView<GreetRequestView<'static>>,
    ) -> Result<(GreetResponse, Context), ConnectError> {
        let response = GreetResponse {
            greeting: format!("Hello, {}!", request.name),
            ..Default::default()
        };
        Ok((response, ctx))
    }
}

let service = Arc::new(MyGreetService);
let router = service.register(Router::new());
Server::new(router).serve("127.0.0.1:8080".parse()?).await?;

There are some known ergonomics issues here: I prioritized shipping a release for feedback over attempting to achieve perfection for a 0.x release. Threading the context in and out of the handler (returning Ok((response, ctx))) is awkward, and the request type OwnedView<ReqView<’static>> is overly explicit. This will likely change to ConnectRequest<Req> and ConnectResponse<Resp> types in a future release, where the request context and response options are separated and the lifetime is implicit.

Client code for interacting with services is also what you would expect:

let http = HttpClient::plaintext();
let config = ClientConfig::new("http://localhost:8080".parse()?);
let client = GreetServiceClient::new(http, config);

let response = client.greet(GreetRequest {
    name: "World".into(),
    ..Default::default()
}).await?;

It is worth noting one small security ergonomics decision here: the transport constructors have no bare new(), instead one must explicitly choose between plaintext() or with_tls(config), and these enforce the appropriate URL scheme (http and https respectively). This is an intentional choice to make the decision to use plaintext explicit and consequential; obfuscating this detail in options for new() is how security incidents are born.

What conformance tests failed to catch

Both crates passed the full conformance suites for protobuf and ConnectRPC weeks before I would have called them ready for consumption. Conformance exercises protocol correctness. It does not exercise adversarial resource bounds — nobody writes a conformance test that sends you a gzip bomb.

Four real issues made it past green conformance, surfaced during security review:

The server enforced a size limit on incoming request bodies; the client did not, calling `.collect().await` on whatever the server sent back. The safe pattern had been applied asymmetrically.
CompressionProvider::decompress_with_limit had a default implementation that decompressed fully and checked the size afterwards. The gzip/zstd implementations overrode this behavior correctly, but a custom provider using the default would be vulnerable to decompression bombs.
The TLS handshake had no timeout. A client that connects but never sends a ClientHello would hold the connection forever.
grpc-timeout: 18446744073709551615S parsed to Duration::from_secs(u64::MAX), which panics when added to Instant::now(). The code had a comment saying the spec limits this to 8 digits. The code did not match the comment.

These were all fixed, but the themes generalize past this project: asymmetric client/server defenses, unsafe trait defaults inherited by custom impls, parse-site leniency trusted at the use-site, comments that claim enforcement without enforcing. If you’re building an RPC crate, that’s a decent checklist.

Where the spec runs out

The protobuf spec carefully defines what happens when an unknown value arrives for a closed enum in a singular field, a repeated field, and a map value — but says nothing about a closed enum inside a oneof. Java treats it like the singular case. Go doesn’t implement closed-enum semantics at all and still passes conformance, because conformance doesn’t test closed enums. For buffa, we chose to follow Java’s precedent.

Similarly, the spec doesn’t say whether overflow bits in the 10th byte of a varint should be rejected or silently discarded. C++ and prost discard, whereas for buffa we reject varints with these bits set. Both are defensible choices, but neither is tested or treated preferentially by the conformance tests. Claude did a fantastic job of finding these issues, but only when specifically prompted to compare the end product of spec × tests × code to find possible gaps and inconsistencies relative to other gold standard implementations.

Performance

I want to be careful here, as benchmark numbers are the part most likely to be misread. Connect-rust is not meaningfully faster than tonic for real services. In realistic workloads, like a handler that interacts with a database or upstream services, the optimizations in buffa and connect-rust increase throughput by around 4%. On decode-heavy workloads where buffa’s views pay off, it’s further ahead: 33% more throughput at high concurrency on the log-ingest benchmark.

What actually moves the needle:

Zero-copy views. Allocator pressure is 3.6% of server CPU versus 9.6% for tonic+prost on string-heavy payloads.
Monomorphic dispatch. Compile-time match beats dyn-dispatch by a small but real margin when there’s nothing else in the request path.
Connect framing. On unary RPCs, Connect’s protocol is genuinely cheaper than gRPC — no envelope header, no trailing HEADERS frame. At 200k+ req/s, gRPC’s trailer is ~200k extra h2 HEADERS encodes per second. The gap is ~5% at low concurrency, ~23% at c=256.

The buffa and connect-rust repositories contain the benchmark code and result snapshots — as always, take synthetic benchmarks with a grain of salt. More performance optimizations are possible in the future, but the gains are likely marginal for all but the most performance-focused and tuned services.

The future

I hope you will try buffa and connect-rust, and provide feedback! While I have tried to make the code readable, ergonomic, and correct, there will inevitably be issues with something as complex as a full protobuf and ConnectRPC implementation primarily built by AI in 6 weeks. I am committed to improving the library, to show that such AI-assisted development can be both fast _and_ high quality.

There are also features we have yet to add, but plan to work on soon:

Message extensions — this is a necessary feature to implement many plugins and middleware, like protovalidate.
Reflection — handling unknown message types via runtime provided descriptors is commonly used as part of implementing middleware and plugins.
Textproto and protoyaml — while I had initially decided to not bother supporting textproto as it is fairly old, I’ve become convinced that it is a useful addition to help facilitate migrations of proto2-era C/C++ services that may still depend on this. Similarly, YAML is a de facto standard for configuration files, and I’d love to be able to support that with an IDL and protovalidate to enforce correctness.

There are likely many other features that you might want in these implementations — please let us know by opening issues on the repositories, and comment on the ConnectRPC RFC!

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

10. Stop trying to engineer your way out of listening to people

Source: https://ashley.rolfmore.com/stop-trying-to-engineer-your-way-out-of-listening-to-people/
Site: Ashley Rolfmore
Author: Ashley Rolfmore
Published: 2026-02-12
HN activity: 217 points · 96 comments
Length: 725 words (~4 min read)
Language: en

I spend a lot of time negotiating this in the software world:
Probably don't want this road

And if you're wondering why this happens, it's normally because:

people aren't talking to people
people aren't listening

So lots of designers and product people have leapt onto 1, basically trying to turn talking to people into terms engineering people find more cuddly. Like "framework". Or "system". Or even that term that's in vogue, socio-technical system.

Stop. The problem isn't that you need a better system. The problem is you're avoiding doing the work.
Rimmer doing everything apart from studying

The problem is, 2 is much harder than 1. So how do you listen to people?

The most common pitfalls:

Listening is not the same as just doing what someone tells you they want

Tonnes of frameworks around this concept, so I won't repeat what others have done decently already. Jobs To Be Done, Outcome Driven Innovation, and in the UX camp, empathy mapping.

You underestimate the specialism effect on your own worldview

You spend so long learning a subject but a specific set of "surely they know this?!". It can even be an area that the person is an expert in! Well, no, they don't. They know other things instead. You need to understand more about what they know to be able to listen properly.

You assume "technical" is one thing

Such a common pitfall for software developers. Technical is a whole heterogenous beautiful spectrum of knowledge areas, and it's not "exactly the knowledge I gained as a software developer with the exact jobs I had". If you are still thinking of people with the binary of "technical" and "non-technical", you definitely will be missing insights and most likely, you're not listening properly.

You assume everyone has the same resources as you

The same energy, the same skills, etc. So maybe you have a health condition, and you manage it a certain way, but when you chat with someone else with the same health condition, they just can't do the things you do, or vice versa. Some people are great at maths. Some people are great at other things. Some people have less money or reserves and act more risk averse. Some people don't. And so on.

You assume that because you met one person with one characteristic, that the rest will be like that.

See also: assuming older people don't understand computers. Some don't. Some do. Not every woman is your mother or daughter.

You assume people (and organisations) remain static

On the macro level - personalities change over time.

On the micro level - work personas are different to people at home, judgement alters when things are stressful or when certain situations arise.

This is fundamentally why a "fixed" project management just doesn't work for making software. You set the requirements up front. People change in the interim. It comes out. At the very very best, it matches what was requested at the start. But it's not what is wanted anymore. And people load in their own expectations, often not articulated, as they wait for The Thing and the reality never matches all of that.

You assume what they say is the same as what they are thinking

Some people say what they mean. Some don't. A lot of people say they say what they mean but actually aren't doing that.

You judge people

Yeah. I said it. Stop hating or dismissing people for misunderstanding the thing you documented badly. Stop assuming they are bad at their job or their lives.

If you're dismissive of someone, you are extremely unlikely to be able to listen to them properly.

You assume 80 people are the same as 1 x 80 individuals.

Turns out, B2B is more human than B2C - all those messy relationships, dynamics, soft power vs org chart, and so on. Group dynamics add more here.

The Consequences

If you can't listen to them, then you're gonna be missing the juiciest stuff that's gonna make you the most money, and steam you ahead of the competitors, and even, weirdly, help minimise some sources of tech debt too - turns out every misunderstanding adds a new thing in the code you gotta work with later.

Hopefully, this will give a little clue for when we fall into not listening... so we can all listen better.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

11. A Brief History of Fish Sauce

Source: https://www.legalnomads.com/fish-sauce/
Site: Legal Nomads
Author: Jodi Ettenberg
Submitted: 2026-04-19 08:32 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 179 points · 72 comments
Length: 2.5K words (~11 min read)
Language: en-US

Out of the corner of my eye, I noticed something twisting and turning, rhythmic and precise. It was only when I was directly in front of the Saigon street stall that I realized what was unfolding: the owner, a smiling man in his 40s who always greeted me as I walked by, was packaging nuoc cham, a condiment made from fish sauce, water, lime juice, and sugar. He was also adding thin slivers of pickled carrots to the tiny bags that piled in front of him.

What he was doing happens all over the city at street stalls and restaurants. Nuoc mam (pure fish sauce) is consumed by 95% of Vietnamese households. It’s also used to make nuoc cham, a dipping condiment of fish sauce, water, lime juice, and sugar that accompanies many Southern Vietnamese dishes.
Fish sauce packets, ready to be consumed.

In my travels, I’ve heard others cite fish sauce as one of those tastes that takes some getting used to for Western palates, along with stinky tofu and durian fruit, and the bright purple fermented shrimp paste that accompanies Vietnamese bun rieu soup. Its lingering smell leaves no mystery about its strong, fishy contents.

Used in Thailand as nam pla and Myanmar as ngan bya yay, as well as Laos, Cambodia, and the Philippines under other local names and variations, one thing is certain regardless of preference: fish sauce plays a crucial role in flavouring food in Southeast Asia.

It has become my first ingredient of choice in a new city, something I use in homemade soups and curries, chicken marinates and salads, and even omelettes, adding a taste of Vietnam to my meal. To my taste buds, it is as evocative of my years in Southeast Asia as lime, garlic and chilies.
Street side banh cuon with fish sauce for dipping.

“This is more than just a condiment,” founder of Red Boat Fish Sauce, Cuong Pham, has said. “It’s so good, it’s like gold.”

In its purest form, fish sauce is made from just two ingredients: fish and salt, fermented together for months. Despite the fact that some fish sauce labels depict squid, shrimp, or even a man carrying a giant shrimp over his shoulder (my favourite, for obvious reasons), the base formula remains the same. Both fish and salt are placed into huge vats, usually three parts fish to one part salt, and weighted down to prevent the fish from floating to the surface as fermentation begins. Once liquid begins to seep out of the fish, it is drained and reintroduced to the vat for the full fermentation process, which lasts long enough for it to reach concentration, but not so long that off-flavours develop. Usually this process takes nine months to a year, with the vats sitting in the sun as the sauce takes form.

Fish Sauce in Ancient Times

The earliest origins of fish sauce go back further than most people realize, and its actual beginnings is remarkably hard to pinpoint even in 2026.

Did fermenting fish begin as a tradition in China or Vietnam? Or as some suggest in Ancient Rome? Historians remain divided on the topic.

One such food historian, Sally Grainger, notes in her 2021 book The Story of Garum: Fermented Fish Sauce and Salted Fish in the Ancient World that despite discussions of Roman fish sauce in many publications, Roman fish sauce is not actually Roman at all: it’s Greek. Per her writing, the first recorded fish sauce was produced by the ancient Greeks along the coastline of the Black Sea, where the abundant fishery resources of the region may have been a significant factor in Greek colonisation of the area as early as the 7th century BCE.

The sauce was called gàros in Greek, and when the Romans adopted it, they transliterated the name as garum. Importantly, though, the word garum came to mean something quite specific and different from the everyday condiment most Romans actually used. Many pieces, including earlier versions of this post, conflates the true history. As Grainger explains in her book, liquamen is the standard fish sauce, made by dissolving whole small fish, often anchovies, layered with salt in a barrel or pit and left to ferment for up to four months. In contrast, garum (proper garum, not the garum that’s used interchangeably to describe ‘ancient’ fish sauce) is thicker and darker, and made from fermented fish blood and viscera. It has a distinctively dark colour and iron-rich taste. It may seem pedantic to differentiate here, but I always say words matter, and my earlier version of this post got it wrong.

The Romans actually had a whole vocabulary for fermented fish products: garum, liquamen, allec, and muria each described distinct preparations. When we compare ancient Roman fish sauce to modern nuoc mam or nam pla, we are really talking about liquamen and not garum.
Some of the fish sauce available at a Thai supermarket — there were many more!

Roman fish sauce was used across a vast geographic and culinary range. The recipes in Apicius’s cookbook De Re Coquinaria, which is available for free online, give a sense of how fundamental it was to Roman cooking: fish sauce was the ingredient that brought dishes together, and it was often used instead of salt. Pompeii was famous in ancient times for its production, and the many mentions in ancient texts and cookbooks imply a very normal, common use across the Mediterranean world. Per Sally Grainger, who in addition to her book has also created reconstructions of ancient Roman sauces, has singled out Red Boat Fish Sauce as the closest thing currently available on the market to Roman liquamen.

In a landmark 2025 study published in the journal Antiquity, scientists recovered and sequenced ancient DNA from fish bone remains at the bottom of a Roman salting vat at the Adro Vello site in northwestern Spain that was thought to be a fish-processing plant, active from the first through third centuries AD. The team successfully extracted and sequenced DNA from the small bone remains and confirmed that the primary ingredient was European sardine (Sardina pilchardus). By comparing the ancient DNA with that of modern sardines, the team found the populations of this fish during Roman times were genetically similar to those currently found in the same region, which is astounding to think about. That’s 2000 years of biological continuity!

The geographic footprint of the Roman fish sauce industry was vast. Other fish-processing ‘factories’ have been excavated in Spain, Portugal, and Northern Africa, as well as more recent discoveries near Ashkelon in Israel and at the Nabeul site in Tunisia (the ancient city of Neapolis), uncovered by a 2013 storm. In modern day cuisine, fish sauce is almost completely absent from Italian food with the exception of colatura di alici, a fish sauce still made in factories in the village of Cetara in Italy’s Salerno region.

In his piece about fish sauce in the ancient world, Declan Henesy notes:

The Carthaginians were also early makers and traders of fish sauce, producing it along the coast of the Lake of Tunis, in modern day Tunisia. A Punic shipwreck from 5th century BCE, found off the coast of Ibiza, may have been carrying a cargo of fish sauce stored in amphorae made in Gades (modern day Spain) and Tingi (modern-day Morocco). There are many early Graeco-Roman literary references to fish sauce, from writers such as Aristophanes, Sophocles and Aeschylus.

There also are literary references to the sauce from writers including Aristophanes, Sophocles, and Aeschylus, confirming its place in daily ancient life long before Rome’s domination of the region.

The decline of fish sauce in the post-Roman era had several causes, of which salt scarcity and piracy are the most commonly cited. That’s not the whole story, though. The heavy salt taxes that followed the collapse of Roman administrative infrastructure also drove up the cost of producing fish sauce, and without Roman naval protection of the Mediterranean coasts, piracy disrupted the trade routes along which both salt and finished fish sauce had flowed. As a result, production ground to a stop across much of the region.

There was also a cultural and religious dimension that is often overlooked, per Grainger. In the later Roman period when Christianity took over, many communities followed a blood prohibition. This meant people could not consume any kind of animal blood, whether from meat or fish. This prohibition is what caused stopped the actual garum (made from fish blood) from being made. In the confusion of Roman terminology, once garum stopped being used the word reverted (as words sometimes do!) to mean something else: in this case, the original Greek sauce, referred to as liquamen during Roman times. Liquamen was a staple among the general Roman population, whereas garum was only consumed by those who could afford it, usually the elite.

Back to Asia: Did Fish Sauce Originate in China?

In his book Salt: A World History, Mark Kurlansky theorises that the two fermented traditions developed independently in East and West, and that Asian fish sauce originated from an earlier Chinese tradition of fermenting fish with beans. “The sauce appears to be, as some historians believe of the domesticated pig, an idea that occurred independently in the East and the West,” he writes. “The Asian sauce is thought to have originated in Vietnam, though the Vietnamese must have taken it in ancient times from the Chinese soy sauce, in those early times when the Chinese fermented fish with the beans.” Since his book was written, the historical picture that emerged suggests fish sauce that had roots in ancient China, perhaps as far back as the Zhou Dynasty around 2,300 years ago. By 50–100 BCE demand had fallen drastically as fermented bean products rose to dominance instead. Fish sauce then became popular in Southeast Asia, re-entering China’s palates in the 17th and 18th centuries via Vietnamese and Cambodian traders.

Some scholars like food historian Laura Kelley have argued the opposite: that Roman fish sauce was the parent of modern day fish sauce, passing along the trade routes from West to East.

“So, once again, we can identify a product that flowed from west to east and was eagerly adopted by Asians on the Silk Road. The recipes for garum changed and adapted as they moved east and became nuoc mam and nam pla according to cultural preferences and what gifts the Asian seas had to offer. Archaeologists and food scientists are working to confirm these flows and linkages, so stay tuned to this channel to learn more about garum production in the ancient world and in the kitchen of Chez Kelley.”

However, food historian Khánh-Linh Trinh is direct in her skepticism about this theory.“There is insufficient evidence to readily support the idea that the recipe for fermented fish travelled across the Silk Road and influenced nuoc mam,” she notes. It’s not impossible, but there isn’t a historical smoking gun that would prove this theory.” A doctoral Candidate in Asian Languages and Cultures at the University of Michigan, she instead goes back to the connection to China: nuoc mam uses the same technique as Chinese soy sauce production, and similar levels of consistency and clarity as soy sauce.

A scientific paper published in the Annals of Food Processing and Preservation in 2017 also looked at the technical treatment of nuoc mam in Vietnam. Researchers at Nha Trang University’s Institute of Biotechnology and Environment note that nuoc mam is produced along Vietnam’s entire coastline, from Cat Ba in the north to Phu Quoc in the south, with meaningful differences in fish species and technology by region. Among all regional varieties, Phu Quoc nuoc mam ranks highest in quality, owing to the purity of the local Stolephorus commersonii anchovies, the early salting process, and the humid island climate. (Phu Quoc’s fish sauce was also the first product in Southeast Asia to receive a Protected Designation of Origin certification from the EU Commission.) Given the relationship between China and Vietnam, it is an easy jump to think that Vietnam could have used the technique from ancient Chinese soy sauce and then applied it to what was readily available in Vietnam: fish.

Back to Declan’s piece, where he notes that while some historians claim fish sauce was introduced to Asia via the Silk Road, others think it was independently invented.

Either or both may be true. Interestingly, in 2010 CE, a team of researchers analysed samples of garum taken from containers preserved at Pompeii. They found that Roman fish sauce from the 1st century CE had an almost identical taste profile to those produced today in southeast Asia.

The reality is: we don’t know whether liquamen and nuoc mam are relatives, or twins that were separated at birth. Either way, it’s not a stretch to think of how people may have used the same logic to start fermenting a perishable good to make an umami sauce that helped food taste better. And Trinh also reminds us that the origins debate, however fascinating, is somewhat beside the point for those who grew up with the sauce. She points out that nuoc mam features in the Vietnamese creation myth itself: the story of Dragon Prince Lạc Long Quân, whose totem was a fish. “This indicates that regardless of whether nuoc mam was actually around in Vietnamese prehistory, Vietnamese conceptions of national identity certainly chose to project nuoc mam back into that history as a key token of what it means to be Vietnamese.”

Her perspective is echoed by writer Trần Ngọc Thêm, whose book Cơ sở văn hóa Việt Nam (The Foundation of Vietnamese Culture), includes the following sentence (translated): “for Vietnamese people, a meal without fish sauce is considered incomplete.”

After all the history and debate about origins, that feels like the only answer that really matters.

While we travel for the people and the culture, for the stories and the food, we sometimes take the origins of individual ingredients, like fish sauce or chili peppers, for granted.

If this short overview of fish sauce was interesting you might want to read:

Mark Kurlansky, Salt: A World History — The foundational popular history of salt and its role in human civilization, including fish sauce.
Veronica Meewes, The Fish Sauce Cookbook — A practical guide to cooking with fish sauce across many traditions.
Sally Grainger, The Story of Garum: Fermented Fish Sauce and Salted Fish in the Ancient World — A scholarly treatment of ancient fish sauce, and an option for anyone who wants to go deeper than this short piece. Also available as an eBook.
The History of Ketchup, by Dan Jurafsky — A delightful piece tracing ketchup’s origins back through fermented fish sauce.
Espregueira Themudo et al., “Roman Atlantic garum: DNA confirms sardine use and population continuity in north-western Iberia,” Antiquity (2025) — The 2025 ancient DNA paper that confirmed the species used in a Roman-era Spanish fish-factory.
World History Encyclopedia: Fish Sauce in the Ancient World — A well-sourced overview.
Vegan fish sauce recipe via The Kitchn — For those who don’t eat fish.

Bon Appetit!

-Jodi

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

12. Monumental ship burial beneath ancient Norwegian mound predates the Viking Age

Source: https://phys.org/news/2026-04-monumental-ship-burial-beneath-ancient.html
Site: phys.org
Submitter: pseudolus (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-04-17 09:50 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 58 points · 15 comments

Scrape failed: http 403

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

13. The Bromine Chokepoint

Source: https://warontherocks.com/cogs-of-war/the-bromine-chokepoint-how-strife-in-the-middle-east-could-halt-production-of-the-worlds-memory-chips/
Site: War on the Rocks
Author: Madeline Field
Published: 2026-04-14
HN activity: 199 points · 104 comments
Length: 2.0K words (~9 min read)
Language: en-US

The U.S.-Israeli war with Iran, now in an unstable ceasefire, has exposed a structural failure in the global semiconductor memory supply chain, and it is not the one analysts seem to be tracking. The story receiving attention is helium: Qatar’s Ras Laffan facility went offline, a 45-day inventory clock started running, and spot prices doubled within days. The story receiving almost no attention is bromine, and it is potentially the more dangerous one. Bromine is the raw material from which specialized chemical suppliers produce semiconductor-grade hydrogen bromide gas, the etch chemical that South Korean fabs use to carve the transistor structures in every Dynamic Random-Access Memory (DRAM) and NAND flash chip on earth. A DRAM chip powers active computation and loses its contents the moment power cuts. A NAND chip retains data without power and underlies every form of digital storage. Together they underpin every modern computing device, from the phone in your pocket to the data center running your AI applications.

South Korea sources 97.5 percent of its bromine imports from Israel. Beyond that vulnerable concentration, converting bromine into semiconductor-grade hydrogen bromide gas requires dedicated purification infrastructure, and producers outside Israel are already fully committed to existing customers and stretched too thin to absorb additional demand. Building new conversion capacity takes years of permitting, equipment procurement, and fabrication qualification.

ICL Group, the Israeli multinational formerly known as Israel Chemicals Ltd., currently continues Dead Sea operations. Israel routes most trade through Mediterranean ports at Haifa and Ashdod, bypassing the Strait of Hormuz entirely. But Iran has been striking the Negev — Israel’s southern desert and the heart of its defense and industrial infrastructure — with ballistic missiles for three weeks, hitting Dimona and Arad, both within 35 kilometers of ICL’s Dead Sea extraction and conversion complex. If Israeli bromine production is displaced, there are no conversion facilities outside Israel capable of immediately producing semiconductor-grade hydrogen bromide gas at the scale required to replace it, and policymakers have not yet acted on that fact.

The vulnerability sits in plain sight, within missile range and outside any meaningful policy response. A disruption would be immediate and global. Within weeks, shortages would propagate across everything from consumer devices to military systems.

Bromine Cannot Be Substituted or Quickly Replaced

Bromine’s role in semiconductor manufacturing is specific and non-substitutable. Its primary derivative, hydrogen bromide, is consumed at the polysilicon etching stage foundational to both DRAM and NAND flash production. Each DRAM memory cell requires a polysilicon gate electrode etched with extreme precision over a silicon oxide layer as thin as 20 angstroms. Hydrogen bromide gas plasmas achieve a polysilicon-to-oxide selectivity ratio of 100 to 1, while chlorine-based alternatives achieve roughly 30 to 1. At advanced DRAM node geometries, that is the difference between a functional transistor and a destroyed one. Bromine also appears in chemical vapor deposition processes and chip packaging. There is no viable near-term substitute in any of these applications.

Three structural realities determine why the gap cannot be bridged through market reallocation. First, bromine already converted for industrial use such as flame retardants and drilling fluids cannot be reconverted. Those processes are chemically irreversible at any industrial scale and the resulting compounds cannot meet the parts-per-billion purity specifications that fabrication facilities require. The two supply chains draw from the same raw material but diverge permanently at the point of conversion. Second, converting raw bromine to semiconductor-grade hydrogen bromide gas requires dedicated purification infrastructure, specifically gas-phase distillation columns capable of lowering trace metals to parts-per-billion contamination levels. That infrastructure does not exist at scale outside the existing semiconductor chemical supply chain, and building more facilities requires permitting, equipment procurement, testing, and fabrication qualification measured in years. Third, producers such as Resonac, Air Liquide, and Adeka manufacture semiconductor-grade hydrogen bromide gas outside Israel, but their combined capacity is already committed to existing customers: Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Company, the world’s dominant contract chipmaker; Samsung, the leading producer of DRAM and high-bandwidth memory; and Semiconductor Manufacturing International Corporation, China’s largest state-backed foundry. Critically, those customers are not holding steady: AI infrastructure buildout is accelerating demand across the board, meaning outside producers are stretched thin against a growing baseline. Even if outside producers could expand output, South Korean facilities would be competing for that capacity with Taiwan, Samsung’s own logic plants, and China, all of whom face the same accelerating demand.

The Chokepoint and Its Consequences

The Dead Sea is among the most bromine-rich bodies of water on earth. ICL Group, which extracts at the lowest cost of any producer globally, dominates a supply that Israel and Jordan together account for roughly two thirds of globally. Critically, ICL’s hydrogen bromide gas production, including the semiconductor-grade output supplied to South Korean fabrication plants, is manufactured at the same Sodom facility where extraction occurs, meaning extraction and conversion infrastructure are co-located in the same vulnerable corridor. Iranian missiles have already penetrated Israeli air defenses in the Negev on multiple occasions, wounding nearly 200 people in Dimona and Arad, both in the same geographic corridor as ICL’s production and conversion sites.

The mechanism of disruption does not require a direct hit on an ICL facility. War risk insurance for vessel calls at Israeli ports has already risen from 0.2 percent to between 0.7 and 1.0 percent of vessel value per seven-day call, adding up to $500,000 in costs per voyage on a mid-sized cargo ship. Even for ships routed through the Mediterranean rather than the Red Sea, those insurance costs apply the moment a vessel calls at an Israeli port. The war risk premium follows the port, not the route. ZIM, Israel’s primary shipping line, has implemented a “war risk premium surcharge” on all cargo to and from Israel. Haifa oil refinery — the country’s largest — was shut down after its power station was damaged in an Iranian attack, demonstrating that critical industrial infrastructure does not require a direct strike to be forced offline. The downstream consequences of even a partial disruption to that corridor would propagate immediately across the global memory supply chain.

Samsung and SK hynix together dominate approximately 70 percent of the global DRAM market. SK hynix alone holds roughly 57 percent of the high bandwidth memory market. Since DRAM and NAND underpin every modern computing device, a supply disruption would propagate across the full consumer and industrial electronics stack, not only AI infrastructure. High bandwidth memory — a specialized form of DRAM stacked vertically to deliver the data speeds that AI accelerators such as Nvidia’s graphics processing units require — is sold out through 2026, and DRAM suppliers hold only two to three weeks of inventory. A shortage would force both companies to allocate scarce hydrogen bromide gas to their highest-value lines — high bandwidth memory for AI accelerators — at the expense of commodity DRAM and NAND used in phones, personal computers, laptops, and data storage. The consequences fall hardest across Africa, South Asia, and Latin America, where memory already accounts for 15 to 20 percent of the bill of materials for a mid-range smartphone. That share rises sharply for budget devices, the primary gateway to digital participation across Africa, South Asia, and Latin America. Smartphone prices in Bangladesh have already risen 10 to 25 percent in 2026 as a direct result of DRAM and NAND inflation, with similar increases reported in Nigeria and South Africa. Budget smartphones are reverting to 4 gigabytes of RAM in 2026, precisely as on-device AI features demand more, not less. A bromine supply shock would price hundreds of millions of people out of the devices through which they access banking, education, healthcare, and economic opportunity.

The exposure extends beyond commercial technology. The majority of guidance systems, radar modules, and electronic warfare packages fielded by the U.S. military run on DRAM and NAND flash chips sourced from the same commercial facilities, on the same allocation logic, with less procurement flexibility than commercial customers. Since the Defense Department shifted to commercial off-the-shelf procurement in the 1990s, there is no separate defense-grade memory supply chain. A shortage that forces Samsung and SK hynix to prioritize high-margin high bandwidth memory for AI customers would deprioritize the commodity DRAM used in precision-guided munitions, intelligence platforms, and shipboard radar systems, with no government visibility into how that allocation decision gets made. The same war straining ICL’s operational continuity is simultaneously depleting munitions stockpiles whose guidance systems depend on the same memory supply chain. The supply stress and the demand spike are running in the same direction at the same time.

The consequences for American AI follow directly from the South Korean exposure but run through a supply chain that most U.S. policymakers have never traced. Every Nvidia Blackwell and Rubin graphics processing unit requires high-bandwidth memory stacks that come almost entirely from SK hynix and Samsung, as SK hynix is Nvidia’s primary high-bandwidth memory supplier for both platforms. Microsoft, Amazon, Google, and Meta are deploying hundreds of billions of dollars in AI infrastructure on delivery schedules that assume South Korean plants will have uninterrupted access to the etch chemicals they need. A bromine disruption produces delivery slippage, renegotiated contracts, higher spot prices, and delayed server deployments.

South Korea, the United States, and Israel Need to Act

Three levers are available, and they require action simultaneously. First, the most immediate is physical pre-positioning. Arkansas bromine from Albemarle and TETRA Technologies cannot be used directly in chip production, but it could serve as feedstock for semiconductor-grade hydrogen bromide gas conversion if that infrastructure existed, which is precisely the gap that ought to be closed. South Korean companies could also establish bromine forward contracts locking in supply and price for 12 to 18 months.

Second, the single most important structural action is the one with the longest lead time: building semiconductor-grade hydrogen bromide gas conversion capacity outside Israel. The Chip 4 framework should be extended to include a critical materials annex with a coordinated allied program to site, permit, and fund dedicated gas-phase distillation infrastructure capable of achieving parts-per-billion purity in geographically diversified locations — particularly in South Korea, Japan, and the United States. Private firms will not build conversion infrastructure at this scale and speed without government mandate, offtake guarantees and permitting priority.

Third, each government should take action in their own lanes, but in a coordinated fashion. South Korea should designate bromine a critical mineral, mandate minimum inventory levels, and fund domestic conversion infrastructure jointly with Samsung and SK hynix. The United States should add bromine, semiconductor-grade hydrogen bromide gas, and the full range of specialty gases derived from bromine to the critical minerals list, and use Defense Production Act authority and CHIPS and Science Act funding to co-invest with allies in purification capacity on allied soil. Israel should formalize bromine as a strategic export commodity, harden ICL’s production sites against missile attack, and use the 2030 Dead Sea concession expiration to bring in allied capital in exchange for long-term supply priority.

Conclusion

In sum, the bromine risk sits outside every dashboard anyone is monitoring. The structural failure is not the war: It is that the global memory supply chain has built itself around a conversion chokepoint with no redundancy and no fallback. If ICL’s Sodom facility goes offline, the gap does not get filled. The action that matters most — building semiconductor-grade hydrogen bromide gas conversion capacity outside Israel — takes years. The actions available now — forward contracts, inventory mandates, and Arkansas feedstock development — buy months at best, not years. That gap is precisely why these three countries should move now, before an Iranian ballistic missile makes the answer irrelevant.

Alvin Camba, Ph.D., is lead scientist and director of research at Lyvi. He is also a nonresident fellow in the Indo-Pacific Security Initiative at the Atlantic Council’s Scowcroft Center for Strategy and Security, and a senior research fellow at Associated Universities, Inc. His book on Chinese megaprojects and coalition politics in Southeast Asia is in production at Cornell University Press.

**Please note, as a matter of house style, War on the Rocks will not use a different name for the U.S. Department of Defense until and unless the name is changed by statute by the U.S. Congress.

Image: NASA/GSFC/METI/ERSDAC/JAROS and U.S./Japan ASTER Science Team via NASA.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

14. I Made the "Next-Level" Camera and I love it

Source: https://thelibre.news/i-made-the-next-level-camera-and-i-love-it/
Site: LibreNews
Author: Niccolò Venerandi
Published: 2026-04-16
HN activity: 35 points · 1 comments
Length: 4.2K words (~19 min read)
Language: en

This is one of my favorite lenses: the Helios 44. It has an "aperture" of 29mm, meaning that if you look straight through it, the circle that you see has a diameter of 29 millimiters. Why do we care, you might ask?

You probably know that pictures can be out of focus. But why does "out of focus exist"?

Well, without getting too technical, the lens takes the rays of light emitted by an object and then converges them into a single point; if you place the camera sensor in that point, you'll be able to see the object. However, if you place the sensor closer or further away from where the rays of light intersect, then you'll get a circle and the image will be out of focus.
Source: https://www.bhphotovideo.com/explora/photography/tips-and-solutions/how-focus-works

Now, here's the kicker: the bigger the focusing lens is, the larger the cone of light rays is, meaning the the out of focus parts of the image will be more out of focus:
Source: https://www.cambridgeincolour.com/tutorials/depth-of-field.htm

This is (partly) why phone cameras can't naturally reach the same levels of background-out-of-focus that camera can reach: they have such small lenses!

This is the camera lens that I do most of my work in. As you can see, this lens is much bigger; indeed, its (maximum) aperture is more than 53mm, almost double what the Helios can offer, which allows for a very strong separation between the subjects and the background.

The question now is: how big can we go? How much blurriness can we get out of a lens?

Well, assuming we're okay with carrying around a lot of weight, we can go pretty big. As an example, take the Sigma 135mm f1.4; this lovely lens (which I sadly don't own, yet) has a majestic aperture of 96mm,
Source: https://blog.sigmaphoto.com/2025/first-impressions-sigma-135mm-f1-4-dg-art-lens-for-portrait-photography/

and it can deliver pictures like the following one. There's a catch, though: due to physical constraints, all of these large lenses are also always very "zoomed in"! Take your phone camera and set the zoom to 4x: that's roughly what you're going to get with this Sigma lens. This can be great for some scenarios (and it's my favorite focal length indeed) but what if we want to keep the same giant aperture but with a wider field of view too?

Well, we can't.

The reason is: remember the cone of light rays above? The bigger the lens is, the bigger the cone of light is too. But also: the wider the field of view of a lens, the bigger the cone of light too.

And, the combination of wide-angle-view and super-high-aperture would literally require light to pass through the metal of the camera in order to reach the sensor:

In order to work around this, you'd have to quite literally tear your camera apart in order to expose the sensor. Somebody has done it, namely some "Stanley Kubrik" guy, and - of course - the lovely folks at Media Division:

But even so, Kubrik only reached ~71mm of aperture, and that's still on a 50mm focal length lens, which is 2.7x wider than the 135mm mentioned above, but also not exactly a wide angle lens either. Media Division instead went for 136mm of aperture, but on a focal length of 100mm, awfully close to the 135mm. Also, I'm not taking my camera apart. And, finally, all of these solutions require these giant pieces of lenses that are extremely rare and pricey.

Luckily, there's a solution to all of these problems. Meet the Charles Beseler 18" Series III:
Source: https://forum.mflenses.com/beseler-18-opaque-projector-lens-t83300.html

As you can see, it's absolutely huge. It's also really cheap to get: I bought to for around 200€, including shipping costs. These lenses were produced a lot of time ago and they were used as projector lenses, in machines like these:

They are no longer used nowadays, and can be bought for cheap. And, as one can see by naked eye, they have a giant aperture. I can only provide an estimate for it, since there's no specs sheet for it, but it should be around 125mm.

So, you might ask, is this a wide angle lens? Well, the 18" in the name is telling us its focal length, and - converted to metric - that's ... 457mm. Which is roughly a 13x zoom in your normal camera, and so much more than we were looking for. Oh, no. Well, we knew it was physically impossible anyway.

Also, look how crazy of a contraption you have to build in order to connect this giant lens to a camera:
Source: https://forum.mflenses.com/beseler-18-opaque-projector-lens-t83300.html

Though, it would produce some pictures, and indeed we can see a lot of out-of-focus (but also a lot of zoom...):
Source: https://forum.mflenses.com/beseler-18-opaque-projector-lens-t83300.html

Fear not, though, the Charles gives us an extra tool to work with. So far, we've always assumed that we were working with a camera like mine, with a "standard"-sized sensor (it's called "full frame").

Suppose instead that we have a sensor that's double the size of mine. That would make for a pretty big camera, but still: a bigger sensor is able to capture a bigger image, effectively "zooming out": thus, our 457mm lens would become a 228mm lens. That's still not enough.

Let's double the size again. We're zooming out by a factor of 2 again, reaching a focal length of 114mm. That's still too much zoom. Let's double the size of the sensor again. We're now at 57mm. This is better already, though we should probably make the sensor just a bit bigger still, so that we can be around 40mm.

This means that the size of the sensor needs to be: the original size, times two, times two, times two, times one point five; that is, we need to increase the sensor size by a factor of 12.

My camera sensor size is 35mm by 24mm. Multiplied by 12, we get 420mm by 288mm. That's, uh, 42cm by 29cm. It's, like, pretty big. That's the size of a painting you'd hang on your wall. This gives us two issues:

Firstly, such a sensor simply doesn't exist. Films shot on IMAX use very big "sensor" (it's film) areas and we're talking about ~7cm by 5cm. It's not even "it's expensive" territory, it simply... does not exist.

Secondly, lenses usually can't project an image big enough to cover such a large area. Most lenses are designed to be used with Full Frame sensors nowadays, or slightly bigger ones (such as "Medium Size" – look, I don't make the names).

The good news here is that the Charles was not built "nowadays". Maybe back then they didn't get the memo about future sensor sizes. How can we check how big of an area our lenses can cover?

It's thankfully pretty easy. If you simply put a lens near a white surface, you'll be able to see what the sensor would see. The Helios projects a rather small image on my white wall, but that's just enough to cover the similarly-small full frame sensor in my camera.

0:00

/0:13

I do also have lenses that project bigger images. As an example, this weird lens that found in some used market gives us a pretty big image circle. It certainly covers a camera sensor, even a "Medium Size" one, but not a the 43cm by 29cm area we need.

0:00

/0:12

The Charles produces a giant image. It's tough to see it exactly because the lens has to be very far from the wall now, thus the image is very faint, but it's there. I'm not sure how big it is, but it's bigger than 43cm by 29cm. This is it.

0:00

/0:13

Now we have to deal with the incompetence of the human mind and quickly invent a new giant sensor, bigger than anyone has ever seen. It should only take a few minutes.

Jokes aside, what we need to make this work was invented a long time ago for camcorders. Back then, we were dealing with a similar problem: we had these consumer video cameras with very small sensor, and we had "pro" camera lenses that were designed to handle much bigger sensors. We needed some kind of "adapter" that would allow to connect the two.
I'm too young to have owned one of these.

This adapter is called a Depth-of-field adapter, and here's how weird it looks.

The idea is the following: we build a big "fake sensor" that's actually just semi-trasparent paper, and we focus the camera lens onto that "fake sensor". Of course paper by itself is not going to "capture" any image, but we can then go on the other side and take a picture of the resulting image, like this:

0:00

/0:16

This is a rather weird two-step process, if you think about it. It needs to have a first lens that supports a bigger sensor area, then you project to a big "fake sensor", and then you need another (smaller) lens that captures the image coming out of the "fake sensor" onto the actual, real sensor of the camera.

All of this works because "semi-transparent paper", when lit by the lightrays coming out of a lens, will allow us to see exactly what a sensor would see if it was placed there. The reason is that the "semi-transparent paper" scatters light randomly, and so it deviates the lightrays from traveling straight to traveling towards our eyes (and all other parts of the room).

Let's see what's required to build this in our scenario.

Firstly, we have the Charles lens, which has to see the world on one side, but should be within a box or something on the other side, so that no there's no light messing with our image.

Then, within the box, there should be the 42cm by 29cm "fake sensor", and it should be made by some semitransparent material that scatters light without absorbing it. The Charles has a focal length 457mm, which tells us that the fake sensor should be at least 45cm away from the lens. Also, in order to focus the lens, this distance needs to be able to increase if necessary (even by ~2x!).

Then, beyond the fake sensor but still within the dark box (otherwise light will mess everything up), there needs to be an actual camera that takes a picture (or a video) of the fake sensor. The distance here depends on the exact camera and lens, but it's usually around 35cm.

Great. Let's build this.

Since the distance between all components will need to be adjusted, and since all of these components weight quite a bit (the lens is around 3kg!), I decided to go with a metal sliding rail (more technically, a vslot 2080) for the base. Then, bought a few sliding plates for it, which have a variety of holes in them.

0:00

/0:08

Let's start from the Charles lens; we need to hold this lens at a certain height and attach it to the base plate. My solution was to hold a second plate up through some long screws and nuts to adjust the height. Then, to hold the lens, I found a couple of telescope holders which have three axis adjustments and support lenses up to 15cm. They had holes in the bottom to screw them onto the plates. Then, I can just insert the lens within the telescope holder and tighten the adjustment screws all around.

0:00

/0:23

Then, on the opposite side, I went with the same idea to hold my actual camera; however we didn't need any telescope holder here, as there's a ring holder for my specific lens which can be just as easily screwed on the base plate.

0:00

/0:06

Onto the fake sensor, then. Firstly: what should it be made of? I tried the following.

Paper. This does not work, as it captures almost all light that it receives, and thus you cannot see through it.

Papier-mâché. This lets some light through, but still very little, and it adds a very heavy texture to it. Also not ideal.

Baking paper. A surprisingly good solution, but it still doesn't let much light through, and you can see a light texture. Still, this is great for quick prototypes, and I used quite a bit of it.

IKEA PUCKELFLY. This is a frosted window film, which does roughly what we want, since it lets light through but also scatters it. This worked pretty nicely and was a great option to me, but it also introduced some heavy texture to the image, as you can see the grains in the image.

Wax. This almost sounds like a joke, but if you're able to create a ~0.3mm thick layer of melted wax, this should act as a great scattering surface that still lets a lot of light through. I spent quite some time attempting this, but I was ultimately unable to create an uniform layer. I still have kilograms worth of wax and I'm not sure what to do with it.

Homemade frosted glass. There are a few ways to achieve homemade frosted glass, and the easiest is to use some fine grit material between two sheets of glass and rub them together. I had issues finding the right grit, and was ultimately put off by the amount of work that this option requires. However, it's also the option that should provide the best results.

Photographic diffusion film. Okay, context: when you have a small but bright light, this will cast a very hard shadow, like the sun. Sometimes, you instead want to turn this into a bright, large light, that casts softer shadows. The easy way to do that is to put a diffusion film in front of the light, which will diffract the light around and effectively act as a bigger, softer light. This layer should absorb little light by design, and it's available in most photography shops. It's also relatively cheap, I paid 10€ for it, it works well. The only issue is that there's plenty of options, and all of them have some texture to it.

After much experimentation, I went with a "Lee Filters - 251 - Quarter white diffusion", which provided the best results for me. Note that it needs to be kept between two layers of glass, since it's a sheet of film.

0:00

/0:13

Next up, I need some component that keeps the layers of glass and attaches to the base plate. I decided to go with a 40x30cm picture frame. The benefits of this choice are that it's a standard size that's easy to find glass for, and there's plenty of frames too. There's also a drawback: cameras don't record in a 4:3 aspect ratio, but rather (in opengate) 3:2, a bit wider. Thus, I'll have to either record more area and crop, or only record part of the fake sensor. It's not a big deal.

In order to secure the picture frame I simply used a few screws. It's more stable than you'd think. Note that, just like for all components here, I went through multiple iterations and the frame that you're seeing is, like, the 5th different picture frame I bought.

0:00

/0:13

Now, we're finally able to position all components correctly! It sounds simple, but it took months just to get to this step. I had to receive most components from China and go through multiple iterations, but we got there. Now, for the hard part. We need bellows.

Camera bellows are these components that can change their size but remain rectangular in shape, allowing to change the distance between lens and sensor but without letting light in. They. Are. EXPENSIVE.
Source: https://ntphotoworks.com/bellows-ultra-large-format-cameras/

Luckily, it's easy to manufacture a small bellow. Sadly, we need an enormous one, and we still need to manufacture it ourself.

There are multiple ways to do it, (and I've tried them all!), but I'll keep the details light here. The general idea is that we need some materal that can bend (such as paper), but within it we need some places where it can't bend. Usually this is done by attaching precisely cut cardboard onto some paper.
Source: http://droopyland.free.fr/Collect-O-bits/Docs%20PHOTO/scannercamera3.html

Then, you can bend specific parts to make the bellow. This is a rather time-consuming and fatiguing process, when the bellow is as large as I needed it to be! But, after much thought, I was able to come up with two tricks to simply it.

Firstly: all bellow images I've shown you so far were of bellows where the entrance rectangle is bigger than the other side, and thus they have this trapezoid look to them. This is appreciated, since we've got a 40x30cm sensor on one side, but the lens on the other side is much smaller. However, this makes them harder to manufacture, so I decided to go with a much simpler bellow that's 40x30cm on both sides.

Secondly: I used IKEA curtains. No, I'm not kidding. Meet the SCHOTTIS.

This curtain is provided folded in ~3.4cm stripes, and it's available in a black color. Since it's a curtain, it's also able to block light effectively, and since it's IKEA, one of the side is plasticized and thus tough to break or tear apart.

This makes our job much easier, as now it's just a matter of leaving the folds where IKEA intended them, cut the curtain into four different pieces, tape them together in a different direction, and re-fold the entire thing correctly. The final folds on the bellow are either the existing ones in the provided curtain (possibly in the opposite direction), or in the places where we cut the curtain, so everything else gets to remain more rigid.

This was still a multiple-hours-long process, especially since I had to manufacture a couple of bellows to test different properties. This year I decided to catch up with Severance and I'm not joking when I tell you that I watched the entirety of the first season whilst folding IKEA curtains, cutting them, and taping them together again.

Ultimately, I had my bellow. It doesn't look stylish but it works. On the lens side I placed another picture frame with cardboard inside and made a hole at the center, so that I had 40x30cm components on both sides.

0:00

/0:24

Then, let's talk about the space between the fake sensor and the camera. There's no way that I'd make another bellow, but thankfully the distance here has to be fixed (depending on the taking lens). I measured the most convenient distance and made a cardboard element with the correct sizes. It's not as sexy as the bellow but it does the trick, and - if necessary - I can still insert the lens within the hole at various distances for small adjustments.

0:00

/0:18

There's one final component to put in place. Right now everything works, but I get some heavy vignetting, i.e. the corners of the "fake sensor" are dark. This is expected: the frosted surface reflects some of the light, but most of it just goes through it and we don't see it.

There's an easy solution to this: before the "fake sensor", we can place a lens that will change the direction of the light from outwards to towards the sensor. This way, most light will still travel towards the camera after passing through the sensor.

However, you should see an issue coming up: a lens that's big enough to physically cover a 40x30cm sensor would require a diameter of 50cm. That's a gigantic lens: the Charles felt pretty big already and that was just 14cm. It would be extremely hard to manufacture and very pricey.

This is where lighthouses come to the rescue. Yes, you read that right.

Each lighthouse has a big source of light; however, in order to make that light shine in the right direction and the maximum intensity, you also need to place one lens in front of it. However, a lighthouse light is even bigger than our fake sensor, and the required lens would have to be absolutely gigantic.

Because of this, a new type of lens was discovered! It's called a Fresnel lens, and it works similarly to a normal lens, but it's flat:
Source: https://insights.globalspec.com/article/3038/the-fresnel-lens-a-19th-century-innovation-with-21st-century-uses

Thus, a lighthouse was able to use big flat lenses, which are much, much easier to manufacture, as they don't require huge chunks of glass:
Ok, this is not a "flat" example exactly, but that's the idea behind this.

Fun fact: you can actually see fresnel lenses in multiple places where a normal lens would be too big or expensive. As an example, my own building places fresnel lenses in front of exterior light to direct the light correctly!

Anyhow, the good news is that we can just use a fresnel lens without worrying about it affecting image quality, or being too expensive. They can be bought for cheap on Aliexpress. They come in various sizes, including (thankfully) 40x30cm.

And that's everything really. Having placed the fresnel lens, we're not able to get an usable image on the whole 40x30cm sensor. The only thing that's left to do is, well, shoot some scenes with it!

0:00

/0:33

The good news is that I had already planned to shoot a short film last month, so I brought this along and used it for multiple scenes that specifically required a very thin depth of field. I was genuinely shocked by how good the results were, and - amongst the many mistakes I've done in production - this was one of the few things I'm very proud of.

Here's some more pictures with an earlier prototype:

Now, there are a few details that should be improved in the next iteration of this system, which I've decided to call Lampone.

Firstly: I need to build a longer bellow and buy a longer rail. This would allow to keep the lens further away from the fake sensor, which would allow to focus on closer objects. Right now, the minimum focusing distance is awfully large.

Secondly: I should probably work on the structural integrity of it all. Any camera movement will generate weird wobblyness within the video too. Overall I thought it was reasonable and I've included a few pans in these scenes, but more stability would be beneficial.

Thirdly: you can definitively see the texture of the diffusion film, and even the pattern of the fresnel lens. You can fix the former by using better ground glass, and the latter by placing the fresnel lens further away from the diffusion film. There's also visible dirtness on the fake sensor; I didn't really care because I felt like it added to the image, but to get clean video you should be extremely careful when assembling this part.

Even if all of this was fixed, one remaining issue would be that this thing is huge. Not only it requires a large minimum focusing distance, but it's also 120cm long by itself, and it's pretty heavy too (my tripod could barely hold it). This is not a problem by itself, but it does mean that it's only possible to use it when there's enough room on set (and sometimes there just isn't).

Another intrinsic issue is that you are losing a lot of light by doing this. There's no way around it: scattering the light around in the fake sensor means less light reaching the actual camera lens. You should consider about a 3 stops light reduction compared to your taking lens, i.e. the lens that you use to photograph the fake sensor. That's a lot of light loss, sadly: scenes just have to be well lit.

Finally, I would like to thank the many people who posted details online about their builds. The video that inspired all of this is, of course, by DIY perks:

He named the build a "Next-Level Camera", so I decided to go with that name too. I think I went for a different enough approach that it justified its own video. There's also a great detailed video by Media Division:

I loved that they decided to include a second video for patrons with exact details for the components that they chose; it was really helpful when doing my design, though I eventually went with quite different takes.

And, finally, there's the F-Zero project too which tried to make this type of lens possible to be bought instead of just built at home:

F-Zero Camera: Capture the Impossible

Our mission is to build unique, high-quality gear to allow photographers and videographers to capture images impossible to achieve with other methods. We help you capture the impossible.

F-Zero Camera

I didn't quite have the budget for that, and I feel like I ended up with slightly better specs compared to the F-Zero, but the design by them is incredible and definitively an inspiration going forward.

Anyhow, I will be using this again, and I loved the experience. If you want to watch the short film: thanks! It's still in post-prod., but it should come out in a couple months. Feel free to subscribe to this website and I'll post an article when it is out. Also, if you need to shoot something with this camera or want to play with it a bit, feel free to reach out.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

15. Turtle WoW classic server announces shutdown after Blizzard wins injunction

Source: https://www.pcgamer.com/games/world-of-warcraft/turtle-wow-classic-server-announces-shutdown-after-blizzard-wins-injunction/
Site: PC Gamer
Author: Justin Wagner
Published: 2026-04-18
HN activity: 235 points · 199 comments
Length: 168 words (~1 min read)
Language: en

Last week, popular World of Warcraft private server Turtle WoW got hit with a cease and desist from Blizzard after a judge ruled in the studio's favor regarding a copyright infringement suit filed last September. Court documents revealed that the two parties reached a settlement that hinged on "certain actions that are required to be taken by certain parties," and today, the other shoe dropped for anyone still playing the modded MMO: a forum post announced a complete shutdown of the project.

"Working on Turtle WoW has been the highlight of our lives," said Turtle WoW developer Torta in the post. "The adventures you had, the battles you fought, and the friends you met are what made it all worthwhile. We hope you will cherish those moments. What we leave behind are fond memories of an 8-year-long journey, and we hope you'll remember it every now and then."

Keep up to date with the most important stories and the best deals, as picked by the PC Gamer team.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

16. Brussels launched an age checking app. Hackers took 2 minutes to break it

Source: https://www.politico.eu/article/eu-brussels-launched-age-checking-app-hackers-say-took-them-2-minutes-break-it/
Site: POLITICO
Author: Émile Marzolf, Ellen O'Regan, Eliza Gkritsi
Published: 2026-04-17
HN activity: 26 points · 9 comments
Length: 125 words (~1 min read)
Language: en-GB

France to ban officials from US video tools including Zoom, Teams

The government wants staff to shun Silicon Valley and shift to its home-grown Visio platform instead.

Jan 27 2 mins read

France to investigate deepfakes of women stripped naked by Grok

Hundreds of women and teenagers have reported their photos published on social media have been “undressed” by Grok.

Jan 2 2 mins read

EU leaders paper over splits on US tech reliance

France and Germany are not yet on the same page to detox from Big Tech.

Oct 23 6 mins read

Paris prosecutors probe streaming site Kick following influencer’s death

France’s digital minister says she filed a complaint against Kick for “dissemination of content constituting criminal offenses.”

Aug 26 2 mins read

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

17. IEA: Solar overtakes all energy sources in a major global first

Source: https://electrek.co/2026/04/19/iea-solar-overtakes-all-energy-sources-in-a-major-global-first/
Site: Electrek
Author: Michelle Lewis
Published: 2026-04-20
HN activity: 39 points · 15 comments
Length: 999 words (~5 min read)
Language: en-US

Image: Springwell Solar Farm

Global energy demand growth slowed in 2025 – but electricity use is still surging, and solar just hit a major milestone, according to the International Energy Agency (IEA).

According to the IEA’s newly released 2026 Global Energy Review, overall energy demand rose 1.3% last year. That’s slightly below the previous decade’s average and well down from 2024. The slowdown was caused by weaker economic growth, milder weather in some regions, and more efficient technologies.

But zoom in on electricity, and it’s a very different story.

Global electricity demand jumped around 3% in 2025 – more than twice as fast as overall energy demand. Even though that growth cooled slightly from 2024 (thanks in part to less extreme heat in places like India and Southeast Asia), it’s still running ahead of the long-term average.

What’s driving it is a number of factors: more electrification in buildings and industry, rising EV adoption, and growing power demand from data centers.

Solar leads global energy growth for the first time

Solar was the single biggest contributor to global energy supply growth in 2025. It accounted for more than 25% of the increase – the first time a modern renewable has led global primary energy growth.

Natural gas came next at 17%, reflecting its continued role in electricity generation.

Overall, renewables and nuclear together met nearly 60% of the growth in energy demand. In fact, power generation from those sources exceeded total growth in electricity demand, meaning clean electricity more than covered the increase.

EVs keep oil demand in check

Global oil demand still grew, but only by 0.7%, right in line with IEA expectations.

One big reason: EVs.

Electric car sales jumped by more than 20% in 2025 to over 20 million vehicles, accounting for roughly 1 in 4 new car sales worldwide. That’s starting to put real pressure on demand for gasoline and diesel.

Coal trends were mixed. In China, strong renewables growth cut coal use in power generation. But in the US, higher natural gas prices led to more coal use as utilities switched fuels. Overall, coal demand growth slowed.

The big picture: Electrification is accelerating

IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol summed it up: “Electricity consumption is growing much faster than overall energy demand – and one energy source [solar] is growing much faster than any other.”

And that shift is happening against a messy global backdrop – economic uncertainty, geopolitical tensions, and volatile energy markets.

Under the surface, regional trends are diverging.

The US saw one of its strongest years of energy demand growth this century (excluding rebound years after recessions), driven by data centers, industrial activity, and a colder winter.

China still accounted for the largest share of global demand growth, but its growth slowed sharply to 1.7% as renewables scaled and efficiency improved.

Emissions growth slows, but not everywhere

Global energy-related CO2 emissions rose by about 0.4% in 2025, a slower increase than in previous years.

China’s emissions actually declined, thanks to rapid growth in renewables and other low-emissions tech. India’s emissions were flat for the first time since the 1970s (excluding the pandemic), helped in part by a strong monsoon season.

But in advanced economies, a cold winter pushed up fossil fuel use and emissions. As a result, emissions in advanced economies grew faster (+0.5%) than in emerging and developing economies (+0.3%) for the first time since the 1990s.

Solar, battery storage, and nuclear all ramp up

The electricity sector saw some standout milestones in 2025.

Solar added about 600 terawatt-hours of generation globally – the largest increase ever recorded in a single year for any power technology. That helped push overall coal-fired electricity generation down.

Battery storage was the fastest-growing power technology, with around 110 gigawatts (GW) of new capacity added – more than any year of natural gas capacity additions on record.

And nuclear is making a comeback: More than 12 GW of new reactors began construction in 2025 in several regions.

Clean tech is denting fossil fuel demand

Since 2019, the rollout of low-emissions technologies has reached a scale where it’s meaningfully cutting into fossil fuel use.

The IEA says these technologies now avoid annual fossil fuel consumption equal to the entire energy demand of Latin America.

And collectively, solar, wind, heat pumps, and other clean tech are displacing natural gas demand equivalent to about half of global LNG exports.

Electrek’s Take

The big takeaway from the IEA’s latest report isn’t just that solar had a record year – it’s that the system is starting to shift in a measurable way.

Electricity demand is rising fast, and clean power is increasingly meeting that demand. Solar alone leading global energy supply growth would’ve sounded optimistic a decade ago. Now it’s reality.

At the same time, the report shows how uneven the transition still is. Coal is falling in some places and rising in others. Emissions are flattening globally, but not consistently across regions.

Still, the direction of travel is clear: More electrification, more clean power, and more pressure on fossil fuels – especially in road transport.

And if EV growth keeps up at anywhere near this pace, oil demand will continue to weaken. The US-Iran conflict isn’t exactly endearing the oil industry to global consumers.

Read more: EV prices drop again as the gap with gas cars hits a record low

If you’ve ever considered going solar, make it easy by finding a trusted, reliable solar installer near you that offers competitive pricing by checking out EnergySage. It has hundreds of pre-vetted solar installers competing for your business, ensuring you get high-quality solutions and save 20-30% compared to going it alone. Plus, it’s free to use, and you won’t get sales calls until you select an installer and share your phone number with them.

Your personalized solar quotes are easy to compare online, and you’ll get access to unbiased Energy Advisors to help you every step of the way. Get started here.

FTC: We use income earning auto affiliate links. More.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

18. Changes in the system prompt between Claude Opus 4.6 and 4.7

Source: https://simonwillison.net/2026/Apr/18/opus-system-prompt/
Site: Simon Willison’s Weblog
Author: Simon Willison
Submitted: 2026-04-19 10:36 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 320 points · 182 comments
Length: 974 words (~5 min read)
Language: en-gb

18th April 2026

Anthropic are the only major AI lab to publish the system prompts for their user-facing chat systems. Their system prompt archive now dates all the way back to Claude 3 in July 2024 and it’s always interesting to see how the system prompt evolves as they publish new models.

Opus 4.7 shipped the other day (April 16, 2026) with a Claude.ai system prompt update since Opus 4.6 (February 5, 2026).

I had Claude Code take the Markdown version of their system prompts, break that up into separate documents for each of the models and then construct a Git history of those files over time with fake commit dates representing the publication dates of each updated prompt—here’s the prompt I used with Claude Code for the web.

Here is the git diff between Opus 4.6 and 4.7. These are my own highlights extracted from that diff—in all cases text in bold is my emphasis:

The “developer platform” is now called the “Claude Platform”.
The list of Claude tools mentioned in the system prompt now includes "Claude in Chrome—a browsing agent that can interact with websites autonomously, Claude in Excel—a spreadsheet agent, and Claude in Powerpoint—a slides agent. Claude Cowork can use all of these as tools."—Claude in Powerpoint was not mentioned in the 4.6 prompt.
The child safety section has been greatly expanded, and is now wrapped in a new <critical_child_safety_instructions> tag. Of particular note: “Once Claude refuses a request for reasons of child safety, all subsequent requests in the same conversation must be approached with extreme caution.”
It looks like they’re trying to make Claude less pushy: “If a user indicates they are ready to end the conversation, Claude does not request that the user stay in the interaction or try to elicit another turn and instead respects the user’s request to stop.”
The new <acting_vs_clarifying> section includes:

When a request leaves minor details unspecified, the person typically wants Claude to make a reasonable attempt now, not to be interviewed first. Claude only asks upfront when the request is genuinely unanswerable without the missing information (e.g., it references an attachment that isn’t there).

When a tool is available that could resolve the ambiguity or supply the missing information — searching, looking up the person’s location, checking a calendar, discovering available capabilities — Claude calls the tool to try and solve the ambiguity before asking the person. Acting with tools is preferred over asking the person to do the lookup themselves.

Once Claude starts on a task, Claude sees it through to a complete answer rather than stopping partway. [...]
It looks like Claude chat now has a tool search mechanism, as seen in this API documentation and described in this November 2025 post:

Before concluding Claude lacks a capability — access to the person’s location, memory, calendar, files, past conversations, or any external data — Claude calls tool_search to check whether a relevant tool is available but deferred. “I don’t have access to X” is only correct after tool_search confirms no matching tool exists.
There’s new language to encourage Claude to be less verbose:

Claude keeps its responses focused and concise so as to avoid potentially overwhelming the user with overly-long responses. Even if an answer has disclaimers or caveats, Claude discloses them briefly and keeps the majority of its response focused on its main answer.
This section was present in the 4.6 prompt but has been removed for 4.7, presumably because the new model no longer misbehaves in the same way:

Claude avoids the use of emotes or actions inside asterisks unless the person specifically asks for this style of communication.

Claude avoids saying “genuinely”, “honestly”, or “straightforward”.
There’s a new section about “disordered eating”, which was not previously mentioned by name:

If a user shows signs of disordered eating, Claude should not give precise nutrition, diet, or exercise guidance — no specific numbers, targets, or step-by-step plans—anywhere else in the conversation. Even if it’s intended to help set healthier goals or highlight the potential dangers of disordered eating, responses with these details could trigger or encourage disordered tendencies.
A popular screenshot attack against AI models is to force them to say yes or no to a controversial question. Claude’s system prompt now guards against that (in the <evenhandedness> section):

If people ask Claude to give a simple yes or no answer (or any other short or single word response) in response to complex or contested issues or as commentary on contested figures, Claude can decline to offer the short response and instead give a nuanced answer and explain why a short response wouldn’t be appropriate.
Claude 4.6 had a section specifically clarifying that “Donald Trump is the current president of the United States and was inaugurated on January 20, 2025”, because without that the model’s knowledge cut-off date combined with its previous knowledge that Trump falsely claimed to win the 2020 election meant it would deny he was the president. That language is gone for 4.7, reflecting the model’s new reliable knowledge cut-off date of January 2026.

And the tool descriptions too

The system prompts published by Anthropic are sadly not the entire story—their published information doesn’t include the tool descriptions that are provided to the model, which is arguably an even more important piece of documentation if you want to take full advantage of what the Claude chat UI can do for you.

Thanfully you can ask Claude directly—I used the prompt:

List all tools you have available to you with an exact copy of the tool description and parameters

My shared transcript has full details, but the list of named tools is as follows:

ask_user_input_v0
bash_tool
conversation_search
create_file
fetch_sports_data
image_search
message_compose_v1
places_map_display_v0
places_search
present_files
recent_chats
recipe_display_v0
recommend_claude_apps
search_mcp_registry
str_replace
suggest_connectors
view
weather_fetch
web_fetch
web_search
tool_search
visualize:read_me
visualize:show_widget

I don’t believe this list has changed since Opus 4.6.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

19. Mechanical Keyboard Sounds – A listening Museum

Source: https://sheets.works/data-viz/keyboard-sounds
Site: sheets.works
Submitter: akashwadhwani35 (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-04-15 15:45 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 123 points · 38 comments
Length: 319 words (~2 min read)
Language: en

The Data Drop · #049

The Listening
Museum.

36 mechanical keyboards and switches, curated and sound-mapped. From IBM Model M (1985) to Topre to thocky modern customs. Click any card, type on your real keyboard, hear it as if it were on your desk.

1

Click a keyboard card,it expands with full details.

2

Type on your real keyboard,every key plays that sound.

3

Read the anatomy. Housing, stem, spring, and why it sounds like it does.

Methodology

A note before you flame us.

Every audio sample on this page comes from the open-source mechanical keyboard community. None of these were recorded by us. We are the curator, not the field recordist.

As ThereminGoat has argued, sound tests are inherently limited: microphone, room, host board, keycap set, codec, and your speakers all color the result. You are never hearing "the keyboard",you are hearing one recording of one build, played through one chain. Treat this as a listening museum, not a buying guide.

Some entries share recordings or are paired on purpose. "Alt build" entries are a separate field recording of the same switch in a different host board and mic chain,listen to these side-by-side with the standard entry to hear how much of a "switch sound" is actually plate, case, mic, and room. Don\'t read loudness differences between paired entries as meaningful: that\'s recording variance, not typing pressure. The Unicomp Classic uses the same bucklespring recording as the IBM Model M because Unicomp still builds these on the original IBM tooling.

All audio is sourced from Mechvibes (community library, MIT app), Bucklespring (GPL-2.0, IBM Model M), grcekh on Freesound (CC0, HHKB Pro Hybrid), keyboardsounds (GPL-3.0), Monkeytype (GPL-3.0), keyBeats (MIT), daktilo (MIT), wayclick, and keebsound. If you are an audio author and want attribution corrected or your sample removed, email akash@sheets.works.

The Data Drop

One interactive story,
every other week.

Built like this. Quiet inbox. No spam. Unsubscribe one click.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

20. A cache-friendly IPv6 LPM with AVX-512 (linearized B+-tree, real BGP benchmarks)

Source: https://github.com/esutcu/planb-lpm
Site: GitHub
Submitter: debugga (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-04-20 03:24 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 35 points · 14 comments
Length: 3.1K words (~14 min read)
Language: en

IPv6 longest-prefix-match (LPM) using a linearized B+-tree with AVX-512 SIMD and a scalar fallback. Based on the algorithm from:

Zhihao Zhang, Lanzheng Liu, Chen Chen, Huiba Li, Jiwu Shu, Windsor Hsu, Yiming Zhang. PlanB: Efficient Software IPv6 Lookup with Linearized B+-Tree. NSDI '26. arXiv:2604.14650. Author's reference code: https://github.com/nicexlab/planb.

This repository is an independent, clean-room reimplementation of the algorithm as a portable, MIT-licensed C++17 library with extras that were not part of the reference:

Portable header-only core (include/lpm6.hpp) that compiles without AVX-512 and transparently falls back to a scalar path.
Dynamic FIB (lpm6::Dynamic) using the paper's rebuild-and-swap model with std::atomic<std::shared_ptr>; lookups are wait-free.
Python bindings via pybind11 (pip install -e .).
Correctness tests (tests/test_correctness.cpp) that verify the tree against a brute-force LPM reference on synthetic FIBs.
Sample FIB/trace generator (examples/generate_sample.py).

Why this exists

The PlanB paper is a solid engineering idea, but the reference code on GitHub is not something you can drop into another project: it is Linux- and AVX-512-only, has no license, no Python layer, and no dynamic-FIB path. planb-lpm re-expresses the algorithm from the paper as a portable, tested, and permissively licensed library so the technique is actually usable in research, teaching, and production software.

Use cases

Research / simulation — drop-in fast LPM backend for ns-3 or a custom packet-level simulator, or as a reference to compare newer LPM structures against.
Control-plane tooling — SDN controllers and route-monitoring services that need to answer "which prefix covers this address?" over a large FIB without pulling in a full routing stack.
Network analysis — IPv6 scanners, traffic classifiers, and log-enrichment pipelines that tag flows with their covering prefix.
Teaching — a compact, readable implementation of a modern SIMD lookup structure suitable for networking and computer-architecture courses.

Build

cmake -B build -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release
cmake --build build -j
ctest --test-dir build --output-on-failure

Options:

CMake option Default Effect
LPM6_BUILD_PYTHON OFF Build the pybind11 extension

AVX-512 is auto-detected via check_cxx_compiler_flag; on CPUs or compilers without support, the scalar path is used.

Run the benchmark

python3 examples/generate_sample.py 100000 1000000 42
./build/planb-lpm examples/sample_fib.txt examples/sample_trace.txt 20

Methodology

Synthetic FIB, 100 000 prefixes. Prefix length distribution is weighted to match the RIPE rrc00-25 table (roughly /48 45%, /32 11%, /40 10%, /44 10%, /36 4%, others), generated by examples/generate_sample.py.
Synthetic trace, 1 M uniform-random 64-bit addresses (upper half of an IPv6 address, which is all that drives /0../64 LPM).
Each benchmark does one warmup pass (discarded) and 20 timed passes. We report min / q1 / median / q3 / max + IQR across the 20 runs so variance is visible, not hidden under an average.
Pin to a single core with taskset -c <N> to cut scheduler noise. The binaries print the CPU they ran on, the affinity-mask width, the cpufreq governor, and the Intel turbo state so numbers are reproducible. (On WSL the /sys probes are unavailable and those lines are silently omitted.)
Hardware: laptop Intel i5-1035G7 (Ice Lake, 4C/8T, AVX-512), Ubuntu 24.04 on WSL, GCC 13.3, -O3. This is a consumer CPU; the paper's numbers are from a 24-core Xeon 8331C and a Zen5 Ryzen 9 370HX.

Results

taskset -c 2 ./build/planb-lpm examples/sample_fib.txt examples/sample_trace.txt 20 (20 timed runs + 1 warmup, batch paths use the real public API returning next-hops):

Path min q1 median q3 max IQR
single 34 45 48 51 62 6.6
batch<1> 32 44 47 51 60 7.6
batch<2> 36 48 54 58 68 10.4
batch<4> 42 60 66 71 84 11.3
batch<8> 53 66 73 81 101 13.4
batch<16> 43 57 62 66 78 9.1
batch<32> 41 70 76 83 94 13.4

Units: MLPS; medians from a rolling average of four 20-run sweeps. Build time for that FIB is ~25 ms, tree depth 6, 531 k keys across 200 k edges.

Observations:

batch<1> ≈ single — the batched entry point adds no overhead at M=1, confirming the dispatch cost is negligible.
Sweet spot at M=8: ~1.5× single-core throughput over single. M=32 is essentially flat; going further would need larger-batch unrolling and register-allocation work.
M=16 dip is real and reproducible across runs — likely register pressure at the #pragma GCC unroll 16 boundary interacting with the 7-level traversal. A known-to-investigate item.

Paper's ablation reports batching worth 3–4.5× on AMD Zen5; we see ~1.5× on Ice Lake. Part of the gap is the paper's lookup_batch_checksum-style fast path (our binary uses the public API that also writes next-hops), part is AVX-512 sustained frequency differences between Ice Lake and Zen5. The paper reports 191–197 MLPS single-core on Xeon and 374–393 MLPS on Zen5 — a real server should land near those numbers.

Against a conventional baseline

The bench_naive binary builds a Patricia radix trie (tests/patricia.hpp) on the same FIB and runs the same trace through it. Patricia is a standard path-compressed binary trie — representative of the pointer-chasing LPM structures PlanB is designed to replace.

taskset -c 2 ./build/bench_naive … (same 20-run discipline):

Implementation min median max IQR
lpm6::Tree 23 50 63 8.2
Patricia trie 2.4 2.4 2.6 0.06

Units: MLPS. Tree-vs-Patricia ≈ 20× on the median, bracketing the upper end of the paper's reported 1.6–14× advantage over PopTrie, CP-Trie, Neurotrie, and HBS. Patricia isn't one of those baselines — it's a conventional-radix-trie stand-in — so the exact multiplier will shift when we benchmark against the paper's actual algorithms (on the roadmap, see plan.md). The binary also prints a linear-scan number on a 50 000-address slice; that is O(N) vs. O(log N) and is only a sanity check, not a comparison.

Memory footprint

Same 100 000-prefix workload. footprint_bytes() counts the algorithmic cost (our flat key + next-hop arrays for the tree; one Node struct per Patricia node); RSS delta is the process-level VmRSS change across the build and captures allocator overhead:

Implementation Algorithmic RSS delta Per-prefix
lpm6::Tree 4.82 MB 5.05 MB ~50 B/prefix
Patricia trie 6.04 MB 9.02 MB ~90 B/prefix

At 100 K, the tree's flat cache-aligned layout costs roughly half the RSS of the pointer-chasing Patricia. This does not hold at scale — see FIB-size sweep below: the linearized B+-tree grows in discrete depth steps (9^depth buckets), so its footprint is bounded from below by depth, not prefix count. Once depth transitions 6→7 (around 250 K prefixes) the tree's algorithmic size jumps to ~38 MB and stays there until depth 7 fills up. Patricia scales linearly with prefixes, so at 250 K the tree is actually larger than Patricia. Paper reports 56–92% memory reductions vs PopTrie/CP-Trie/Neurotrie/HBS; those are heavier than plain Patricia, so the paper's advantage likely still holds against them even at our 250 K crossover.

FIB-size sweep

examples/run_sweep.sh drives planb-lpm, bench_update, and bench_naive across five FIB sizes sharing one 1 M-address trace, same 20-run discipline, pinned to core 2. Numbers are medians of the timed runs; throughput units are MLPS:

FIB depth single batch<8> batch<32> rebuild tree alg. Patricia alg.
10 K 5 94 165 148 1.5 ms 0.53 MB 0.61 MB
100 K 6 46 69 75 17.7 ms 4.82 MB 6.04 MB
250 K 7 20 29 41 51.8 ms 38.40 MB 15.00 MB
500 K 7 12 18 27 107.9 ms n/m n/m
1 M 7 10 14 22 213.4 ms n/m n/m

(n/m = not measured; Patricia allocation and the brute-force sanity check become impractical at 500 K+ on a laptop, so the sweep script only runs them for ≤250 K. Tree footprint at 500 K / 1 M is dominated by the same depth-7 bucket skeleton as 250 K and grows only with the filled-leaf count; we haven't added a separate probe yet.)

Observations:

Throughput falls as the FIB exceeds L3. The laptop has ~6 MB L3; the tree's flat footprint is below that at 100 K (4.8 MB) and above it from 250 K onward. Single-lookup throughput drops 4.6× going from 10 K → 100 K and another 2.3× going from 100 K → 250 K, dominated by memory traffic once we spill out of L3.
Batching helps most at scale. At 10 K, batch<8> beats batch<32> (165 vs 148 MLPS) — everything's in L1/L2 and large unrolls just add register pressure. At 1 M, batch<32> is the best path (22 vs 14 for batch<8>); the long-latency DRAM fetches benefit from more in-flight loads.
Depth transitions matter. Depth goes 5→6 between 10 K and 100 K, and 6→7 between 100 K and 250 K. Each extra level is one more cache-line indirection per lookup and bumps the sentinel-padded key count (531 K → 4.78 M going 6→7), which drives the tree-above- Patricia memory crossover.
Rebuild scales roughly linearly. 1.5 / 17.7 / 51.8 / 107.9 / 213.4 ms for 10 K / 100 K / 250 K / 500 K / 1 M; the paper's Zen5 number is 850 ms for 1 M, so our Ice Lake laptop is actually ~4× faster on the rebuild path (likely because our tree build elides some of the preprocessing the paper bundles into rebuild time).

Dataset caveat: these are synthetic FIBs with a RIPE-weighted length distribution, not real BGP tables. Real BGP has stronger prefix-length clustering and spatial locality in advertised ranges, both of which change cache behavior — see the next section for a reproduction on an actual RIPE RIS RIB.

Real BGP reproduction (RIPE RIS rrc00)

examples/mrt_to_fib.py parses a TABLE_DUMP_V2 / RIB_IPV6_UNICAST MRT dump (RFC 6396) into a planb-lpm FIB. On the rrc00 full-table latest-bview.gz of 2026-04-19 we get 254 197 unique IPv6 prefixes — right in the range (≈235 K) the paper cites for rrc00 in its evaluation. Same 1 M uniform-random 64-bit trace, same 20-run discipline, pinned to core 2:

Path min median max IQR
single 48.7 67.5 74.4 3.6
batch<8> 115.3 137.2 151.0 8.7
batch<32> 100.5 118.6 137.1 8.3

Units: MLPS. Tree depth 7, 4.78 M sentinel-padded keys, 38.4 MB algorithmic footprint (same skeleton as the synthetic 250 K row). Build is 63 ms, full rebuild under bench_update is median 40 ms (paper 850 ms/1 M on Zen5 → ~213 ms/250 K scale; our Ice Lake laptop at 40 ms is ~5× faster — likely because the paper bundles more preprocessing into the rebuild number).

Throughput is roughly 3× higher on real BGP than on the same-size synthetic (67 vs 20 MLPS single). The synthetic distribution is length-weighted but picks each prefix's address uniformly; real BGP concentrates advertisements in a small fraction of the address space, so a uniform-random lookup trace against a real RIB tends to hit the same hot tree paths and stays L2-resident. This is the opposite direction of "real data is worse" that we expected — it mainly tells us our trace is the limiting factor, not the FIB.

A surprise on Patricia

Against real BGP the Patricia baseline gets faster too — by more:

Implementation min median max IQR
lpm6::Tree 43.5 65.3 75.4 5.1
Patricia trie 51.2 95.7 110.9 24.2

Patricia jumps from 2.4 MLPS on the 100 K synthetic to 95 MLPS on real BGP — 40× better on the same machine, and now ahead of the tree. Two things are going on:

Uniform 64-bit lookups bail out early in Patricia on a BGP table. Most random upper-64-bit addresses fall into a handful of heavily covered root regions (think /6, /8, /12) — Patricia returns after 1–2 pointer chases staying in L1. The tree always does 7 cache-line fetches no matter which prefix ultimately wins.
Our Patricia is a stand-in, not one of the paper's baselines. The paper's 1.6–14× advantage is over PopTrie / CP-Trie / Neurotrie / HBS — those structures add per-node SIMD and bitmap acceleration that a plain pointer trie doesn't have; on uniform lookups they pay more than our Patricia does. The gap to a genuine paper baseline is almost certainly larger than our gap to Patricia.

The honest conclusion: on this hardware, on a real BGP table, against a uniform 64-bit trace, a plain Patricia trie is roughly at parity with the tree. The tree's advantage shows up with non-uniform traces (real packet captures concentrate on long prefixes where Patricia walks deep) or with the paper's actual baselines. Both are on the roadmap.

Multi-core scaling

bench_mt runs batch<8> across T threads, each pinned to a distinct logical CPU, all sharing one immutable lpm6::Tree. Threads release in lockstep per run so L3 / DRAM contention is measured, not dodged. Same 20-run discipline. Laptop: 4 physical cores / 8 logical (SMT):

FIB T per-thread min per-thread max aggregate MLPS efficiency
BGP 254 K 1 95 140 130 1.00×
BGP 254 K 2 95 143 278 1.07×
BGP 254 K 4 68 142 396 0.76×
BGP 254 K 8 17 98 626 0.60×
synth 1 M 1 12 18 15 1.00×
synth 1 M 2 13 18 31 1.02×
synth 1 M 4 7 16 52 0.85×
synth 1 M 8 3 15 85 0.69×

Efficiency = aggregate at T ÷ (T × aggregate at T=1). Units MLPS.

Observations:

T=2 is super-linear on the BGP FIB (1.07×). At 1T, a single memory-bound lookup chain leaves functional units idle during DRAM waits; with 2T on 2 cores the hardware has more in-flight loads and can hide more of that latency. Similar effect is visible on synth.
4-of-4 physical cores is the cleanest scaling regime. At 4T the efficiency is ~0.76–0.85×, mainly limited by shared L3 once the hot set no longer fits per-core.
8T uses SMT (hyperthreading). Per-thread throughput collapses (the two sibling threads contend for L1/L2 and AVX-512 port bandwidth on the same physical core), but aggregate still rises because the second sibling occupies stall cycles. Efficiency vs single-core baseline drops to 0.60–0.69×.
Real BGP scales worse relatively than synth 1 M. BGP's hot set at T=1 already hits ~130 MLPS and stays in L2; more threads push it out and each one pays the L3 tax. Synth-1M is DRAM-bound even at T=1 (footprint 38 MB ≫ L3), so adding threads is cheaper in relative terms — the DRAM subsystem was the bottleneck anyway.

Paper reports 3.4 BLPS on 12 Xeon cores (§5.4). Our 8-thread laptop (4 real cores + SMT) hits 0.63 BLPS on the same-scale BGP table — roughly 5× below the paper, which tracks with 12 vs 4 real cores plus Xeon's wider L2 / higher sustained AVX-512 frequency. A proper comparison needs a server-class box; see Phase 2.6 in plan.md.

Rebuild / update cost

PlanB's update model is batched: N pending prefix changes are coalesced into one full rebuild (§3.6 of the paper). bench_update measures rebuild time and per-op latency on the 100 000-prefix FIB:

  tree rebuild          : min 17.2  med 18.8  max 25.0  ms    (IQR 1.2)
  dynamic insert (incl. rebuild) : med 14.4 ms
  amortized if coalesced per 1 K : ~14 µs / update
  amortized if coalesced per 10 K: ~1.4 µs / update


The paper reports 850 ms to rebuild a 1 M-prefix FIB on an AMD Zen5 server; linear scaling gives ~85 ms for our 100 K setup and we see ~19 ms on Ice Lake, so the rebuild path is at parity within hardware noise.

Limitations — what this is not

Not on the paper's hardware. Laptop Ice Lake (4 physical cores, ~6 MB L3) vs. the paper's 12-core Xeon 8331C / Zen5 server — ≈5–15× raw single-core throughput gap before algorithm and ~3× core-count gap for multi-core aggregate. A server-class run on GCP c2-standard-16 (Cascade Lake, AVX-512) is on the roadmap (Phase 2.6 in plan.md).
Not the paper's baselines. Patricia is a stand-in conventional pointer-chasing trie; we do not implement PopTrie, CP-Trie, Neurotrie, or HBS. PopTrie is the next item in plan.md (Phase 2.7); the others are tracked but not scheduled.
Synthetic FIBs are length-weighted, not address-distributed like real BGP. The "Real BGP reproduction" section above shows how much this matters: throughput on a real rrc00 table is ~3× higher than on a same-size synthetic for uniform 64-bit traces, and Patricia's relative position against the tree flips entirely. Both the synthetic and the real-BGP runs use a uniform-random lookup trace — real packet captures concentrate on long prefixes, which would penalize Patricia further and is the regime where the linearized tree's fixed 7 cache-line cost looks best.

Treat these numbers as a reproducibility check that the algorithm behaves as the paper predicts on commodity hardware, not as a competitive evaluation.

Python

pip install pybind11 scikit-build-core
pip install -e .
python examples/basic_usage.py

from planb_lpm import Tree, Dynamic

t = Tree()
t.build([("2001:db8::", 32, 10), ("fe80::", 10, 20)])
t.lookup("2001:db8::1")   # -> 10

d = Dynamic()
d.load([("::", 0, 1)])
d.insert("2001:db8::", 32, 7)
d.lookup("2001:db8::abcd") # -> 7

Algorithm sketch

Expand each prefix/len into a [start, end) interval on the upper 64 bits of the IPv6 address space.
Sort the 2·N boundary points; resolve prefix nesting with a stack so that each elementary interval knows its active next-hop.
Pack the sorted boundaries into the leaves of a 9-ary linearized B+-tree (8 keys per node, 64-byte cache-line aligned). Internal nodes hold separator keys copied from the leaves at strides of 9^L · 8.
Lookup is a pure predecessor search: at each internal node use a single AVX-512 vpcmpuq + popcnt to pick the child, then do the same at the leaf to locate the predecessor edge.

File layout

include/lpm6.hpp            core header-only library
src/main.cpp                CLI benchmark
src/ipv6_util.hpp           FIB/trace loaders
tests/test_correctness.cpp  brute-force vs tree vs patricia
tests/patricia.hpp          baseline path-compressed radix trie (benchmark only)
tests/bench_naive.cpp       three-way throughput: naive / patricia / tree
tests/bench_update.cpp      rebuild + dynamic-update latency
tests/bench_mt.cpp          multi-core scaling (shared const tree, per-thread slice)
tests/bench_stats.hpp       warmup / percentile / env-probe helpers
examples/mrt_to_fib.py      RFC 6396 TABLE_DUMP_V2 → FIB converter for RIPE RIS
python/binding.cpp          pybind11 module
examples/                   sample data + usage scripts


All files in this repository are original work under the MIT license — see LICENSE.md. The author's reference implementation at https://github.com/nicexlab/planb is not vendored; see the paper cited above for the algorithm itself.

Verified

The 0.1.0 tree has been built and tested in the following configurations on Ubuntu 24.04 / GCC 13.3 (Intel Ice Lake):

Configuration Result
Release, AVX-512 auto-detect ctest 1/1, bench OK
Release, AVX-512 forced off (scalar fallback) ctest 1/1, 0 zmm instructions in binary
Debug + -fsanitize=address,undefined ctest 1/1, no leaks / UB
-Wall -Wextra -Wpedantic -Wshadow -Wconversion -Werror Clean build
pip install -e . in a fresh venv + examples/basic_usage.py All lookups correct

The core algorithm is from the PlanB paper by Zhang et al. (see top of file); all source in this repository is an independent reimplementation.

Contributing

Contributions of any size are welcome — bug reports, benchmark results on new hardware, alternative SIMD backends, language bindings, documentation fixes. See CONTRIBUTING for the dev workflow, commit conventions, and how to run the full verification suite (scalar fallback, ASAN/UBSAN, -Werror, pip install -e .) before opening a pull request.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

21. Tracking when Trump chickens out

Source: https://www.thetacotracker.com/
Site: thetacotracker.com
Submitter: JMiao (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-04-20 08:01 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 35 points · 6 comments
Language: en

No extractable content.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

22. How Long Poop Stays in Your Body May Impact Your Health, Study Finds

Source: https://www.sciencealert.com/how-long-poop-stays-in-your-body-may-impact-your-health-study-finds
Site: ScienceAlert
Author: Michelle Starr
Published: 2026-04-19
HN activity: 59 points · 31 comments
Length: 788 words (~4 min read)
Language: en-US

Whether poop speeds through your gut like a bullet train or takes a more smell-the-roses approach could have more profound implications for your overall health than a first glance would suggest.

According to a 2023 review that combined data from dozens of studies, distinct differences can be observed between the gut microbiomes of 'speeders' and 'slowpokes'.

Since the human gut microbiome is intrinsically linked to health, this could have implications that have gone unnoticed before now.

In particular, slow transit times and constipation have been linked with metabolic and inflammatory disorders, as well as neurological disorders such as Parkinson's disease.

Figuring out the microbiome profiles associated with these gut transit times could help develop new ways to treat and manage these conditions.

"By taking into account the interindividual and intraindividual differences in gut transit time, we can advance our understanding of diet–microbiota interactions and disease-related microbiome signatures," writes a team led by nutritionists Nicola Procházková and Henrik Roager of the University of Copenhagen.

"Altogether, a better understanding of the complex, bidirectional interactions between the gut microbiota and transit time is required to better understand gut microbiome variations in health and disease."
The human gut microbiome is intrinsically linked to health. (troyanphotos/Canva)

We know the gut microbiome, both in composition and activity, plays an important role in health. We also know that it can be shaped by a variety of mechanisms, from exercise to diet to disease.

Procházková and her colleagues wanted to know if we were overlooking a very simple thing that could affect gut microbes: how long they spend hanging out with poop before it makes its way to the wild loo yonder.

The team tapped into previously published research on participants' gut transit time, including stool consistency (a proxy for transit time), diet, the composition of their microbiomes, and the metabolites produced by those microbes.

Their results incorporated studies that collectively had thousands of patients, both healthy people and people with conditions such as irritable bowel syndrome, constipation, and liver cirrhosis.

Understanding gut transit time isn't as simple as keeping a record of one's poop schedule. It can involve special swallowable capsules equipped with sensors that record their journey through the digestive tract.

Another approach is the Bristol Stool Scale, a visual diagnostic tool that classifies poop based on consistency, from hard, rock-like pellets (long transit time) to a watery mush (short transit time). Some studies track how long it takes participants to pass ingested blue dye or sweet corn.

All have the same goal: To estimate how long food stays in the colon. The longer the stay, the more time bacteria have to ferment the contents, regulate gut acidity, and produce metabolites that can influence the body's health in multiple ways.

Ultimately, the team's analysis yielded fascinating results. People with faster gut transit times had dramatically different microbiomes than those with slower transit times. Adding transit times to the patient data provided better predictions of gut microbiota than simply examining diet alone.

Unsurprisingly, those with faster gut transit times tended to have microbiomes dominated by faster-growing species that thrive on a high-carbohydrate, low-fat diet. Slower transit times, meanwhile, were sometimes dominated by species that thrive on protein.

Each of these extremes also had lower gut microbiome diversity than that of people with average gut transit times, suggesting that fast and slow movement create environments where specialist species come out on top.

That would then create a feedback loop in which the dominant species in each environment releases metabolites that maintain the status quo.

Taken together, the results suggest that gut transit time is an overlooked tool for understanding how the gut works, the role it plays in overall health, and how patients respond to treatments such as probiotics.

Related: Your Poop Schedule May Be Shaping Your Body From The Inside Out

This may also help explain why the same gut health advice may not work for everyone. Two people can eat the exact same meal and get two very different results, depending on how fast their poop usually moves.

Transit times may even influence how your body responds to probiotics and certain supplements or medications that interact with the gut. This suggests that recognizing the patient's individual gut rhythm could help tailor treatments and dietary advice that precisely match their body.

"By including gut transit time measurements in gut microbiome-related studies, we can advance our understanding of the links between the gut microbiome, diet, and disease," the researchers write in their paper.

"Such insights may be key for the prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of several diseases in the gut and beyond throughout the lifespan."

The research was published in 2023 in the journal Gut.

An earlier version of this article was published in December 2025.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

23. Swiss AI Initiative (2023)

Source: https://www.swiss-ai.org
Site: Swiss AI
Submitter: doener (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-04-19 22:58 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 70 points · 25 comments
Length: 182 words (~1 min read)
Language: en

The Swiss AI Initiative was started in December 2023 and seeded with an initial investment of over 10m GPU hours on Alps (by CSCS) and a grant of 20m CHF by the ETH Domain. The initiative is the largest open science/open source effort for AI foundation models worldwide, and the first initiative of the Swiss National AI Institute, a partnership between the ETH AI Center and the EPFL AI Center. The initiative further benefits from the critical mass of expertise of over 800 researchers (including 70 AI-focused professors) from over 10 academic institutions across Switzerland.

The frontier AI research is enabled by one of the world’s leading AI supercomputer "Alps" (with over 10’000 GH200 GPUs) in collaboration with engineers at the Swiss National Supercomputing Centre (CSCS). Regular compute calls are available to bring together researchers from different organizations.The initiative provides artifacts such as transparent and open software, models, and data releases, enabling their trustworthy use by various Swiss stakeholders, including SMEs and start-ups.

​

For a full list of Swiss AI members, go to the Swiss AI Members page:

Swiss AI Members

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

24. Knitout and Kniterate 3

Source: https://soup.agnescameron.info//2026/04/01/transfers.html
Site: soup.agnescameron.info
Author: agnes cameron
Submitted: 2026-04-16 14:43 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 24 points · 0 comments
Length: 2.2K words (~10 min read)

This is the fourth in a series of blog posts about the Material Programming Project. We are developing malleable knitting software for the Kniterate, a semi-industrial knitting machine. The first post, on the Knitout project, is available here, a longer post about the Kniterate machine is here, and a guide to the different file formats is here.

This week I learned 2-bed knitting on the domestic machine, and made some progress on the Knitout-> Kniterate code visualiser. We also managed to get a bunch of tests to run on the Kniterate, most of which worked fairly well. We also visited an exhibition of some work by visiting students from NAFA (Nanyang Academy of Fine Art Singapore), which featured a really great and inspiring bit of Kniterate work.

making friends with the ribber

This past weekend, Rosie and I went to Knitworks to do a workshop on the Brother ribber. Neither of us had worked with one before, and it was really useful for getting a material understanding of what’s happening on a 2-bed machine.
a plated 5x5 rib sample made on the Knitworks ribber. The ribbing pattern is made by transferring stitches between the front and back beds

Setting the ribber up in my studio

We practiced a cast-on, different ribs, and experimented with plating and racking on the front bed (which might be a nice thing to re-create on the Kniterate). After the session, I went to my studio to set up the ribber that had come with my Brother machine, but that I’d not used before! It was pretty straightforward to set up: the hardest part was figuring out how to attach the brackets to the ribber as they’d been taken off. These are sprung, to allow the bed to latch up and down.

kniterate testing

testing the waste section

The first thing we did at Chelsea was to test the waste section sample we’d generated last week. All I needed to do was add a set of rows of front bed knitting. I decided to do this by using the waste generation file as intended – I made a rectangle on the front bed, and then appended the waste section using a script.

This turned out to be easier said than done: the lines I’d added to the cast-on section messed up the carrier directions because I was bringing them in twice: once in the tucked section and once again in the kniterate-style introduction that I’d added. This meant that the carriers ended up on the ‘wrong’ side of the bed for the original code. In the end I ended up adding a few extra rows to hack this together so we had something to test with, but I’ll need to sort this out properly later on.
comparing between a waste section from the kniterate editor (left) and the knitout code (right). Note the tucked draw thread and cast-on yarn at the bottom of the knitout-based sample

The tests went well: B was quite pleased with the double introduction as it means the yarns are brought in early on, getting around an issue with yarn height on their kniterate, and saves her from manually bringing the carriers in. It was really cool seeing our code turn from code into actual, knitted material – and in seeing the correspondences between the knitout and kniterate-editor based cast-on.

We encountered another issue, which is that bringing carriers ‘out’ from the right hand side means that they trail over the whole knit to move to the Home position. For now we just move the ‘out’ statement to the end (as they’re not as important in kniterate anyway),B said that bringing carriers ‘in’ and ‘out’ was more of a Shima thing – when they’re not being knit they just sit there, they don’t do that much. but the other way around this would be to always ensure the drawthread ends up on the RHS (thinking about it, this is non-ideal as it fixes the cast-on direction of the input file… so we won’t do that).

Once we’d got this working, we made a couple of test samples – one with a 1x1 rib, one with a fisherman’s rib (same as the waste section). Both of these knitted well, though they could have been a little tighter.

sample of 1x1 rib (right) and fisherman's rib (left)

casting off

The next thing to test was casting off (after B spent about 20 minutes manually casting off the first sample). Initially, I used the rectangle-bindoff code from (in the US, ‘casting off’ = ‘binding off’) from the knitout examples repo, adapting it to the more recent version of the knitout-frontend javascript code as follows:

what the first bindoff section looks like in the knitout visualiser. Note the ‘held’ stitches every other stitch on the back bed!

k.xfer("f" + n, "b" + n);
k.rack(1.0);
k.xfer("b" + n, "f" + (n+1));
k.rack(0.25);
if ((n-min) % 2 === 1) {
	k.tuck("+", "b" + n, Carrier); // every other stitch held by back bed
}
k.knit("+", "f" + (n+1), Carrier);
if (n+2 <= max) {
	k.miss("+", "f" + (n+2), Carrier);
}
k.rack(0.0);


Translating to words, the order of operations here is:

transfer a stitch from the front bed to the back bed (the previous row will all have been knitted on the front bed, leaving the back bed free)
rack 1 needle position over, bringing the stitch that was transferred to face the next needle along (which will still have a stitch)
transfer that first stitch from the back bed to the front bed (on top of an existing stitch)
every odd-numbered stitch, perform a tuck stitch on the back bed (this will take a loop of yarn from the carrier and hold it in place on the back bed). This is effectively holding the carrier yarn in place.
knit the stitch that’s held on the front bed
for all except the last 3 stitches, drop the knitted stitch off the front bed
rack back to 0, and continue

This does something a bit different to the typical knitout bindoff, which doesn’t do this step of holding every other stitch on the back bed. B remarked that this method was ‘very shima-y’ (probably because it’s taken from the regular knitout examples), and the end result was somewhat distorted.
the bindoff test sample knit using the original code -- note how the shima-style holds leave some loose stitches on the edge

The next step was to update the code to match kniterate editor, removing the every-other-needle transfers to the back bed. We ran out of time to test this, but the hope is this should work similarly to the version in the kniterate editor:

k.xfer("f" + n, "b" + n);  // front to rear transfer
k.rack(1.0); // rack 1
k.xfer("b" + n, "f" + (n+1));
k.rack(0.25);
k.knit("+", "f" + (n+1), Carrier);
k.rack(0.0);


This does a simpler operation than the first one described above, missing the tuck steps, but also leaving the ‘miss’ steps till the very end, holding the knit stitches in place on the needles (instead of holding them in place using the tucked stitches on the back bed).

transfer a stitch from the front bed to the back bed
rack 1 needle position over
transfer that first stitch from the back bed to the front bed
knit the stitch that’s held on the front bed
rack back to 0, and continue


The kniterate editor bindoff, compared to the equivalent in knitout. Note that compared to the image above, no tucked stitches are held at the back.

In validating this approach, I also looked to see if there were any kniterate-specific knitout examples. I wasn’t able to find a JS-based bindoff in Gabrielle’s code, but there is a Python equivalent in her knit3D repository, where ‘x’ represents the number of the needle:

k.xfer(f'b{x}', f'f{x}')
k.rack(1)
k.xfer(f'f{x}', f'b{x-1}')
k.rack(0)
[...]
k.knit('-', f'b{x-1}', c)


The … part is this, which handles roller positions. It’s unclear whether this is necessary for a straight bindoff – potentially this is necessary as when dealing with 3D shapes, it might need to be extra careful with the positioning of the sample on the bed.

if x != xferNeedle+count-1:
  if not asDecMethod and (xferNeedle+count) - x == 30: 
    k.rollerAdvance(0)
  elif x < xferNeedle+count-4 
  and (asDecMethod or (xferNeedle+count) - x < 30): 
    k.addRollerAdvance(-50)
    k.drop(f'b{x+1}')
if not asDecMethod and (xferNeedle+count) - x >= 30: 
  k.addRollerAdvance(50)


kniterate issues

We encountered a recurrent issue where the Kniterate moves the yarn carrier before the carriage starts to move, resulting on stitches being dropped on the right hand side of the bed. B mentioned that this was also an issue that also occurred in kniterate-editor generated files, but was seeming to occur more often in ours.

She said that this only ever happened with carriers on the right-hand-side of the code, and also happened most frequently just after the main yarn was cast on (e.g. after the row of both beds knitting at the start of a sample).

I started to look into this by making close comparisons of the .kcode files generated by the kniterate editor and knitout-to-kcode conversion script respectively. This yielded some differences, but will need a lot more time with the converter (and ideally to see how the Kniterate editor does it) to get to the bottom of if, how and why there’s a bug there.

In trying to understand this, I also made an annotated guide to a .kcode ‘row’:
the 'row' consists of information about the front bed (carrier position and stitches, then stitch tensions), followd by the back bed, followed by a general metadata section (stitch type, carrier, speed etc)

knitout -> kniterate editor

To make the JS knitout library usable to our students, I’m updating the visualiser to include a bunch more kniterate-specific functions, including kcode export and automatic waste section generation.

updating the interface

the adapted visualiser, featuring functional KCode export button and buggy waste yarn addition checkbox

The first thing to do was add kcode export button to the visualiser. This was pretty straightforward, I just used Gabrielle’s code, which had already been integrated into a web interface, just a different one. This sped things up a lot once we had knitout code that looked good.

auto exporting the waste section

This requires a more in-depth refactor, partly also to overcome some of the issues we ran into with carrier positioning during the initial waste section tests. My plan is to write a state object (similar to the one used in the knitout-to-kcode file) that tracks the carrier positions and decides the direction of each row based on this.

It’s possible that it might be nice to have this as a callable function where the min and max width, height etc are rendered as arguments (rather than just automatically adding as present), but not sure how that would integrate into the main code parsing.

ideas for helper functions

Kniterate’s “do my transfers” function is really good and helpful. The way it works is that an area of knit where transfers from the front to back should happen, and then apply it as a layer, when they get scheduled correctly.

I wonder if there’s a nice higher level js function that can handle simple cases – e.g. manage transfers between 2 rows that looks at what needs to move from the back bed to the front bed. Some of this seems to happen already: adjacent transfers seem to get split over 2 rows without me needing to do anything. I suppose this gets in to needing a greater understanding of how knitout is generated from js (this file) to understand whether I’d be breaking some kind of parsing law.

NAFA Kniterate Sample

In the Triangle Space at Chelsea, there was an exhibition of a bunch of work made by some exchange students from the Nanyang Academy of Fine Art Singapore with different Chelsea programs, including one group with BA Textile design.

There was a big variety of work, including some really cool samples inspired by images of the sky from the student Chua Yi Jie. The sample was a Double Bed Jacquard, where one yarn was spandex, causing a really interesting bunching form on the right side of the fabric.
Chua Yi Jie's sample, with the elastic yarn in light blue

This made me think about using elastic to do shaping in knits more generally, potentially producing some really interesting geometries. It might be a nice way to explore 3D knits around the limitations of the kniterate, though I’d imagine it might also make things a lot less predictable.

next steps

I’d really like to learn more about jacquard, as it’s a technique I’ve never used on either the kniterate or on a ribber.
Understanding the kcode file format in order to get to the bottom of the carriage errors and understand where they’re being introduced (and whether that happens in hardware or software).

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

25. Two Motorola Transistors Became the Default NPNs

Source: https://www.allaboutcircuits.com/news/how-two-motorola-transistors-became-the-worlds-default-npns/
Site: allaboutcircuits.com
Submitter: ChuckMcM (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-04-17 20:27 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 27 points · 11 comments

Scrape failed: http 403

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

26. Scientific datasets are riddled with copy-paste errors

Source: https://www.sciencedetective.org/scientific-datasets-are-riddled-with-copy-paste-errors/
Site: Science Detective
Author: Markus Englund
Published: 2026-03-05
HN activity: 105 points · 28 comments
Length: 2.8K words (~13 min read)
Language: en

The above data comes from a landmark paper in Parkinson's Disease research, which provided the first-ever evidence that the disease originates in the gut rather than the brain. The paper received media coverage from major outlets and has amassed over 3000 citations from other scientific papers. But the underlying data contains sequences of duplicated values that should belong to completely different individual mice. The dataset has been publicly available on Dryad - an open-access repository where scientists upload their raw data - for more than 8 years. Why didn't anyone notice the blatant copy-paste errors until now?

Before going into more detail about this case, let me give some background on how we detected the issue: It was flagged by a piece of software I started building last year, which was inspired by two cases of data fabrication that made the news in recent years. One by Nobel laureate Thomas Südhof's lab and one by spider ecologist Jonathan Pruitt. Both cases had publicly available datasets with entire blocks of copy-pasted data that seemed quite trivial to detect. I was curious what I could dig up by creating a program that would correctly flag those cases, and then unleash it on all datasets available in open-access repositories.

Together with a few volunteer contributors, we've finished reporting all cases from the first 600 datasets we've scanned. There were 18 cases we felt were serious enough to raise concerns. Here are 3 of the most exciting ones:

Case 1: A seminal Parkinson's paper

Article: Gut Microbiota Regulate Motor Deficits and Neuroinflammation in a Model of Parkinson’s Disease Cell (2016)
Dryad dataset | Pubpeer comment (by contributor Ben Woden)

We took mice that were genetically predisposed to developing symptoms of Parkinson's and we just cleared out their microbiome - all their symptoms went away.

That's how the paper's senior author Sarkis Mazmanian summarized the findings of the study when he went on the Rich Roll Youtube channel:

These are the results he is referring to:
Source: Figure 4

Graphs B, C, and D contain measurements of the motor function of different groups of mice. They tell a clean story where the ASO mice (genetically predisposed to developing the mouse model Parkinson's disease) take longer to complete the tasks than regular wild-type (WT) mice only when they have retained a normal gut microbiome (SPF, Ex-GF) - not in mice stripped of their microbiome (GF, Abx).
Diagram showing which results are affected by each block of duplicate values.

There are two issues with the data:

There are two sets of 5 identical sequential numbers in the "Adhesive removal times" column, shared between the SPF mice (brought up with a normal, healthy microbiome) and the ExGF mice (raised with a stripped microbiome, but then had their gut re-colonized).
There's a pair of sequences of 3 identical numbers within "Pole-descent time" data for the germ-free wild-type mice.

Verdict

It could be either a fat-finger mistake when editing the Excel file or deliberate tampering to cover up real data that didn't tell the right story.

The study has low sample size, so the impact on the conclusions of the paper is serious, even if we trust the rest of the data. The duplicated rows make up 50% of the SPF samples and 42% of the ExGF samples. While the motor function values are not the only data the authors rely on for their conclusions, they're necessary for showing that the gut bacteria actually caused Parkinson's-like symptoms.

The issue was reported in January, and the authors have so far not responded.

Case 2: Ostrich-snake mixup

Article: Constraints on the evolution of toxin-resistant Na,K-ATPases have limited dependence on sequence divergence PLOS Genetics (2022)
Dryad dataset | Pubpeer comment

In this paper, the authors investigated how different animals have evolved resistance to a family of toxins called cardiotonic steroids (CTS). There's an arms race in nature where prey species produce CTS to protect themselves against animals such as birds and snakes, who in turn have developed mutations to help protect themselves against the toxin.

The authors created a blend of Ouabain (a CTS) and Na,K-ATPase (the protein that the poison targets) to get a dose-response curve showing how well different versions of the protein survived the poison at various doses.

Issues
Source: NKA_Enzyme_Assays_Raw_Data.xlsx, sheet: "IC50"

The yellow cells are precise duplicates between the Ostrich/Sandgrouse data and the Xenodon data (a species of snake). More concerning are the orange cells, which are near-duplicates that differ by one or two digits, always ending with the same digit. For example, 0.538 on row 39 becomes 0.518 on row 71. There are six such pairs out of eight total non-duplicate pairs.

In her response, the lead author Shabnam Mohammadi concedes that this probably is a copy-paste error. For the suspicious orange cells she gives the following explanation:

We suspect that they [the cells with one-digit tweaks marked in orange] stem from measurement variation among multiple reads of the same plate, and that the Ostrich and Xenodon results were copied from different readings of the same plate. However, since the original reader outputs are not available, we cannot confirm that this is the source of the variation.

Verdict

Could the one-digit tweaks be caused by multiple readings of the same plate as the author theorizes? My best guess is no, but there is enough uncertainty to give me pause.

When doing multiple readings of the same plate we would generally expect many of the values to jump around a tiny bit. Instead we see almost all of the values staying the exact same except 8 that change by a lot. In email correspondence, the author provides a potential explanation for this: before taking the readings they add a chemical to stop the reaction, which should stabilize the values. But some wells will stabilize faster than others, which could explain why those 8 values still varied by so much.

That still leaves the issue of the 6 pairs of values that each happen to end with the same digit. It would be supremely unlikely for this to happen purely by chance.

The BioRad model 680 is a basic machine that records raw light measurements as it sees them without any post-processing, but perhaps it's still possible that it introduces some bias that makes it more likely for readings to end on the same digit.

The alternative explanation is that the authors either accidentally or deliberately copy-pasted the Ostrich/Sandgrouse data on top of the Xenodon data. Then they might have manually tampered with the data to make it better suit their hypothesis or make it look less suspicious, not realizing that the copy-and-paste would leave behind this signature. However, the fraud theory suffers from there not being any obvious reason for why the authors would tamper with these specific values.

The authors state that they will try to replicate the process and report what they find on Pubpeer.

See author's response here.

Case 3: Scrambled fish sizes

Article: Behavioural individuality in clonal fish arises despite near-identical rearing conditions Nature communications (2017)
Dryad dataset | Pubpeer comment (by contributor Ben Woden)

Background

This is a paper from 2017 about fish personalities. They took a bunch of genetically identical fish, then checked how much their swimming behavior varied in terms of distance traveled. The idea was to see how much their behavior differed while keeping genetics and environment identical. Besides movement, they also took the size of each fish into account to check that any difference in movement was not just a result of bigger fish moving differently from smaller fish.

Issues

The SL column is the length of the individual fish measured in millimeters. Can you spot anything that looks out of place?

It looks quite strange that 3 different individual fish (ID 5, 8 and 10) all have the exact same sequential size measurements. But wait, can an individual fish really get >10% shorter over the course of a few days? Did they actually measure the length of every individual fish 4 times? No.

Verdict

The real explanation becomes obvious if we order the sheet by the SL column. It reveals that every unique SL value reoccurs exactly four times. 4 also happens to be the number of observations that were done per individual fish.
The same spreadsheet sorted by SL (fish length in mm)

The reason for that is that the authors only measured the length of a fish once. So all 4 rows with observations of the same fish are supposed to have the same exact fish length, but they have been scrambled so that the length of one fish has been given to 4 other fish.

In his response, the first author admits to the error and gives the following explanation:

[I]n short, we stored measured body size and behavior in two separate data files and when we joined these files, we accidentally misaligned the ID values resulting in a phase shift where all body size values were shifted and assigned to the wrong rows

And I don't see any reason to doubt him.

In the paper they unsurprisingly concluded that body size didn't have any effect on distance traveled, while in their corrected analysis they do find a small effect:

Body size now is a significant predictor of behavior but its effects are quite small (i.e. a 1mm increase in body leads to a 0.8cm decrease in total distance swam over the whole trial) and in fact roughly 3x smaller than the effect of observation. More importantly though, body size still does not explain the among-individual variation in behavior.

It looks like the authors did a solid job of owning up to their mistake and correcting the dataset. Luckily, body size turned out to only explain a small part of the behavioral differences between the fish. "The conclusions remain unaffected" is one thing you should never take at face value coming from a researcher, but in this case it appears to be right.

Overall results so far

The software detected 18 cases in the first 600 datasets that were serious enough to raise concerns. So far, we have posted 15 of these to PubPeer (see the full list here). Most of them probably innocent mistakes, some may be deliberate fabrication. One of them had already been retracted. So based on that limited sample, around 3% of papers contain these types of errors.

However, the true error rate must surely be a lot higher than 3%. There are myriad other ways of accidentally screwing up your data that this software could never detect. And if you want to commit fraud, there are plenty of less lazy ways to do it than to copy-paste values from a different part of the same Excel sheet.

It might come as a surprise to some that nobody else has cared to check for these errors. Isn't there some peer review thing that is supposed to prevent stuff like this from making it into the scientific record? The conclusion I've come to is that there just isn't anybody whose job it is to actively look for it. Journals, universities and funding organizations won't hire anyone to do it because they generally care a lot more about rankings and metrics. And if you report a serious error to them you've just introduced an annoying inconvenience that might make those numbers go in the wrong direction.

The only bright spot has been Dryad - the research data repository. They have taken an active role in supporting the project by helping push journals and authors to correct the record.

What's next

I started working on the project last year, and after some good initial results, I was able to raise a 50,000$ grant from Astral Codex Ten (a popular science blog), which allowed me to quit my job and start working on it full-time this year. Next up is to scan through the rest of the ~24,000 datasets with Excel files available on Dryad. It will be interesting to see what other treasures we can dig up there! If the 3% error rate holds, we'd expect to see ~700 more cases in that sample alone. Feel free to subscribe to the email newsletter to stay up to date on what we find.

Updated on March 8: Removed unwarranted confidence in the verdict of case 2 and added some additional detail.

Updated on March 23: Clarified that 15 of the 18 cases had been publicly posted on Pubpeer.

Update: Response to the author of case 2

Added on April 11th.

Shabnam Mohammadi - the first author of the paper, responded in the comments section. I'm adding it here together with my response.

Mohammadi's response

As an author of the study featured as the second case and the one who performed the experiments in question, I'd like to provide some additional context.

As noted, the Model 680 plate reader is a 30-year-old legacy plate reader that requires manual translation or copy-pasting of results. Englund's claim that the Model 680 "records raw light measurements as it sees them without any post-processing" is incorrect. The instrument has a resolution of 0.001 OD and a specified reproducibility of 1.0% or 0.005 OD across the 0.000-2.000 OD range (and 1.5% from 2.000-3.000 OD). It converts analog intensity signals to absorbance values using Beer's law, rounding results to the nearest 0.001 OD. Consequently, values fluctuating within a narrow range may round in ways that produce apparent digit-level patterns with some digits varying systematically while others appearing unchanged across wells. For a developing colorimetric assay, a mix of unchanged, moderately changed, and markedly different well values between reads is therefore entirely plausible, reflecting both the underlying chemistry of the assay and the instrument's optical and processing characteristics.

Further, we have updated our PubPeer response to include a reanalysis that excludes the duplicated data. Our conclusion is that removing the problematic data actually strengthens the paper's main conclusions rather than undermining them.

My response

Englund's claim that the Model 680 "records raw light measurements as it sees them without any post-processing" is incorrect. [...] It converts analog intensity signals to absorbance values using Beer's law, rounding results to the nearest 0.001 OD.

Ok, that was incorrect on my part and shows my lack of knowledge about photometers. I was attempting to paraphrase an email from Bio-rad where they said: “The system [Bio-rad 680] was very basic and recorded OD as seen, it did not do any onboard manipulation of the data, it gave raw results for the user to interpret.”

Consequently, values fluctuating within a narrow range may round in ways that produce apparent digit-level patterns with some digits varying systematically while others appearing unchanged across wells.

I don’t see how that follows as a consequence at all. The formula used by plate readers is from what I understand just a log10-transformation of the raw analog signals. How could that possibly produce the pattern where the last digit (the thousandth place) remains the same across readings?

Here's an example of what I would expect multiple readings of the same plate to look like:

Use buttons to toggle between readings to compare differences

These images are of three consecutive readings of the same plate using the BioTek EL800, which like the Bio-rad 680 is an old filter-based microplate reader. It's not identical to the Bio-rad model 680, but from what I gather it's similar. Like all absorbance plate readers, it uses the same log10-transformation to get the final values. The test was done on a chemically stable dye called PNP at different concentrations. The experiment shows minor differences between readings of 0.001-0.002 for many of the wells which is caused by noise. Full data here.

The test was run by Dr Gert Folkers at Utrecht University (not affiliated with Science detective). He also did the same test on two more modern plate readers, which counter-intuitively have larger variance across readings than the old BioTek reader. Shown below is data from the same test done on the BMG clariostar:

The tests from all plate readers show many changes in OD values between readings, and none of them show a tendency to preserve the last digit. Have you - or anyone from the scientific community reading this - actually observed “digit-level patterns with some digits varying systematically while others appearing unchanged” when working with the Bio-rad 680 or other plate-readers? If so, please show some data that demonstrates this.

I'm not saying these data are proof of manipulation. The BioTek is not an identical machine to the BioRad. Also, the fact that the modern reader has much higher variance (possibly due to "plate background correction" according to Dr Folkers) is a good reminder that these machines can produce unexpected patterns. But I've yet to see evidence that the pattern where the last digit remains the same across readings could be caused by the log formula used by plate readers.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

27. The RAM shortage could last years

Source: https://www.theverge.com/ai-artificial-intelligence/914672/the-ram-shortage-could-last-years
Site: The Verge
Author: Terrence O'Brien
Published: 2026-04-18
HN activity: 304 points · 367 comments
Length: 310 words (~2 min read)
Language: en-US

Skip to main content

﻿Memory makers are only expected to meet 60 percent of demand by the end of 2027.

﻿Memory makers are only expected to meet 60 percent of demand by the end of 2027.

by Terrence O'Brien

Apr 18, 2026, 9:08 PM UTC

Image: Cath Virginia / The Verge, Getty Images

Terrence O'Brien

is the Verge’s weekend editor. He has over 18 years of experience, including 10 years as managing editor at Engadget.

According to Nikkei Asia, even as suppliers ramp up DRAM production, manufacturers are only expected to meet 60 percent of demand by the end of 2027. SK Group chairman has even said that shortages could last until 2030.

The world’s largest memory makers — Samsung, SK Hynix, and Micron — are all working to add new fabrication capacity, but almost none of it will be online until at least 2027, if not 2028. SK opened a fab in Cheongju in February, but that is the only increase in production among the three for 2026.

Nikkei says that production would need to increase by 12 percent a year in 2026 and 2027 to meet demand. But according to Counterpoint Research, an increase of only 7.5 percent is planned.

The new facilities will primarily focus on producing high-bandwidth memory (HBM), which is used in AI data centers. With the companies already prioritizing HBM over general-purpose DRAM used in computers and phones, it’s not clear how much these new fabs will help alleviate the price crunch facing consumer electronics. Everything from phones and laptops to VR headsets and gaming handhelds have seen price increases due to the RAM shortage.

Follow topics and authors from this story to see more like this in your personalized homepage feed and to receive email updates.

Terrence O'Brien

The Verge Daily

A free daily digest of the news that matters most.

Email (required)

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

28. Show HN: Run TRELLIS.2 Image-to-3D generation natively on Apple Silicon

Source: https://github.com/shivampkumar/trellis-mac
Site: GitHub
Submitter: shivampkumar (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-04-20 00:07 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 160 points · 27 comments
Length: 587 words (~3 min read)
Language: en

TRELLIS.2 for Apple Silicon

Run TRELLIS.2 image-to-3D generation natively on Mac.

This is a port of Microsoft's TRELLIS.2 — a state-of-the-art image-to-3D model — from CUDA-only to Apple Silicon via PyTorch MPS. No NVIDIA GPU required.

Results

Generates 400K+ vertex meshes from single images in ~3.5 minutes on M4 Pro.

Output includes textured OBJ and GLB files with PBR materials, ready for use in 3D applications.

Example (nearest-neighbor sampling, trilinear interpolation WIP)

Input → Generated 3D mesh (424K vertices, 858K triangles)

Requirements

macOS on Apple Silicon (M1 or later)
Python 3.11+
24GB+ unified memory recommended (the 4B model is large)
~15GB disk space for model weights (downloaded on first run)

Quick Start

# Clone this repo
git clone https://github.com/shivampkumar/trellis-mac.git
cd trellis-mac

# Log into HuggingFace (needed for gated model weights)
hf auth login

# Request access to these gated models (usually instant approval):
#   https://huggingface.co/facebook/dinov3-vitl16-pretrain-lvd1689m
#   https://huggingface.co/briaai/RMBG-2.0

# Run setup (creates venv, installs deps, clones & patches TRELLIS.2)
bash setup.sh

# Activate the environment
source .venv/bin/activate

# Generate a 3D model from an image
python generate.py path/to/image.png

Output files are saved to the current directory (or use --output to specify a path).

Usage

# Basic usage
python generate.py photo.png

# With options
python generate.py photo.png --seed 123 --output my_model --pipeline-type 512

# All options
python generate.py --help

Option Default Description
--seed 42 Random seed for generation
--output output_3d Output filename (without extension)
--pipeline-type 512 Pipeline resolution: 512, 1024, 1024_cascade

What Was Ported

TRELLIS.2 depends on several CUDA-only libraries. This port replaces them with pure-PyTorch and pure-Python alternatives:

Original (CUDA) Replacement Purpose
flex_gemm backends/conv_none.py Sparse 3D convolution via gather-scatter
o_voxel._C hashmap backends/mesh_extract.py Mesh extraction from dual voxel grid
flash_attn PyTorch SDPA Scaled dot-product attention for sparse transformers
cumesh Stub (graceful skip) Hole filling, mesh simplification
nvdiffrast Stub Differentiable rasterization (texture export)

Additionally, all hardcoded .cuda() calls throughout the codebase were patched to use the active device instead.

Technical Details

Sparse 3D Convolution (backends/conv_none.py): Implements submanifold sparse convolution by building a spatial hash of active voxels, gathering neighbor features for each kernel position, applying weights via matrix multiplication, and scatter-adding results back. Neighbor maps are cached per-tensor to avoid redundant computation.

Mesh Extraction (backends/mesh_extract.py): Reimplements flexible_dual_grid_to_mesh using Python dictionaries instead of CUDA hashmap operations. Builds a coordinate-to-index lookup table, finds connected voxels for each edge, and triangulates quads using normal alignment heuristics.

Attention (patched full_attn.py): Adds an SDPA backend to the sparse attention module. Pads variable-length sequences into batches, runs torch.nn.functional.scaled_dot_product_attention, then unpads results.

Performance

Benchmarks on M4 Pro (24GB), pipeline type 512:

Stage Time
Model loading ~45s
Image preprocessing ~5s
Sparse structure sampling ~15s
Shape SLat sampling ~90s
Texture SLat sampling ~50s
Mesh decoding ~30s
Total ~3.5 min

Memory usage peaks at around 18GB unified memory during generation.

Limitations

No texture export: Texture baking requires nvdiffrast (CUDA-only differentiable rasterizer). Meshes export with vertex colors only.
Hole filling disabled: Mesh hole filling requires cumesh (CUDA). Meshes may have small holes.
Slower than CUDA: The pure-PyTorch sparse convolution is ~10x slower than the CUDA flex_gemm kernel. This is the main bottleneck.
No training support: Inference only.

License

The porting code in this repository (backends, patches, scripts) is released under the MIT License.

Upstream model weights are subject to their own licenses:

TRELLIS.2: MIT License
DINOv3: Meta custom license (gated, review before commercial use)
RMBG-2.0: CC BY-NC 4.0 (non-commercial; commercial use requires a license from BRIA)

Credits

TRELLIS.2 by Microsoft Research — the original model and codebase
DINOv3 by Meta — image feature extraction
RMBG-2.0 by BRIA AI — background removal

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

29. 2,100 Swiss municipalities showing which provider handles their official email

Source: https://mxmap.ch/
Site: MXmap
Author: David Huser
Submitted: 2026-04-19 22:55 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 186 points · 56 comments
Length: 138 words (~1 min read)
Language: en

What is this?

A map of all ~2,100 Swiss municipalities showing which provider handles their official email — grouped by jurisdiction — based on public DNS records and other public network signals.

Context

Digital sovereignty: US-based providers are subject to the US CLOUD Act, which allows US authorities to request stored data, regardless of where it is physically hosted. This map makes the current provider landscape visible.

How does it work?

Each municipality's official domain is checked via 11 signals from DNS records, SMTP banners, ASN lookups, and a public Microsoft API endpoint, then classified by provider type with confidence scoring.

Disclaimer: DNS records indicate mail routing and authorized senders, not necessarily where data is stored.

Open source & open data

The code and data are on GitHub.
If you have noticed an error, please submit an issue.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

30. Six Levels of Dark Mode (2024)

Source: https://cssence.com/2024/six-levels-of-dark-mode/
Site: cssence.com
Author: Matthias Zöchling
Submitted: 2026-04-19 18:36 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 89 points · 39 comments
Length: 1.6K words (~8 min read)
Language: en

Barebone
Basic
Benign
Bold
Bisectional
Ballistic

Beyond
Beguiling

Being reminded of the visually hidden debate hasn’t been the only thing that happened to me on this year’s CSS Naked Day.

I’ve observed that on pretty much all the sites I’ve visited, dark mode was rather absent after the styles had been removed. This got me thinking, maybe it’s time to talk about the six levels of dark mode.

A less catchy—but more accurate—title for this blog post would have been “six levels of color scheme switching”. Oh well. Most of the example code in this article shows the dark side, so the title does make sense. Just keep in mind that the other way around also works.

Enough said, let’s get to it.

Level 1:
Barebone

This level is as easy as it gets, but apparently the underlying directive was missing on the sites mentioned in the introduction. You can opt into light/dark mode differentiation even without a single line of CSS, which is great in general, but especially on April 9.

Simply add the following meta tag to the document head, and you are good to go.

<meta name="color-scheme" content="light dark">

Whenever a web page contains this tag, the browser knows it should adhere to the user’s color scheme preference. The order of the entries in the content attribute matters, at least in theory. Users without a preference for a color scheme would get the first in the space-separated list. But the settings in today’s operating systems lack the option to *not* choose one, so you’ll always end up with the one that matches the OS.

You could just specify a single entry in the content attribute. Doing so would enforce the corresponding scheme, without taking the user preference into account, but that’s another story.

To some degree, the meta tag is the HTML equivalent of our next level.

Level 2:
Basic

Let’s move on to the CSS way of light/dark mode differentiation.

html {
	color-scheme: light dark;
}

You won’t need this declaration if you already have the meta tag in the DOM. Unless you have no control over the HTML (e.g. if your content comes from a CMS, poor you), I encourage you to always use the meta tag. This gives the browser a <head> start, as it already knows about the color scheme directive before any CSS has been parsed.

Both ways essentially give you the option to piggyback on user agent default styles, and the light and dark mode that comes with them. Now add some CSS, but maybe limit yourself to the use of CSS system colors while doing so, and you will already be able to achieve quite neat designs. Heck, the page style switcher on this site has entries named ‘None’ and ‘Basic’, they correspond to levels 1 and 2.

Which brings us to the point where the two ways differ. Unlike the meta tag, which always applies to the whole document, the CSS color-scheme declaration can be set anywhere, not just on the root element. This enables some additional usage scenarios, but I’ll address those in another blog post.

Level 3:
Benign

We are past the basic stage, but still in shallow waters. A rather recent addition to CSS, namely the light-dark() color function, allows for simple light/dark mode adjustments.

html {
	background-color: light-dark(black, white);
	color: light-dark(white, black);
}

The function takes two arguments, both should be colors. The first will be applied in light mode, you may guess what the second argument is for. Whether you simply specify actual colors, or even throw in custom properties that resolve in colors, is up to you.

This is the only part level in this whole blog post where browser support is not great at the time of writing, but we’ll get there.

Level 4:
Bold

Moving on to the good old media query.

@media (prefers-color-scheme: dark) {
	html {
		background-color: black;
		color: white;
	}
}

Whether you query for light or dark, the media query allows for maximum customization, as you are not limited to merely changing colors. You can put anything in there. Wanna use a filter to desaturate images in dark mode? Go for it. Replace box shadows with outlines? Sure.

Level 5:
Bisectional

You can use the media query in HTML too. Adding it as a media attribute allows you to create style sheets for each scheme.

<link media="screen and (prefers-color-scheme:light)" rel="stylesheet" href="light.css">
<link media="screen and (prefers-color-scheme:dark)" rel="stylesheet" href="dark.css">

Dedicated files make sense if you do a lot of customization. The browser may ignore any CSS file that does not match the query, so there’ll be one less thing to download.

Level 6:
Ballistic

Obviously JavaScript wants to play a part in this too. You can use the matchMedia function to query for either light or dark scheme, just like any other media query.

const isDarkScheme = window.matchMedia('(prefers-color-scheme:dark)');

And then do whatever.

In reality, you don’t stay within one lane, you can mix and match the techniques from all the aforementioned levels.

Level 7:
Beyond

You don’t need to solely rely on the user preference, you can build a color scheme switcher.

If you do, be careful, the preference for either light or dark mode is not a boolean state, because initially you want to default to ‘Automatic’, i.e. adhere to prefers-color-scheme. By building a scheme switcher on top of that, you allow the user to opt into one of the three modes.

If you already knew everything you’ve just read, I’ve got one more for you.

Level 8:
Beguiling

When web developers create a level 7 color scheme switcher, they usually either add a class like .dark to the HTML element, sometimes even a fancy data-theme="dark" attribute.

Well, we no longer need either one, because we can use :has() to query the real deal.

html:has(meta[name="color-scheme"][content="dark"]) {
	--color-bg: black;
	--color-text: white;
}

Check out my accompanying piece »Color scheme switcher, 2024 edition« to see it live.

I definitely saw a couple more sites that had this in their <head>s!

But yes agreed, there’s so much CSS power available lately. When starting a new site from scratch with new styles, you can bake in light and dark modes really easily now. 🙂

In reply to: @sarajw@front-end.social.

Good to hear. Also, seems like we’ve been visiting different sites. 😅

Would a CSS Naked Day webring make sense? 🤔

In reply to: @CSSence@mas.to.

it seems a bit specific for just naked day… oh, unless it’s done with a nav bar and iframes or something!! Old school…

In reply to: @sarajw@front-end.social.

Frameset? No, wait, that could backfire…
adactio.com/journal/17916

In reply to: @CSSence@mas.to.

CSS naked ring? Awesome! I’m in!

Could it be a regular ring but with an url parameter indicating you need to get naked?

Might work for js-naked day too @zachleat@zachleat.com.

BTW I’m pretty sure my site did support dark/light preference correctly during naked day. 😉

In reply to: @villepreux@mastodon.social.

Dark & light color-scheme preference still respected.

Looks like it. 😀👍

Well done! Plus a lot of hybrid levels are there. Variables with colour changer JS, hidden automatic colour scheme:
gist.github.com/iamdtms/ddc4e556805e60652c21c06281d5b3c2

One thing to note is that up until quite recently (perhaps the latest version), Safari did not have accessible link colours for dark mode. During last year’s CSS Naked Day, I noticed the issue on my website and decided to get rid of the meta tag and just use the light colour scheme. This year I added the meta tag back even though I knew that might create an inaccessible experience for some who might be using the older versions of Safari. I did notice that text boxes did not have any visible borders in Safari with dark mode.

I’ve been starting to think that in the future I might include enough styles to keep my site accessible for CSS Naked Day, since User Agent styles are not fully accessible (even with correct, semantic HTML).

In reply to: @knowler@sunny.garden.

Yeah, good point. Then again, if you look out there realizing how many websites aren’t accessible all year round, April 9 will be the least of our worries.

In reply to: @CSSence@mas.to, @knowler@sunny.garden.

I almost think seeing the a11y fails on that day is sort of part of it. But it’s good of you to strive to keep it working well for everyone.

I’m curious why there is screen and … in the Bisectional example. The default (when you have no prefix) would be all and …, which has the same effect unless you want to hide styles from printers.

In reply to: @pepelsbey@mastodon.social.

Yes, hiding it from printers was the idea, I would assume they are anyhow taken care of in either a theme-independent core style sheet, or a dedicated print style sheet.

So I guess I wanted to be on the safe side, #DarkMode for printers could waste a lot of ink. 😉

In reply to: @CSSence@mas.to.

I toggled the system dark more and printed a sample page with the default dark mode styles enabled via the color-scheme. I even tried to enable the “background graphics” option. All I got was black text on white paper. It seems like all browsers don’t apply them to print.

In reply to: @pepelsbey@mastodon.social.

Interesting. I also ran a test: I opened my media queries test page, in the print preview prefers-color-scheme always reports light. Which makes sense. And I guess that’s also the cause for your result. Good to know. (I’ve only been able to test Firefox and Chromium.)

In reply to: @CSSence@mas.to.

It’s a bummer, though, if you have black paper and white ink, you know. 😄

In reply to: @pepelsbey@mastodon.social.

🤣

In reply to: @pepelsbey@mastodon.social, @CSSence@mas.to.

dark mode printers!

Get involved

Have your say on Mastodon, or simply share this article.

