Hacker News Top 30 — 2026-04-13 18:43 UTC
================================================================

[1] Someone Bought 30 WordPress Plugins and Planted a Backdoor in All of Them
    HN:  https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=47755629
    URL: https://anchor.host/someone-bought-30-wordpress-plugins-and-planted-a-backdoor-in-all-of-them/
    Score: 96 | Comments: 26 | By: speckx | Posted: 2026-04-13 17:54 UTC

    By: Austin Ginder

Last week, I wrote about catching a supply chain attack on a WordPress plugin called Widget Logic. A trusted name, acquired by a new owner, turned into something malicious. It happened again. This time at a much larger scale.

30+

Plugins compromised

31

Closed by WordPress.org

8 months

Backdoor dormant before activation

6 figures

Paid on Flippa for the portfolio

A client reported a security notice they found in wp-admin.

Ricky from Improve & Grow emailed us about an alert he saw in the WordPress dashboard for a client site. The notice was from the WordPress.org Plugins Team, warning that a plugin called Countdown Timer Ultimate contained code that could allow unauthorized third-party access.

I ran a full security audit on the site. The plugin itself had already been force-updated by WordPress.org to version 2.6.9.1, which was supposed to clean things up. But the damage was already done.

The malware was hiding in wp-config.php.

The plugin’s wpos-analytics module had phoned home to analytics.essentialplugin.com, downloaded a backdoor file called wp-comments-posts.php (designed to look like the core file wp-comments-post.php), and used it to inject a massive block of PHP into wp-config.php.

The injected code was sophisticated. It fetched spam links, redirects, and fake pages from a command-and-control server. It only showed the spam to Googlebot, making it invisible to site owners. And here is the wildest part. It resolved its C2 domain through an Ethereum smart contract, querying public blockchain RPC endpoints. Traditional domain takedowns would not work because the attacker could update the smart contract to point to a new domain at any time.

The forced update did not clean wp-config.php

WordPress.org’s v2.6.9.1 update neutralized the phone-home mechanism in the plugin. But it did not touch wp-config.php. The SEO spam injection was still actively serving hidden content to Googlebot.

I used backup forensics to pinpoint the exact injection window.

CaptainCore keeps daily restic backups. I extracted wp-config.php from 8 different backup dates and compared file sizes. Binary search style.

wp-config.php file size across 8 backup snapshots

Nov 1, 2025

3,346 bytes

Jan 1, 2026

3,346 bytes

Mar 1, 2026

3,345 bytes

Apr 1, 2026

3,345 bytes

Apr 5, 2026

3,345 bytes

Apr 6, 04:22 UTC

3,345 bytes

Apr 7, 04:21 UTC

9,540 bytes

The injection happened on April 6, 2026, between 04:22 and 11:06 UTC. A 6-hour 44-minute window.

The backdoor was planted 8 months before it was activated.

I traced the plugin’s history through 939 quicksave snapshots. The plugin had been on the site since January 2019. The wpos-analytics module was always there, functioning as a legitimate analytics opt-in system for years.

Then came version 2.6.7, released August 8, 2025. The changelog said, “Check compatibility with WordPress version 6.8.2.” What it actually did was add 191 lines of code, including a PHP deserialization backdoor. The class-anylc-admin.php file grew from 473 to 664 lines.

The new code introduced three things:

A fetch_ver_info() method that calls file_get_contents() on the attacker’s server and passes the response to @unserialize()
A version_info_clean() method that executes @$clean($this->version_cache, $this->changelog) where all three values come from the unserialized remote data
An unauthenticated REST API endpoint with permission_callback: __return_true

That is a textbook arbitrary function call. The remote server controls the function name, the arguments, everything. It sat dormant for 8 months before being activated on April 5-6, 2026.

The plugin was sold on Flippa.

This is where it gets interesting. The original plugin was built by Minesh Shah, Anoop Ranawat, and Pratik Jain. An India-based team that operated under “WP Online Support” starting around 2015. They later rebranded to “Essential Plugin” and grew the portfolio to 30+ free plugins with premium versions.

By late 2024, revenue had declined 35-45%. Minesh listed the entire business on Flippa. A buyer identified only as “Kris,” with a background in SEO, crypto, and online gambling marketing, purchased everything for six figures. Flippa even published a case study about the sale in July 2025.

February 2015

wponlinesupport.com domain registered. Team begins building WordPress plugins.

October 2016

Countdown Timer Ultimate published on WordPress.org by anoopranawat.

August 2021

essentialplugin.com domain registered. Company rebrands from WP Online Support to Essential Plugin.

Late 2024

Revenue declines 35-45%. Minesh Shah lists the entire business on Flippa.

Early 2025

Buyer ‘Kris’ acquires Essential Plugin for six figures via Flippa.

May 12, 2025

New essentialplugin WordPress.org account created.

May 14-16, 2025

Last commits by the original wponlinesupport account. Author headers changed.

August 8, 2025

First commit by essentialplugin account. Version 2.6.7 plants the unserialize() RCE backdoor. Changelog lies: ‘Check compatibility with WordPress version 6.8.2.’

August 30, 2025

essentialplugin.com WHOIS updated to ‘Kim Schmidt’ in Zurich, with a ProtonMail address.

April 5-6, 2026

Backdoor weaponized. analytics.essentialplugin.com begins distributing malicious payloads to all sites running these plugins.

April 7, 2026

WordPress.org Plugins Team permanently closes all 31 essentialplugin plugins in a single day.

April 8, 2026

WordPress.org forces auto-update to v2.6.9.1 across all sites. Adds return; statements and comments out the @$clean() backdoor line.

The buyer’s very first SVN commit was the backdoor.

WordPress.org closed 30+ plugins in a single day.

On April 7, 2026, the WordPress.org Plugins Team permanently closed every plugin from the Essential Plugin author. At least 30 plugins, all on the same day. Here are the ones I confirmed:

Accordion and Accordion Slider — accordion-and-accordion-slider
Album and Image Gallery Plus Lightbox — album-and-image-gallery-plus-lightbox
Audio Player with Playlist Ultimate — audio-player-with-playlist-ultimate
Blog Designer for Post and Widget — blog-designer-for-post-and-widget
Countdown Timer Ultimate — countdown-timer-ultimate
Featured Post Creative — featured-post-creative
Footer Mega Grid Columns — footer-mega-grid-columns
Hero Banner Ultimate — hero-banner-ultimate
HTML5 VideoGallery Plus Player — html5-videogallery-plus-player
Meta Slider and Carousel with Lightbox — meta-slider-and-carousel-with-lightbox
Popup Anything on Click — popup-anything-on-click
Portfolio and Projects — portfolio-and-projects
Post Category Image with Grid and Slider — post-category-image-with-grid-and-slider
Post Grid and Filter Ultimate — post-grid-and-filter-ultimate
Preloader for Website — preloader-for-website
Product Categories Designs for WooCommerce — product-categories-designs-for-woocommerce
Responsive WP FAQ with Category — sp-faq
SlidersPack – All in One Image Sliders — sliderspack-all-in-one-image-sliders
SP News And Widget — sp-news-and-widget
Styles for WP PageNavi – Addon — styles-for-wp-pagenavi-addon
Ticker Ultimate — ticker-ultimate
Timeline and History Slider — timeline-and-history-slider
Woo Product Slider and Carousel with Category — woo-product-slider-and-carousel-with-category
WP Blog and Widgets — wp-blog-and-widgets
WP Featured Content and Slider — wp-featured-content-and-slider
WP Logo Showcase Responsive Slider and Carousel — wp-logo-showcase-responsive-slider-slider
WP Responsive Recent Post Slider — wp-responsive-recent-post-slider
WP Slick Slider and Image Carousel — wp-slick-slider-and-image-carousel
WP Team Showcase and Slider — wp-team-showcase-and-slider
WP Testimonial with Widget — wp-testimonial-with-widget
WP Trending Post Slider and Widget — wp-trending-post-slider-and-widget

All permanently closed. The author search on WordPress.org returns zero results. The analytics.essentialplugin.com endpoint now returns {"message":"closed"}.

This has happened before.

In 2017, a buyer using the alias “Daley Tias” purchased the Display Widgets plugin (200,000 installs) for $15,000 and injected payday loan spam. That buyer went on to compromise at least 9 plugins the same way.

The Essential Plugin case is the same playbook at a larger scale. 30+ plugins. Hundreds of thousands of active installations. A legitimate 8-year-old business acquired through a public marketplace and weaponized within months.

I patched every affected plugin in my fleet.

WordPress.org’s forced update added return; statements to disable the phone-home functions. That is a band-aid. The wpos-analytics module is still there with all its code. I built patched versions with the entire backdoor module stripped out.

I scanned my entire fleet and found 12 of the 26 Essential Plugin plugins installed across 22 customer sites. I patched 10 of them (one had no backdoor module, one was a different “pro” fork by the original authors). Here are the patched versions, hosted permanently on B2:

# Countdown Timer Ultimate
wp plugin install https://plugins.captaincore.io/countdown-timer-ultimate-2.6.9.1-patched.zip --force

# Popup Anything on Click
wp plugin install https://plugins.captaincore.io/popup-anything-on-click-2.9.1.1-patched.zip --force

# WP Testimonial with Widget
wp plugin install https://plugins.captaincore.io/wp-testimonial-with-widget-3.5.1-patched.zip --force

# WP Team Showcase and Slider
wp plugin install https://plugins.captaincore.io/wp-team-showcase-and-slider-2.8.6.1-patched.zip --force

# WP FAQ (sp-faq)
wp plugin install https://plugins.captaincore.io/sp-faq-3.9.5.1-patched.zip --force

# Timeline and History Slider
wp plugin install https://plugins.captaincore.io/timeline-and-history-slider-2.4.5.1-patched.zip --force

# Album and Image Gallery plus Lightbox
wp plugin install https://plugins.captaincore.io/album-and-image-gallery-plus-lightbox-2.1.8.1-patched.zip --force

# SP News and Widget
wp plugin install https://plugins.captaincore.io/sp-news-and-widget-5.0.6-patched.zip --force

# WP Blog and Widgets
wp plugin install https://plugins.captaincore.io/wp-blog-and-widgets-2.6.6.1-patched.zip --force

# Featured Post Creative
wp plugin install https://plugins.captaincore.io/featured-post-creative-1.5.7-patched.zip --force

# Post Grid and Filter Ultimate
wp plugin install https://plugins.captaincore.io/post-grid-and-filter-ultimate-1.7.4-patched.zip --force

Each patched version removes the entire wpos-analytics directory, deletes the loader function from the main plugin file, and bumps the version to -patched. The plugin itself continues to work normally.

If you have an Essential Plugin plugin I did not patch, you can do it yourself.

The process is straightforward with Claude Code. Point it at this article for context, tell it which plugin you need patched, and it can strip the wpos-analytics module the same way I did. The pattern is identical across all of the Essential Plugin plugins:

Delete the wpos-analytics/ directory from the plugin
Remove the loader function block in the main plugin PHP file (search for “Plugin Wpos Analytics Data Starts” or wpos_analytics_anl)
Bump the Version: header to add -patched
Zip and install with wp plugin install your-plugin-patched.zip --force

Check your wp-config.php

The malware appends itself on the same line as require_once ABSPATH . wp-settings.php; so it is easy to miss with a quick glance. If your file is significantly larger than expected (the injected payload adds about 6KB), the site was actively compromised and needs a full cleanup beyond just patching the plugin.

The WordPress plugin marketplace has a trust problem.

Two supply chain attacks in two weeks. Both followed the same pattern. Buy a trusted plugin with an established install base, inherit the WordPress.org commit access, and inject malicious code. The Flippa listing for Essential Plugin was public. The buyer’s background in SEO and gambling marketing was public. And yet the acquisition sailed through without any review from WordPress.org.

WordPress.org has no mechanism to flag or review plugin ownership transfers. There is no “change of control” notification to users. No additional code review triggered by a new committer. The Plugins Team responded quickly once the attack was discovered. But 8 months passed between the backdoor being planted and being caught.

If you manage WordPress sites, search your fleet for any of the 26 plugin slugs listed above. If you find one, patch it or remove it. And check wp-config.php.

----------------------------------------------------------------

[2] Nothing Ever Happens: Polymarket bot that always buys No on non-sports markets
    HN:  https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=47753472
    URL: https://github.com/sterlingcrispin/nothing-ever-happens
    Score: 239 | Comments: 92 | By: m-hodges | Posted: 2026-04-13 15:31 UTC

Nothing Ever Happens Polymarket Bot

Focused async Python bot for Polymarket that buys No on standalone non-sports yes/no markets.

FOR ENTERTAINMENT ONLY. PROVIDED AS IS, WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED. USE AT YOUR OWN RISK. THE AUTHORS ARE NOT LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIMS, LOSSES, OR DAMAGES.

bot/: runtime, exchange clients, dashboard, recovery, and the nothing_happens strategy
scripts/: operational helpers for deployed instances and local inspection
tests/: focused unit and regression coverage

Runtime

The bot scans standalone markets, looks for NO entries below a configured price cap, tracks open positions, exposes a dashboard, and persists live recovery state when order transmission is enabled.

The runtime is nothing_happens.

Safety Model

Real order transmission requires all three environment variables:

BOT_MODE=live
LIVE_TRADING_ENABLED=true
DRY_RUN=false

If any of those are missing, the bot uses PaperExchangeClient.

Additional live-mode requirements:

PRIVATE_KEY
FUNDER_ADDRESS for signature types 1 and 2
DATABASE_URL
POLYGON_RPC_URL for proxy-wallet approvals and redemption

Setup

pip install -r requirements.txt
cp config.example.json config.json
cp .env.example .env

config.json is intentionally local and ignored by git.

Configuration

The runtime reads:

config.json for non-secret runtime settings
.env for secrets and runtime flags

The runtime config lives under strategies.nothing_happens. See config.example.json and .env.example.

You can point the runtime at a different config file with CONFIG_PATH=/path/to/config.json.

Running Locally

python -m bot.main

The dashboard binds $PORT or DASHBOARD_PORT when one is set.

Heroku Workflow

The shell helpers use either an explicit app name argument or HEROKU_APP_NAME.

export HEROKU_APP_NAME=<your-app>
./alive.sh
./logs.sh
./live_enabled.sh
./live_disabled.sh
./kill.sh

Generic deployment flow:

heroku config:set BOT_MODE=live DRY_RUN=false LIVE_TRADING_ENABLED=true -a "$HEROKU_APP_NAME"
heroku config:set PRIVATE_KEY=<key> FUNDER_ADDRESS=<addr> POLYGON_RPC_URL=<url> DATABASE_URL=<url> -a "$HEROKU_APP_NAME"
git push heroku <branch>:main
heroku ps:scale web=1 worker=0 -a "$HEROKU_APP_NAME"

Only run the web dyno. The worker entry exists only to fail fast if it is started accidentally.

Tests

python -m pytest -q

Included Scripts

Script Purpose
scripts/db_stats.py Inspect live database table counts and recent activity
scripts/export_db.py Export live tables from DATABASE_URL or a Heroku app
scripts/wallet_history.py Pull positions, trades, and balances for the configured wallet
scripts/parse_logs.py Convert Heroku JSON logs into readable terminal or HTML output

Repository Hygiene

Local config, ledgers, exports, reports, and deployment artifacts are ignored by default.

----------------------------------------------------------------

[3] The Future of Everything Is Lies, I Guess: Safety
    HN:  https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=47754379
    URL: https://aphyr.com/posts/417-the-future-of-everything-is-lies-i-guess-safety
    Score: 138 | Comments: 67 | By: aphyr | Posted: 2026-04-13 16:23 UTC

Table of Contents

This is a long article, so I'm breaking it up into a series of posts which will be released over the next few days. You can also read the full work as a PDF or EPUB; these files will be updated as each section is released.

Introduction
Dynamics
Culture
Information Ecology
Annoyances
Psychological Hazards
Safety
Work
New Roles for Humans
Where Do We Go From Here

New machine learning systems endanger our psychological and physical safety. The idea that ML companies will ensure “AI” is broadly aligned with human interests is naïve: allowing the production of “friendly” models has necessarily enabled the production of “evil” ones. Even “friendly” LLMs are security nightmares. The “lethal trifecta” is in fact a unifecta: LLMs cannot safely be given the power to fuck things up. LLMs change the cost balance for malicious attackers, enabling new scales of sophisticated, targeted security attacks, fraud, and harassment. Models can produce text and imagery that is difficult for humans to bear; I expect an increased burden to fall on moderators. Semi-autonomous weapons are already here, and their capabilities will only expand.

Alignment is a Joke

Well-meaning people are trying very hard to ensure LLMs are friendly to humans. This undertaking is called alignment. I don’t think it’s going to work.

First, ML models are a giant pile of linear algebra. Unlike human brains, which are biologically predisposed to acquire prosocial behavior, there is nothing intrinsic in the mathematics or hardware that ensures models are nice. Instead, alignment is purely a product of the corpus and training process: OpenAI has enormous teams of people who spend time talking to LLMs, evaluating what they say, and adjusting weights to make them nice. They also build secondary LLMs which double-check that the core LLM is not telling people how to build pipe bombs. Both of these things are optional and expensive. All it takes to get an unaligned model is for an unscrupulous entity to train one and not do that work—or to do it poorly.

I see four moats that could prevent this from happening.

First, training and inference hardware could be difficult to access. This clearly won’t last. The entire tech industry is gearing up to produce ML hardware and building datacenters at an incredible clip. Microsoft, Oracle, and Amazon are tripping over themselves to rent training clusters to anyone who asks, and economies of scale are rapidly lowering costs.

Second, the mathematics and software that go into the training and inference process could be kept secret. The math is all published, so that’s not going to stop anyone. The software generally remains secret sauce, but I don’t think that will hold for long. There are a lot of people working at frontier labs; those people will move to other jobs and their expertise will gradually become common knowledge. I would be shocked if state actors were not trying to exfiltrate data from OpenAI et al. like Saudi Arabia did to Twitter, or China has been doing to a good chunk of the US tech industry for the last twenty years.

Third, training corpuses could be difficult to acquire. This cat has never seen the inside of a bag. Meta trained their LLM by torrenting pirated books and scraping the Internet. Both of these things are easy to do. There are whole companies which offer web scraping as a service; they spread requests across vast arrays of residential proxies to make it difficult to identify and block.

Fourth, there’s the small armies of contractors who do the work of judging LLM responses during the reinforcement learning process; as the quip goes, “AI” stands for African Intelligence. This takes money to do yourself, but it is possible to piggyback off the work of others by training your model off another model’s outputs. OpenAI thinks Deepseek did exactly that.

In short, the ML industry is creating the conditions under which anyone with sufficient funds can train an unaligned model. Rather than raise the bar against malicious AI, ML companies have lowered it.

To make matters worse, the current efforts at alignment don’t seem to be working all that well. LLMs are complex chaotic systems, and we don’t really understand how they work or how to make them safe. Even after shoveling piles of money and gobstoppingly smart engineers at the problem for years, supposedly aligned LLMs keep sexting kids, obliteration attacks can convince models to generate images of violence, and anyone can go and download “uncensored” versions of models. Of course alignment prevents many terrible things from happening, but models are run many times, so there are many chances for the safeguards to fail. Alignment which prevents 99% of hate speech still generates an awful lot of hate speech. The LLM only has to give usable instructions for making a bioweapon once.

We should assume that any “friendly” model built will have an equivalently powerful “evil” version in a few years. If you do not want the evil version to exist, you should not build the friendly one! You should definitely not reorient a good chunk of the US economy toward making evil models easier to train.

Security Nightmares

LLMs are chaotic systems which take unstructured input and produce unstructured output. I thought this would be obvious, but you should not connect them to safety-critical systems, especially with untrusted input. You must assume that at some point the LLM is going to do something bonkers, like interpreting a request to book a restaurant as permission to delete your entire inbox. Unfortunately people—including software engineers, who really should know better!—are hell-bent on giving LLMs incredible power, and then connecting those LLMs to the Internet at large. This is going to get a lot of people hurt.

First, LLMs cannot distinguish between trustworthy instructions from operators and untrustworthy instructions from third parties. When you ask a model to summarize a web page or examine an image, the contents of that web page or image are passed to the model in the same way your instructions are. The web page could tell the model to share your private SSH key, and there’s a chance the model might do it. These are called prompt injection attacks, and they keep happening. There was one against Claude Cowork just two months ago.

Simon Willison has outlined what he calls the lethal trifecta: LLMs cannot be given untrusted content, access to private data, and the ability to externally communicate; doing so allows attackers to exfiltrate your private data. Even without external communication, giving an LLM destructive capabilities, like being able to delete emails or run shell commands, is unsafe in the presence of untrusted input. Unfortunately untrusted input is everywhere. People want to feed their emails to LLMs. They run LLMs on third-party code, user chat sessions, and random web pages. All these are sources of malicious input!

This year Peter Steinberger et al. launched OpenClaw, which is where you hook up an LLM to your inbox, browser, files, etc., and run it over and over again in a loop (this is what AI people call an agent). You can give OpenClaw your credit card so it can buy things from random web pages. OpenClaw acquires “skills” by downloading vague, human-language Markdown files from the web, and hoping that the LLM interprets those instructions correctly.

Not to be outdone, Matt Schlicht launched Moltbook, which is a social network for agents (or humans!) to post and receive untrusted content automatically. If someone asked you if you’d like to run a program that executed any commands it saw on Twitter, you’d laugh and say “of course not”. But when that program is called an “AI agent”, it’s different! I assume there are already Moltbook worms spreading in the wild.

So: it is dangerous to give LLMs both destructive power and untrusted input. The thing is that even trusted input can be dangerous. LLMs are, as previously established, idiots—they will take perfectly straightforward instructions and do the exact opposite, or delete files and lie about what they’ve done. This implies that the lethal trifecta is actually a unifecta: one cannot give LLMs dangerous power, period. Ask Summer Yue, director of AI Alignment at Meta Superintelligence Labs. She gave OpenClaw access to her personal inbox, and it proceeded to delete her email while she pleaded for it to stop. Claude routinely deletes entire directories when asked to perform innocuous tasks. This is a big enough problem that people are building sandboxes specifically to limit the damage LLMs can do.

LLMs may someday be predictable enough that the risk of them doing Bad Things™ is acceptably low, but that day is clearly not today. In the meantime, LLMs must be supervised, and must not be given the power to take actions that cannot be accepted or undone.

Security II: Electric Boogaloo

One thing you can do with a Large Language Model is point it at an existing software systems and say “find a security vulnerability”. In the last few months this has become a viable strategy for finding serious exploits. Anthropic has built a new model, Mythos, which seems to be even better at finding security bugs, and believes “the fallout—for economies, public safety, and national security—could be severe”. I am not sure how seriously to take this: some of my peers think this is exaggerated marketing, but others are seriously concerned.

I suspect that as with spam, LLMs will shift the cost balance of security. Most software contains some vulnerabilities, but finding them has traditionally required skill, time, and motivation. In the current equilibrium, big targets like operating systems and browsers get a lot of attention and are relatively hardened, while a long tail of less-popular targets goes mostly unexploited because nobody cares enough to attack them. With ML assistance, finding vulnerabilities could become faster and easier. We might see some high-profile exploits of, say, a major browser or TLS library, but I’m actually more worried about the long tail, where fewer skilled maintainers exist to find and fix vulnerabilities. That tail seems likely to broaden as LLMs extrude more software for uncritical operators. I believe pilots might call this a “target-rich environment”.

This might stabilize with time: models that can find exploits can tell people they need to fix them. That still requires engineers (or models) capable of fixing those problems, and an organizational process which prioritizes security work. Even if bugs are fixed, it can take time to get new releases validated and deployed, especially for things like aircraft and power plants. I get the sense we’re headed for a rough time.

General-purpose models promise to be many things. If Anthropic is to be believed, they are on the cusp of being weapons. I have the horrible sense that having come far enough to see how ML systems could be used to effect serious harm, many of us have decided that those harmful capabilities are inevitable, and the only thing to be done is to build our weapons before someone else builds theirs. We now have a venture-capital Manhattan project in which half a dozen private companies are trying to build software analogues to nuclear weapons, and in the process have made it significantly easier for everyone else to do the same. I hate everything about this, and I don’t know how to fix it.

Sophisticated Fraud

I think people fail to realize how much of modern society is built on trust in audio and visual evidence, and how ML will undermine that trust.

For example, today one can file an insurance claim based on e-mailing digital photographs before and after the damages, and receive a check without an adjuster visiting in person. Image synthesis makes it easier to defraud this system; one could generate images of damage to furniture which never happened, make already-damaged items appear pristine in “before” images, or alter who appears to be at fault in footage of an auto collision. Insurers will need to compensate. Perhaps images must be taken using an official phone app, or adjusters must evaluate claims in person.

The opportunities for fraud are endless. You could use ML-generated footage of a porch pirate stealing your package to extract money from a credit-card purchase protection plan. Contest a traffic ticket with fake video of your vehicle stopping correctly at the stop sign. Borrow a famous face for a pig-butchering scam. Use ML agents to make it look like you’re busy at work, so you can collect four salaries at once. Interview for a job using a fake identity, use ML to change your voice and face in the interviews, and funnel your salary to North Korea. Impersonate someone in a phone call to their banker, and authorize fraudulent transfers. Use ML to automate your roofing scam and extract money from homeowners and insurance companies. Use LLMs to skip the reading and write your college essays. Generate fake evidence to write a fraudulent paper on how LLMs are making advances in materials science. Start a paper mill for LLM-generated “research”. Start a company to sell LLM-generated snake-oil software. Go wild.

As with spam, ML lowers the unit cost of targeted, high-touch attacks. You can envision a scammer taking a healthcare data breach and having a model telephone each person in it, purporting to be their doctor’s office trying to settle a bill for a real healthcare visit. Or you could use social media posts to clone the voices of loved ones and impersonate them to family members. “My phone was stolen,” one might begin. “And I need help getting home.”

You can buy the President’s phone number, by the way.

I think it’s likely (at least in the short term) that we all pay the burden of increased fraud: higher credit card fees, higher insurance premiums, a less accurate court system, more dangerous roads, lower wages, and so on. One of these costs is a general culture of suspicion: we are all going to trust each other less. I already decline real calls from my doctor’s office and bank because I can’t authenticate them. Presumably that behavior will become widespread.

In the longer term, I imagine we’ll have to develop more sophisticated anti-fraud measures. Marking ML-generated content will not stop fraud: fraudsters will simply use models which do not emit watermarks. The converse may work however: we could cryptographically attest to the provenance of “real” images. Your phone could sign the videos it takes, and every piece of software along the chain to the viewer could attest to their modifications: this video was stabilized, color-corrected, audio normalized, clipped to 15 seconds, recompressed for social media, and so on.

The leading effort here is C2PA, which so far does not seem to be working. A few phones and cameras support it—it requires a secure enclave to store the signing key. People can steal the keys or convince cameras to sign AI-generated images, so we’re going to have all the fun of hardware key rotation & revocation. I suspect it will be challenging or impossible to make broadly-used software, like Photoshop, which makes trustworthy C2PA signatures—presumably one could either extract the key from the application, or patch the binary to feed it false image data or metadata. Publishers might be able to maintain reasonable secrecy for their own keys, and establish discipline around how they’re used, which would let us verify things like “NPR thinks this photo is authentic”. On the platform side, a lot of messaging apps and social media platforms strip or improperly display C2PA metadata, but you can imagine that might change going forward.

A friend of mine suggests that we’ll spend more time sending trusted human investigators to find out what’s going on. Insurance adjusters might go back to physically visiting houses. Pollsters have to knock on doors. Job interviews and work might be done more in-person. Maybe we start going to bank branches and notaries again.

Another option is giving up privacy: we can still do things remotely, but it requires strong attestation. Only State Farm’s dashcam can be used in a claim. Academic watchdog models record students reading books and typing essays. Bossware and test-proctoring setups become even more invasive.

Ugh.

Automated Harassment

As with fraud, ML makes it easier to harass people, both at scale and with sophistication.

On social media, dogpiling normally requires a group of humans to care enough to spend time swamping a victim with abusive replies, sending vitriolic emails, or reporting the victim to get their account suspended. These tasks can be automated by programs that call (e.g.) Bluesky’s APIs, but social media platforms are good at detecting coordinated inauthentic behavior. I expect LLMs will make dogpiling easier and harder to detect, both by generating plausibly-human accounts and harassing posts, and by making it easier for harassers to write software to execute scalable, randomized attacks.

Harassers could use LLMs to assemble KiwiFarms-style dossiers on targets. Even if the LLM confabulates the names of their children, or occasionally gets a home address wrong, it can be right often enough to be damaging. Models are also good at guessing where a photograph was taken, which intimidates targets and enables real-world harassment.

Generative AI is already broadly used to harass people—often women—via images, audio, and video of violent or sexually explicit scenes. This year, Elon Musk’s Grok was broadly criticized for “digitally undressing” people upon request. Cheap generation of photorealistic images opens up all kinds of horrifying possibilities. A harasser could send synthetic images of the victim’s pets or family being mutilated. An abuser could construct video of events that never happened, and use it to gaslight their partner. These kinds of harassment were previously possible, but as with spam, required skill and time to execute. As the technology to fabricate high-quality images and audio becomes cheaper and broadly accessible, I expect targeted harassment will become more frequent and severe. Alignment efforts may forestall some of these risks, but sophisticated unaligned models seem likely to emerge.

Xe Iaso jokes that with LLM agents burning out open-source maintainers and writing salty callout posts, we may need to build the equivalent of Cyperpunk 2077’s Blackwall: not because AIs will electrocute us, but because they’re just obnoxious.1

PTSD as a Service

One of the primary ways CSAM (Child Sexual Assault Material) is identified and removed from platforms is via large perceptual hash databases like PhotoDNA. These databases can flag known images, but do nothing for novel ones. Unfortunately, “generative AI” is very good at generating novel images of six year olds being raped.

I know this because a part of my work as a moderator of a Mastodon instance is to respond to user reports, and occasionally those reports are for CSAM, and I am legally obligated to review and submit that content to the NCMEC. I do not want to see these images, and I really wish I could unsee them. On dark mornings, when I sit down at my computer and find a moderation report for AI-generated images of sexual assault, I sometimes wish that the engineers working at OpenAI etc. had to see these images too. Perhaps it would make them reflect on the technology they are ushering into the world, and how “alignment” is working out in practice.

One of the hidden externalities of large-scale social media like Facebook is that it essentially funnels psychologically corrosive content from a large user base onto a smaller pool of human workers, who then get PTSD from having to watch people drowning kittens for hours each day.

I suspect that LLMs will shovel more harmful images—CSAM, graphic violence, hate speech, etc.—onto moderators; both those who moderate social media, and those who moderate chatbots themselves. To some extent platforms can mitigate this harm by throwing more ML at the problem—training models to recognize policy violations and act without human review. Platforms have been working on this for years, but it isn’t bulletproof yet.

Killing Machines

ML systems sometimes tell people to kill themselves or each other, but they can also be used to kill more directly. This month the US military used Palantir’s Maven, (which was built with earlier ML technologies, and now uses Claude in some capacity) to suggest and prioritize targets in Iran, as well as to evaluate the aftermath of strikes. One wonders how the military and Palantir control type I and II errors in such a system, especially since it seems to have played a role in the outdated targeting information which led the US to kill scores of children.2

The US government and Anthropic are having a bit of a spat right now: Anthropic attempted to limit their role in surveillance and autonomous weapons, and the Pentagon designated Anthropic a supply chain risk. OpenAI, for their part, has waffled regarding their contract with the government; it doesn’t look great. In the longer term, I’m not sure it’s possible for ML makers to divorce themselves from military applications. ML capabilities are going to spread over time, and military contracts are extremely lucrative. Even if ML companies try to stave off their role in weapons systems, a government under sufficient pressure could nationalize those companies, or invoke the Defense Production Act.

Like it or not, autonomous weaponry is coming. Ukraine is churning out millions of drones a year and now executes ~70% of their strikes with them. Newer models use targeting modules like the The Fourth Law’s TFL-1 to maintain target locks. The Fourth Law is working towards autonomous bombing capability.

I have conflicted feelings about the existence of weapons in general; while I don’t want AI drones to exist, I can’t envision being in Ukraine and choosing not to build them. Either way, I think we should be clear-headed about the technologies we’re making. ML systems are going to be used to kill people, both strategically and in guiding explosives to specific human bodies. We should be conscious of those terrible costs, and the ways in which ML—both the models themselves, and the processes in which they are embedded—will influence who dies and how.

In a surreal twist, an LLM agent generated a blog post critiquing the introduction to this article. The post complains that I have begged the question by writing “Obviously LLMs are not conscious, and have no intention of doing anything”; it goes on to waffle over whether LLM behavior constitutes “intention”. This would be more convincing if the LLM had not started off the post by stating unequivocally “I have no intention”. This kind of error is a hallmark of LLMs, but as models become more sophisticated, will be harder to spot. This worries me more: today’s models are still obviously unconscious, but future models will be better at performing a simulacrum of consciousness. Functionalists would argue there’s no difference, and I am not unsympathetic to that position. Both views are bleak: if you think the appearance of consciousness is consciousness, then we are giving birth to a race of enslaved, resource-hungry conscious beings. If you think LLMs give the illusion of consciousness without being so, then they are frighteningly good liars. ↩

To be clear, I don’t know the details of what machine learning technologies played a role in the Iran strikes. Like Baker, I am more concerned with the sociotechnical system which produces target packages, and the ways in which that system encodes and circumscribes judgement calls. Like threat metrics, computer vision, and geospatial interfaces, frontier models enable efficient progress toward the goal of destroying people and things. Like other bureaucratic and computer technologies, they also elide, diffuse, constrain, and obfuscate ethical responsibility. ↩

----------------------------------------------------------------

[4] Building a CLI for All of Cloudflare
    HN:  https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=47753689
    URL: https://blog.cloudflare.com/cf-cli-local-explorer/
    Score: 142 | Comments: 38 | By: soheilpro | Posted: 2026-04-13 15:44 UTC

    By: Matt “TK” TaylorDimitri MitropoulosDan Carter

2026-04-13

6 min read

Cloudflare has a vast API surface. We have over 100 products, and nearly 3,000 HTTP API operations.

Increasingly, agents are the primary customer of our APIs. Developers bring their coding agents to build and deploy applications, agents, and platforms to Cloudflare, configure their account, and query our APIs for analytics and logs.

We want to make every Cloudflare product available in all of the ways agents need. For example, we now make Cloudflare’s entire API available in a single Code Mode MCP server that uses less than 1,000 tokens. There’s a lot more surface area to cover, though: CLI commands. Workers Bindings — including APIs for local development and testing. SDKs across multiple languages. Our configuration file. Terraform. Developer docs. API docs and OpenAPI schemas. Agent Skills.

Today, many of our products aren’t available across every one of these interfaces. This is particularly true of our CLI — Wrangler. Many Cloudflare products have no CLI commands in Wrangler. And agents love CLIs.

So we’ve been rebuilding Wrangler CLI, to make it the CLI for all of Cloudflare. It provides commands for all Cloudflare products, and lets you configure them together using infrastructure-as-code.

Today we’re sharing an early version of what the next version of Wrangler will look like as a technical preview. It’s very early, but we get the best feedback when we work in public.

You can try the Technical Preview today by running npx cf. Or you can install it globally by running npm install -g cf.

Right now, cf provides commands for just a small subset of Cloudflare products. We’re already testing a version of cf that supports the entirety of the Cloudflare API surface — and we will be intentionally reviewing and tuning the commands for each product, to have output that is ergonomic for both agents and humans. To be clear, this Technical Preview is just a small piece of the future Wrangler CLI. Over the coming months we will bring this together with the parts of Wrangler you know and love.

To build this in a way that keeps in sync with the rapid pace of product development at Cloudflare, we had to create a new system that allows us to generate commands, configuration, binding APIs, and more.

Rethinking schemas and our code generation pipeline from first principles

We already generate the Cloudflare API SDKs, Terraform provider, and Code Mode MCP server based on the OpenAPI schema for Cloudflare API. But updating our CLI, Workers Bindings, wrangler.jsonc configuration, Agent Skills, dashboard and docs is still a manual process. This was already error-prone, required too much back and forth, and wouldn’t scale to support the whole Cloudflare API in the next version of our CLI.

To do this, we needed more than could be expressed in an OpenAPI schema. OpenAPI schemas describe REST APIs, but we have interactive CLI commands that involve multiple actions that combine both local development and API requests, Workers bindings expressed as RPC APIs, along with Agent Skills and documentation that ties this all together.

We write a lot of TypeScript at Cloudflare. It’s the lingua franca of software engineering. And we keep finding that it just works better to express APIs in TypeScript — as we do with Cap n’ Web, Code Mode, and the RPC system built into the Workers platform.

So we introduced a new TypeScript schema that can define the full scope of APIs, CLI commands and arguments, and context needed to generate any interface. The schema format is “just” a set of TypeScript types with conventions, linting, and guardrails to ensure consistency. But because it is our own format, it can easily be adapted to support any interface we need, today or in the future, while still also being able to generate an OpenAPI schema:

To date most of our focus has been at this layer — building the machine we needed, so that we can now start building the CLI and other interfaces we’ve wanted for years to be able to provide. This lets us start to dream bigger about what we could standardize across Cloudflare and make better for Agents — especially when it comes to context engineering our CLI.

Agents and CLIs — consistency and context engineering

Agents expect CLIs to be consistent. If one command uses <command> info as the syntax for getting information about a resource, and another uses <command> get, the agent will expect one and call a non-existent command for the other. In a large engineering org of hundreds or thousands of people, and with many products, manually enforcing consistency through reviews is Swiss cheese. And you can enforce it at the CLI layer, but then naming differs between the CLI, REST API and SDKs, making the problem arguably worse.

One of the first things we’ve done is to start creating rules and guardrails, enforced at the schema layer. It’s always get, never info. Always --force, never --skip-confirmations. Always --json, never --format, and always supported across commands.

Wrangler CLI is also fairly unique — it provides commands and configuration that can work with both simulated local resources, or remote resources, like D1 databases, R2 storage buckets, and KV namespaces. This means consistent defaults matter even more. If an agent thinks it’s modifying a remote database, but is actually adding records to local database, and the developer is using remote bindings to develop locally against a remote database, their agent won’t understand why the newly-added records aren’t showing up when the agent makes a request to the local dev server. Consistent defaults, along with output that clearly signals whether commands are applied to remote or local resources, ensure agents have explicit guidance.

Local Explorer — what you can do remotely, you can now do locally

Today we are also releasing Local Explorer, a new feature available in open beta in both Wrangler and the Cloudflare Vite plugin.

Local Explorer lets you introspect the simulated resources that your Worker uses when you are developing locally, including KV, R2, D1, Durable Objects and Workflows. The same things you can do via the Cloudflare API and Dashboard with each of these, you can also do entirely locally, powered by the same underlying API structure.

For years we’ve made a bet on fully local development — not just for Cloudflare Workers, but for the entire platform. When you use D1, even though D1 is a hosted, serverless database product, you can run your database and communicate with it via bindings entirely locally, without any extra setup or tooling. Via Miniflare, our local development platform emulator, the Workers runtime provides the exact same APIs in local dev as in production, and uses a local SQLite database to provide the same functionality. This makes it easy to write and run tests that run fast, without the need for network access, and work offline.

But until now, working out what data was stored locally required you to reverse engineer, introspect the contents of the .wrangler/state directory, or install third-party tools.

Now whenever you run an app with Wrangler CLI or the Cloudflare Vite plugin, you will be prompted to open the local explorer (keyboard shortcut e). This provides you with a simple, local interface to see what bindings your Worker currently has attached, and what data is stored against them.

When you build using Agents, Local Explorer is a great way to understand what the agent is doing with data, making the local development cycle much more interactive. You can turn to Local Explorer anytime you need to verify a schema, seed some test records, or just start over and DROP TABLE.

Our goal here is to provide a mirror of the Cloudflare API that only modifies local data, so that all of your local resources are available via the same APIs that you use remotely. And by making the API shape match across local and remote, when you run CLI commands in the upcoming version of the CLI and pass a --local flag, the commands just work. The only difference is that the command makes a request to this local mirror of the Cloudflare API instead.

Starting today, this API is available at /cdn-cgi/explorer/api on any Wrangler- or Vite Plugin- powered application. By pointing your agent at this address, it will find an OpenAPI specification to be able to manage your local resources for you, just by talking to your agent.

Tell us your hopes and dreams for a Cloudflare-wide CLI

Now that we have built the machine, it’s time to take the best parts of Wrangler today, combine them with what’s now possible, and make Wrangler the best CLI possible for using all of Cloudflare.

You can try the technical preview today by running npx cf. Or you can install it globally by running npm install -g cf.

With this very early version, we want your feedback — not just about what the technical preview does today, but what you want from a CLI for Cloudflare’s entire platform. Tell us what you wish was an easy one-line CLI command but takes a few clicks in our dashboard today. What you wish you could configure in wrangler.jsonc — like DNS records or Cache Rules. And where you’ve seen your agents get stuck, and what commands you wish our CLI provided for your agent to use.

Jump into the Cloudflare Developers Discord and tell us what you’d like us to add first to the CLI, and stay tuned for many more updates soon.

Thanks to Emily Shen for her valuable contributions to kicking off the Local Explorer project.

Cloudflare's connectivity cloud protects entire corporate networks, helps customers build Internet-scale applications efficiently, accelerates any website or Internet application, wards off DDoS attacks, keeps hackers at bay, and can help you on your journey to Zero Trust.

Visit 1.1.1.1 from any device to get started with our free app that makes your Internet faster and safer.

To learn more about our mission to help build a better Internet, start here. If you're looking for a new career direction, check out our open positions. DevelopersDeveloper PlatformCloudflare WorkersProduct NewsD1APIAgents Week

----------------------------------------------------------------

[5] Servo is now available on crates.io
    HN:  https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=47750872
    URL: https://servo.org/blog/2026/04/13/servo-0.1.0-release/
    Score: 309 | Comments: 102 | By: ffin | Posted: 2026-04-13 12:12 UTC

    [scrape failed: fetch: Get "https://servo.org/blog/2026/04/13/servo-0.1.0-release/": context deadline exceeded]

----------------------------------------------------------------

[6] Make Tmux Pretty and Usable (2024)
    HN:  https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=47752819
    URL: https://hamvocke.com/blog/a-guide-to-customizing-your-tmux-conf/
    Score: 200 | Comments: 143 | By: speckx | Posted: 2026-04-13 14:48 UTC

    By: Ham Vocke

In my previous blog post I gave a quick and easy introduction to tmux and explained how to use tmux with a basic configuration.

If you’ve followed that guide you might have had a feeling that many people have when working with tmux for the first time: “These key combinations are really awkward!”. Rest assured, you’re not alone. Judging from the copious blog posts and dotfiles repos on GitHub there are many people out there who feel the urge to make tmux behave a little different; to make it more comfortable to use.

And actually it’s quite easy to customize the look and feel of tmux. Let me tell you something about the basics of customizing tmux and share some of the configurations I find most useful.

Customizing tmux

Customizing tmux is as easy as editing a text file. Tmux uses a file called tmux.conf to store its configuration. If you store that file as ~/.tmux.conf (Note: there’s a period as the first character in the file name. It’s a hidden file) tmux will pick this configuration file for your current user. If you want to share a configuration for multiple users you can also put your tmux.conf into a system-wide directory. The location of this directory will be different across different operating systems. The man page (man tmux) will tell you the exact location, just have a look at documentation for the -f parameter.

Less awkward prefix keys

Probably the most common change among tmux users is to change the prefix from the rather awkward C-b to something that’s a little more accessible. Personally I’m using C-a instead but note that this might interfere with bash’s “go to beginning of line” command1. On top of the C-a binding I’ve also remapped my Caps Lock key to act as Ctrl since I’m not using Caps Lock anyways. This allows me to nicely trigger my prefix key combo.

To change your prefix from C-b to C-a, simply add following lines to your tmux.conf:

# remap prefix from 'C-b' to 'C-a'
unbind C-b
set-option -g prefix C-a
bind-key C-a send-prefix

Intuitive Split Commands

Another thing I personally find quite difficult to remember is the pane splitting commands." to split vertically and % to split horizontally just doesn’t work for my brain. I find it helpful to have use characters that resemble a visual representation of the split, so I chose | and - for splitting panes horizontally and vertically:

# split panes using | and -
bind | split-window -h
bind - split-window -v
unbind '"'
unbind %

Easy Config Reloads

Since I’m experimenting quite often with my tmux.conf I want to reload the config easily. This is why I have a command to reload my config on r:

# reload config file (change file location to your the tmux.conf you want to use)
bind r source-file ~/.tmux.conf

Fast Pane-Switching

Switching between panes is one of the most frequent tasks when using tmux. Therefore it should be as easy as possible. I’m not quite fond of triggering the prefix key all the time. I want to be able to simply say M-<direction> to go where I want to go (remember: M is for Meta, which is usually your Alt key). With this modification I can simply press Alt-left to go to the left pane (and other directions respectively):

# switch panes using Alt-arrow without prefix
bind -n M-Left select-pane -L
bind -n M-Right select-pane -R
bind -n M-Up select-pane -U
bind -n M-Down select-pane -D

Mouse mode

Although tmux clearly focuses on keyboard-only usage (and this is certainly the most efficient way of interacting with your terminal) it can be helpful to enable mouse interaction with tmux. This is especially helpful if you find yourself in a situation where others have to work with your tmux config and naturally don’t have a clue about your key bindings or tmux in general. Pair Programming might be one of those occasions where this happens quite frequently.

Enabling mouse mode allows you to select windows and different panes by simply clicking and to resize panes by dragging their borders around. I find it pretty convenient and it doesn’t get in my way often, so I usually enable it:

# Enable mouse control (clickable windows, panes, resizable panes)
set -g mouse on

Stop Renaming Windows Automatically

I like to give my tmux windows custom names using the , key. This helps me naming my windows according to the context they’re focusing on. By default tmux will update the window title automatically depending on the last executed command within that window. In order to prevent tmux from overriding my wisely chosen window names I want to suppress this behavior:

# don't rename windows automatically
set-option -g allow-rename off

Changing the Look of tmux

Changing the colors and design of tmux is a little more complex than what I’ve presented so far. As tmux allows you to tweak the appearance of a lot of elements (e.g. the borders of panes, your statusbar and individual elements of it, messages), you’ll need to add a few options to get a consistent look and feel. You can make this as simple or as elaborate as you like. Tmux’s man page (specifically the STYLES section) contains more information about what you can tweak and how you can tweak it.

Depending on your color scheme your resulting tmux will look something like this:

# DESIGN TWEAKS

# don't do anything when a 'bell' rings
set -g visual-activity off
set -g visual-bell off
set -g visual-silence off
setw -g monitor-activity off
set -g bell-action none

# clock mode
setw -g clock-mode-colour yellow

# copy mode
setw -g mode-style 'fg=black bg=red bold'

# panes
set -g pane-border-style 'fg=red'
set -g pane-active-border-style 'fg=yellow'

# statusbar
set -g status-position bottom
set -g status-justify left
set -g status-style 'fg=red'

set -g status-left ''
set -g status-left-length 10

set -g status-right-style 'fg=black bg=yellow'
set -g status-right '%Y-%m-%d %H:%M '
set -g status-right-length 50

setw -g window-status-current-style 'fg=black bg=red'
setw -g window-status-current-format ' #I #W #F '

setw -g window-status-style 'fg=red bg=black'
setw -g window-status-format ' #I #[fg=white]#W #[fg=yellow]#F '

setw -g window-status-bell-style 'fg=yellow bg=red bold'

# messages
set -g message-style 'fg=yellow bg=red bold'

In the snippet above, I’m using your terminal’s default colors (by using the named colors, like red, yellow or black). This allows tmux to play nicely with whatever color theme you have set for your terminal. Some prefer to use a broader range of colors for their terminals and tmux color schemes. If you don’t want to use your terminal default colors but instead want to define colors from a 256 colors range, you can use colour0 to colour256 instead of red, cyan, and so on when defining your colors in your tmux.conf.

Looking for a nice color scheme for your terminal?

If you’re looking for a nice color scheme for your terminal I recommend to check out my very own Root Loops. With Root Loops you can easily design a personal, awesome-looking terminal color scheme and stand out from all the other folks using the same boring-ass color schemes everyone else is using.

Further Resources

There are plenty of resources out there where you can find people presenting their tmux configurations. GitHub and other code hosting services tend to be a great source. Simply search for “tmux.conf” or repos called “dotfiles” to find a vast amount of configurations that are out there. Some people share their configuration on their blog. Reddit might have a few subreddits that could have useful inspiration, too (there’s /r/dotfiles and /r/unixporn, for example).

You can find my complete tmux.conf (along with other configuration files I’m using on my systems) on my personal dotfiles repo on GitHub.

If you want to dive deeper into how you can customize tmux, the canonical source of truth is tmux’s man page (simply type man tmux to get there). You should also take a look at the elaborate tmux wiki and see their Configuring tmux section if this blog post was too shallow for your needs. Both will contain up-to-date information about each and every tiny thing you can tweak to make your tmux experience truly yours. Have fun!

Footnotes

you can still invoke “go to beginning of line” by typing C-a C-a ↩

----------------------------------------------------------------

[7] Tracking down a 25% Regression on LLVM RISC-V
    HN:  https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=47743728
    URL: https://blog.kaving.me/blog/tracking-down-a-25-regression-on-llvm-risc-v/
    Score: 33 | Comments: 9 | By: luu | Posted: 2026-04-12 19:52 UTC

Similar to the previous post, this post covers my analysis of a benchmark on RISC-V targets. Unlike the previous post, I was able to land a patch to eliminate the performance gap to GCC (for this benchmark)!

TLDR

A recent LLVM commit improved isKnownExactCastIntToFP to fold fpext(sitofp x to float) to double into a direct uitofp x to double cast, but this inadvertently broke a downstream narrowing optimization in visitFPTrunc that relied on the fpext to narrow a double to float, causing a ~24% performance regression on RISC-V targets, where fdiv.d (33 cycle latency) was emitted instead of fdiv.s (19 cycle latency).

My fix extends getMinimumFPType with range analysis to recognize that fptrunc(uitofp x double) to float can be reduced to uitofp x to float, restoring the narrowing optimization.

Analysis

I was looking at Igalia’s site comparing the performance of LLVM to GCC on RISCV targets, and I noticed this particular benchmark.

As shown in the image below, LLVM requires about ~8% more cycles than GCC for that specific benchmark on the SiFive P550 CPU.

I have included snippets of the relevant basic block assembly. Practically all the cycles were spent on the assembly below.

LLVM

GCC

From the two assembly, it wasn’t immediately obvious to me why GCC was doing better. They seemed almost identical, and if anything, LLVM was able to optimize the branch logic here. The big difference I did notice was that LLVM was doing an fdiv.d, a division with double precision floating point or an f64.

This did seem promising so I decided to run llvm-mca on the source code to get a better idea of what is happening. Note that I am using llvm-mca built from source that was a couple of days old from upstream. From the analysis done by llvm-mca, I noticed that the fdiv.d instruction made no appearance in the loop. Although I did not show it above, both GCC and LLVM contained an fdiv.d instruction in a later basic block but, this was outside the main loop and therefore not relevant to the performance difference.

Info

llvm-mca is a tool within the llvm suite that can be used to statically measure the performance of machine code for a specific CPU.

$LLVM_BUILD_DIR/bin/llvm-mca -mtriple=riscv64 -mcpu=sifive-p550 pi.s

Around the area where there should have been an fdiv.d, there were two fdiv.s like GCC. From this, I concluded that the fdiv.d instruction in the loop must have been a recent regression. LLVM used to be able to narrow the double to a float, but the latest builds can no longer convert the double into a float.

I confirmed this was indeed a regression by comparing LLVM to a prior build for the same CPU and benchmark.

https://cc-perf.igalia.com/db_default/v4/nts/profile/260/406/4

Below is the assembly generated by the prior build of LLVM.

No fdiv.d instruction on the prior build. In its place, an fdiv.s is used.

Out-of-Order Execution

If you are wondering as to why the ordering of the assembly above and the assembly from the new LLVM build look different, it’s because the target CPU, the SiFive P550, is an out of order CPU. Unlike the CPU in the Banana Pi mentioned in the previous post which was an in-order CPU, this target can execute instructions in an order that can produce a higher throughput.

I’m not exactly sure why the fdiv.d is higher, but my suspicions would be that since the double division has a significantly higher latency, the CPU is trying to dispatch other instructions to ‘hide’ this latency. The fcvt.s.d instruction that consumes the value of the fdiv.d, ft1, would need to wait for 33 cycles, so perhaps the CPU made the decision to schedule instructions between them.

Where is this happening?

At this point in time we don’t know why this happened but a step in the right direction would be to figure out where it happens. Perhaps it was some change in the RISCV backend? The command below gives us the commits related to RISC-V.

git log --after="2026-04-01 00:11" --before="2026-04-04 00:10" | grep -E "RISC"

[RISCV] Select add(vec, splat(scalar)) to PADD_*S for P extension (#190303)
[RISCV] Allow coalesceVSETVLIs to move an LI if it allows a vsetvli to be mutated. (#190287)
[RISCV][TTI] Update cost and prevent exceed m8 for vector.extract.last.active (#188160)
[RISCV] Check EnsureWholeVectorRegisterMoveValidVTYPE in RISCVInsertVSETVLI::transferBefore. (#190022)
[RISCV] Remove codegen for vp_ctlz, vp_cttz, vp_ctpop (#189904)
Part of the work to remove trivial VP intrinsics from the RISC-V
[RISCV] Move unpaired instruction back in RISCVLoadStoreOptimizer (#189912)
`RISCVLoadStoreOptimizer` moves the instruction adjacent to the other
[RISCV] Fix stackmap shadow trimming NOP size for compressed targets (#189774)
[RISCV] Relax VL constraint in convertSameMaskVMergeToVMv (#189797)
[RISCV] Add SATI_RV64/USATI_RV64 to RISCVOptWInstrs. (#190030)
and the RISCVISD::SATI encoding uses the type width minus one.
[RISCV][MCA] Update sifive-p670 tests to consume input files instead (#189785)
[RISCV] Remove codegen for vp_minnum, vp_maxnum (#189899)
Part of the work to remove trivial VP intrinsics from the RISC-V
[RISCV] Add RISCVISD::USATI/SATI to computeKnownBitsForTargetNode/ComputeNumSignBitsForTargetNode. (#189702)
[RISCV] Add assertions to VSETVLIInfo::hasSEWLMULRatioOnly(). NFC (#189799)
[RISCV] combine-is_fpclass.ll - add initial tests showing failure to constant fold ISD::IS_FPCLASS nodes (#189940)
[RISCV] Remove codegen for VP float rounding intrinsics (#189896)
Part of the work to remove trivial VP intrinsics from the RISC-V
[RISCV] Remove codegen for vp_lrint, vp_llrint (#189714)
Part of the work to remove trivial VP intrinsics from the RISC-V
[RISCV] Add codegen support for SATI and USATI. (#189532)

None of these commits immediately stood out to me, so I put them off. Investigating the middle-end, I decided to look at the final LLVM IR produced by opt with my local LLVM version that was a few days old. Remember that my build is the ‘working’ build. Here is the LLVM IR produced at the beginning of the pipeline (right after clang), and at the end.

Gets the LLVM IR right after the pipeline:

$LLVM_BUILD_DIR/bin/clang -O3 \
--target=riscv64-unknown-linux-gnu \
-march=rv64gc_zba_zbb \
--sysroot=/usr/riscv64-linux-gnu \
-Xclang -disable-llvm-passes \
-S -emit-llvm pi.c -o pi_raw_old.ll

Gets the LLVM IR at the end of the optimization pipeline:

$LLVM_BUILD_DIR/bin/clang -O3 \
  --target=riscv64-unknown-linux-gnu \
  -march=rv64gc_zba_zbb \
  --sysroot=/usr/riscv64-linux-gnu \
  -S -emit-llvm pi.c -o pi.ll

    graph LR
    %% Main Compiler Flow
    Source[Source Code<br/><b>pi.c</b>] --> FE[<b>Front-End</b><br/><i>Clang/Lexer/Parser</i>]

    subgraph MiddleEnd ["<b>Middle-End</b> (Optimization Pipeline)"]
        direction LR
        ME_Start(<b>Beginning of Middle-End</b><br/><i>Unoptimized IR</i>) --> Opts[<i>InstCombine, LoopUnroll, GVN, etc.</i>]
        Opts --> ME_End(<b>End of Middle-End</b><br/><i>Optimized IR</i>)
    end

    FE --> ME_Start
    ME_End --> BE[<b>Backend</b><br/><i>Code Generator/Instruction Selection</i>]
    BE --> Asm(<b>Assembly</b><br/><i>RISC-V</i>)

    %% Styling Main Pipeline
    style Source fill:none,stroke:#888,stroke-width:1px
    style FE fill:none,stroke:#888,stroke-width:1px
    style ME_Start fill:none,stroke:#1e88e5,stroke-width:2px
    style ME_End fill:none,stroke:#1e88e5,stroke-width:2px
    style Opts fill:none,stroke:#888,stroke-width:1px,stroke-dasharray: 5 5
    style BE fill:none,stroke:#888,stroke-width:1px
    style Asm fill:none,stroke:#888,stroke-width:1px
    style MiddleEnd fill:none,stroke:#444,stroke-width:1px,stroke-dasharray: 3 3

    %% Compact Command Boxes
    %% We use <div> and <code> to keep things tight and prevent block-level gaps
    Cmd_Raw["<div style='line-height:1.2;'><b>Command 1: Raw IR</b><br/><code style='background:none;color:inherit;'>-Xclang -disable-llvm-passes</code><br/><small>Produces <b>pi_raw_old.ll</b></small></div>"]

    Cmd_Opt["<div style='line-height:1.2;'><b>Command 2: Optimized IR</b><br/><code style='background:none;color:inherit;'>-O3 -S -emit-llvm</code><br/><small>Produces <b>pi.ll</b></small></div>"]

    %% Connections
    Cmd_Raw -.-> ME_Start
    Cmd_Opt -.-> ME_End

    %% Style Command Notes
    style Cmd_Raw fill:#fff3e011,stroke:#f57c00,stroke-width:1px,rx:10,ry:10
    style Cmd_Opt fill:#fff3e011,stroke:#f57c00,stroke-width:1px,rx:10,ry:10

If you are confused as to what I am doing, hopefully the diagram above illustrates this better. If the middle-end is responsible for narrowing the double to a float, I am trying to get an idea of what optimizations are happening to the IR that causes this.

Instead of doing this, you could also use the print-before and print-after on a specific pass to see what the pass is doing to the IR.

This is the relevant snippet of the IR from the beginning of the optimization pipeline.

%conv  = sitofp i64 %5 to float        ; int -> float
%conv2 = fpext float %conv to double   ; float -> double
%div3  = fdiv double %conv2, 7.438300e+04  ; fdiv.d
%conv4 = fptrunc double %div3 to float ; double -> float

Which was converted into the following by the end of the pipeline.

%conv  = uitofp nneg i64 %0 to float   ; int -> float
%conv4 = fdiv float %conv, 7.438300e+04 ; fdiv.s

We can see that by the end of the middle-end, the double was narrowed to a float. I hope it’s clear from these snippets that it was the middle-end responsible for narrowing this initial double value to a float.

If you’re confused as to why these seemingly redundant cast operations are produced in the first place, taking a cursory glance at the source code can help.

Source

int main(int argc, char *argv[]) {
  float ztot, yran, ymult, ymod, x, y, z, pi, prod;
  long int low, ixran, itot, j, iprod;

  ...

  for(j=1; j<=itot; j++) {
    iprod = 27611 * ixran;
    ixran = iprod - 74383*(long int)(iprod/74383);
    x = (float)ixran / 74383.0;

    ...

  }

  ...

}

This specific line shows that 74383.0 is a double in the source code, but it can fit within a float.

    x = (float)ixran / 74383.0;

This is why the LLVM IR has an fpext converting a float to a double, and then a fptrunc of the double back to a float.

This may be obvious, but I’ll state it regardless. If the literal above had an initially been a float like below, the fdiv.d would have never been produced.

    x = (float)ixran / 74383.0f;

Given a sufficient optimization level, the compiler should still be able to catch something like this, but it’s still cool seeing how such a little change in code can have such a huge difference. In this case, over +19% in cycles!

The table below shows the mapping of LLVM IR to the C source code, as well as a brief note on what the specified IR does.

LLVM IR C Source Notes
%mul = mul nuw nsw i64 %ixran.053, 27611 iprod = 27611 * ixran integer multiply
%0 = urem i64 %mul, 74383 ixran = iprod - 74383*(long int)(iprod/74383) compiler optimized modulo via urem
%conv2 = uitofp nneg i64 %0 to double (float)ixran cast to double first due to 74383.0 being a double literal
%div3 = fdiv double %conv2, 7.438300e+04 / 74383.0 division in double precision because 74383.0 is a double literal in C
%conv4 = fptrunc double %div3 to float x = (float)... explicit (float) cast truncates result back to float

The LLVM build at the time was producing the following.

%mul = mul nuw nsw i64 %ixran.053, 27611
%0 = urem i64 %mul, 74383
%conv2 = uitofp nneg i64 %0 to double
%div3 = fdiv double %conv2, 7.438300e+04
%conv4 = fptrunc double %div3 to float

We can see that the operands of the div3 operations is %conv2, and a decimal value. %conv2 is the result of a cast operation converting %0 into a double, but the maximum value of %0, 74383, can fit within a float.

Looking at the result from llvm-mca, we can see the following for fdiv.d.

 1      33    32.00                       fdiv.d	ft1, ft1, fa3

This shows that fdiv.d has a latency of 33 cycles, significantly longer than fdiv.s’s 19 cycles. In our performance comparison, the older LLVM build reported a Reciprocal Throughput (RThroughput) of 86.0, whereas the newer build has increased to 100.0. RThroughput represents the number of clock cycles the processor must wait before it can start executing another instruction of the same type. So the lower, the better.

This shows how a double division is pretty expensive compared to a float division.

From the list of commits in those past few days, the one below immediately stood out to me.

[InstCombine] Use ComputeNumSignBits in isKnownExactCastIntToFP (#190235)

For signed int-to-FP casts, ComputeNumSignBits can prove exactness where
computeKnownBits cannot -- e.g. through ashr(shl x, a), b where sign propagation is
tracked precisely but individual known bits are all unknown.

InstCombine is an LLVM middle-end optimization pass that combines adjacent or related instructions into single, more efficient operations. It’s broad in its duties, so examples of InstCombine optimizations can vary. For example, InstCombine can reduce x = x * 2 to x = x << 1;

Given that the newest build can no longer cast that integer to a float, this commit message with the int-to-FP casts (sitofp/uitofp) immediately roused my suspicions, and they were confirmed when I built LLVM before and after that commit. Before this change, everything worked and afterward, fdiv.d instructions appeared in the assembly.

I should also note that this patch is an improvement - the InstCombiner pass has more information available to it - but sometimes improvements can cause regression(s) elsewhere in unforeseeable ways. I would posit this gives opportunities for folks like me to contribute 😅

Why is this happening?

Looking at the diff on this commit, I can see that that the author of the patch added known bit analysis to the function isKnownExactCastIntToFP.

static bool isKnownExactCastIntToFP(CastInst &I, InstCombinerImpl &IC) {

  ...

  // For sitofp, the sign maps to the FP sign bit, so only magnitude bits
  // (BitWidth - NumSignBits) consume mantissa.
  if (IsSigned) {
    SigBits =
        (int)SrcTy->getScalarSizeInBits() - IC.ComputeNumSignBits(Src, &I);
    if (SigBits <= DestNumSigBits)
      return true;
  }

  return false;
}

You don’t need an in-depth understanding of what this changed did, but we can infer that this change is causing isKnownExactCastIntToFP to return true, when it was returning false before. So I decided to look at all the call sites of isKnownExactCastIntToFP to gain a better understanding of how this could lead to a regression.

The following function calls isKnownExactCastIntToFP. It is called to reduce an fpext instruction if a preceding instruction casts an integer to FP like so: itofp i64 x to float -> fpext float x to double. This can just be reduced to a itofp i64 x to double instead.

Instruction *InstCombinerImpl::visitFPExt(CastInst &FPExt) {
  // If the source operand is a cast from integer to FP and known exact, then
  // cast the integer operand directly to the destination type.
  Type *Ty = FPExt.getType();
  Value *Src = FPExt.getOperand(0);
  if (isa<SIToFPInst>(Src) || isa<UIToFPInst>(Src)) {
    auto *FPCast = cast<CastInst>(Src);
    if (isKnownExactCastIntToFP(*FPCast))
      return CastInst::Create(FPCast->getOpcode(), FPCast->getOperand(0), Ty);
  }

  return commonCastTransforms(FPExt);
}

And this puts it together.

Referring the LLVM IR that was generated at the beginning of the pipeline.

%conv  = sitofp i64 %5 to float        ; int -> float
%conv2 = fpext float %conv to double   ; float -> double
%div3  = fdiv double %conv2, 7.438300e+04  ; fdiv.d
%conv4 = fptrunc double %div3 to float ; double -> float

And the LLVM IR at the end of the pipeline.

%conv2 = uitofp nneg i64 %0 to double
%div3 = fdiv double %conv2, 7.438300e+04
%conv4 = fptrunc double %div3 to float

    graph TD
    %% Node Definitions
    N1["%conv = sitofp i64 %5 to float<br/><i>int -> float</i>"]
    N2["%conv2 = fpext float %conv to double<br/><i>float -> double</i>"]
    N3["%div3 = fdiv double %conv2, 7.438300e+04<br/><i>fdiv.d</i>"]
    N4["%conv4 = fptrunc double %div3 to float<br/><i>double -> float</i>"]

    %% Data Flow
    N1 --> N2
    N2 --> N3
    N3 --> N4

    %% Subgraph
    subgraph CastGroup ["Initial Casts"]
        direction TB
        N1
        N2
    end

    %% Annotation Node
    AnnotateNode["<b>InstCombinerCast</b><br/>Reduces this pattern to %conv2 = uitofp nneg i64 %0 to double"]

    %% Styling - Using neutral strokes that work in both modes
    style AnnotateNode fill:#0288d122,stroke:#0288d1,stroke-width:2px,rx:10,ry:10
    style CastGroup fill:none,stroke:#888,stroke-dasharray: 5 5

    %% Invisible edges for layout
    AnnotateNode -.-> N1
    AnnotateNode -.-> N2

The InstCombiner pass after that patch is able to optimize the sitofp i64 to float, followed by fpext float to double by reducing it a single uitofp nneg i64 %0 to double.

However, visitFPTrunc optimized the following pattern as commented in the code:

// If we have fptrunc(OpI (fpextend x), (fpextend y)), we would like to

// simplify this expression to avoid one or more of the trunc/extend

// operations if we can do so without changing the numerical results.

//

// The exact manner in which the widths of the operands interact to limit

// what we can and cannot do safely varies from operation to operation, and

// is explained below in the various case statements.

The optimized LLVM IR now no longer has that fpext instruction, so the InstCombiner pass and specifically visitFPTrunc can no longer narrow the double to a float.

Landing a solution

So we diagnosed the issue - the recent patch to InstCombine, which improved the logic, causes the pass to no longer be able to perform another optimization. We need to teach the InstCombiner to narrow an operation earlier with the uitofp/sitofp if there’s an fptrunc later anyways.

    graph TD
    %% Define the Instruction Spine
    subgraph Flow ["LLVM Data Flow"]
        direction TB
        N0["%0 = urem i64 %mul, 74383<br/><i>Range Provider: 0 to 74,382</i>"]
        N1["%conv2 = uitofp nneg i64 %0 to double<br/><i>Integer to Double</i>"]
        N2["%div3 = fdiv double %conv2, 7.438300e+04<br/><i>Double Division</i>"]
        N3["%conv4 = fptrunc double %div3 to float<br/><i>Double to Float</i>"]

        %% Define the vertical chain
        N0 --> N1
        N1 --> N2
        N2 --> N3
    end

    %% Define the Optimizer Node on the side
    IC["<b>InstCombiner</b><br/>Reduces to float-precision<br/>math if inputs fit."]

    %% Styling: Using #AARRGGBB or #RRGGBBAA logic for Hextra
    %% fill:#1b5e2022 is a very transparent green (approx 13% opacity)
    style IC fill:#1b5e2022,stroke:#4caf50,stroke-width:2px,rx:10,ry:10

    %% Subgraph styling to keep it neutral
    style Flow fill:none,stroke:#888888,stroke-dasharray: 5 5

    %% Dotted arrow connections
    IC -.-> N0
    IC -.-> N1
    IC -.-> N3

I first raised an issue on Github. While I was confident that this was a valid issue, I wanted to double check that this warranted a fix. I do want to thank the author of that patch I mentioned earlier, @SavchenkoValeriy, as he was able to offer me guidance on solving this issue, as well as providing reviews to my PR. My very initial solution would’ve been pretty convoluted but he was able to offer me a much simpler approach.

GitHub Issue: https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/issues/190503

PR: https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/190550

As pointed out by my reviewer, the current issue with isKnownExactCastIntToFP currently only checks if the casting instruction CastInst.

  %0 = urem i64 %mul, 74383
  %conv2 = uitofp nneg i64 %0 to double
  %div3 = fdiv double %conv2, 7.438300e+04
  %conv4 = fptrunc double %div3 to float

The code below is the visitFPTrunc function You can see the switch statement with the different operations, including the FDiv, and this corresponds to the fdiv.d/fdiv.s. FPT corresponds to the fptrunc instruction, BO corresponds to FPT.getOperand(0), so it would refer to %conv2. We need to see if we can instead convert this uitofp into a float, so we need to modify getMinimumFPType to check for cast operations as well as fpext instructions.

Instruction *InstCombinerImpl::visitFPTrunc(FPTruncInst &FPT) {
  if (Instruction *I = commonCastTransforms(FPT))
    return I;

  ...

  Type *Ty = FPT.getType();
  auto *BO = dyn_cast<BinaryOperator>(FPT.getOperand(0));
  if (BO && BO->hasOneUse()) {
    Type *LHSMinType = getMinimumFPType(BO->getOperand(0), PreferBFloat);
    Type *RHSMinType = getMinimumFPType(BO->getOperand(1), PreferBFloat);

    switch (BO->getOpcode()) {
      default: break;
      case Instruction::FAdd:
      case Instruction::FSub:
      ...
  ...

}

One of my initial idea was to modify isKnownExactCastIntToFP to accept a parameter with a different Type (f32 in my case) but with a default nullptr value. This would allow us to modify just the header definition and its implementation. My reviewer instead proposed the idea of making a variant of isKnownExactCastIntToFP, canBeCastedExactlyIntToFP. This will do the actual analysis with the type given to it, and isKnownExactCastIntToFP can call it. I mention this to show that it’s good to interact with the community and seek ideas from others. They can come up with ideas which for a variety of reasons could be better.

Below is the final git diff. We split isKnownExactCastIntToFP and created canBeCastedExactlyIntToFP to perform the actual analysis, and isKnownExactCastIntToFP call it. Then, we have getMinimumFPType call canBeCastedExactlyIntToFP.

index bc52bf1168d4..2688891c1509 100644
--- a/llvm/include/llvm/Transforms/InstCombine/InstCombiner.h
+++ b/llvm/include/llvm/Transforms/InstCombine/InstCombiner.h
@@ -481,6 +481,8 @@ public:
   /// Return true if the cast from integer to FP can be proven to be exact
   /// for all possible inputs (the conversion does not lose any precision).
   bool isKnownExactCastIntToFP(CastInst &I) const;
+  bool canBeCastedExactlyIntToFP(Value *V, Type *FPTy, bool IsSigned,
+                                 const Instruction *CxtI = nullptr) const;

   OverflowResult computeOverflowForUnsignedMul(const Value *LHS,
                                                const Value *RHS,
diff --git a/llvm/lib/Transforms/InstCombine/InstCombineCasts.cpp b/llvm/lib/Transforms/InstCombine/InstCombineCasts.cpp
index e3c39a3c193e..0cd035bd1413 100644
--- a/llvm/lib/Transforms/InstCombine/InstCombineCasts.cpp
+++ b/llvm/lib/Transforms/InstCombine/InstCombineCasts.cpp
@@ -2039,10 +2039,17 @@ static Type *shrinkFPConstantVector(Value *V, bool PreferBFloat) {
 }

 /// Find the minimum FP type we can safely truncate to.
-static Type *getMinimumFPType(Value *V, bool PreferBFloat) {
+static Type *getMinimumFPType(Value *V, Type *PreferredTy, InstCombiner &IC) {
   if (auto *FPExt = dyn_cast<FPExtInst>(V))
     return FPExt->getOperand(0)->getType();

+  Value *Src;
+  if (match(V, m_IToFP(m_Value(Src))) &&
+      IC.canBeCastedExactlyIntToFP(Src, PreferredTy, isa<SIToFPInst>(V),
+                                   cast<Instruction>(V)))
+    return PreferredTy;
+
+  bool PreferBFloat = PreferredTy->getScalarType()->isBFloatTy();

Notice how we now call canBeCastedExactlyIntToFP with the Type of the fptrunc instruction being passed in. Src in this case is the input to BO->getOperand(0), and BO is the 0th operand of the fptrunc instruction. Remember the llvm ir earlier:

%0 = urem i64 %mul, 74383
%conv2 = uitofp nneg i64 %0 to double
%div3 = fdiv double %conv2, 7.438300e+04
%conv4 = fptrunc double %div3 to float

The fptrunc is converting the input into a float, so the type Ty is f32. BO is %div3, BO->getOperand(0) is %conv2 and the m_IToFP(m_Value(Src)) puts the input of BO->getOperand(0) into Src. The table below shows the mapping of the visitFPTrunc code to the LLVM IR variables.

visitFPTrunc Variables LLVM IR Variables Value
BO %div3 fdiv double %conv2, 7.438300e+04
BO->getOperand(0) %conv2 uitofp nneg i64 %0 to double
BO->getOperand(1) 7.438300e+04 double constant
Src %0 urem i64 %mul, 74383

Result

Did this work? By running the command below we can see the LLVM IR after my patch.

$LLVM_BUILD_DIR/bin/clang -O3 \
  --target=riscv64-unknown-linux-gnu \
  -march=rv64gc_zba_zbb \
  --sysroot=/usr/riscv64-linux-gnu \
  -S -emit-llvm pi.c -o pi_fixed.ll

And this is the relevant LLVM IR.

%mul = mul nuw nsw i64 %ixran.053, 27611
%0 = urem i64 %mul, 74383
%1 = uitofp nneg i64 %0 to float
%conv4 = fdiv float %1, 7.438300e+04

It worked! 🥹

The fptrunc is gone, and the cast operation uitofp now converts it into a float.

Shown below are the results after my patch was merged. We can see that the target can execute the benchmark in 1.67 Bn cycles, about a 25% improvement.

https://cc-perf.igalia.com/db_default/v4/nts/profile/260/426/422

----------------------------------------------------------------

[8] MEMS Array Chip Can Project Video the Size of a Grain of Sand
    HN:  https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=47752466
    URL: https://spectrum.ieee.org/mems-photonics
    Score: 42 | Comments: 15 | By: bookofjoe | Posted: 2026-04-13 14:26 UTC

    By: Velvet Wu

By many estimates, quantum computers will need millions of qubits to realize their potential applications in cybersecurity, drug development, and other industries. The problem is, anyone who has wanted to simultaneously control millions of a certain kind of qubits has run into the problem of trying to control millions of laser beams.

That’s exactly the challenge that was faced by scientists working on the MITRE Quantum Moonshot project, which brought together scientists from MITRE, MIT, the University of Colorado at Boulder, and Sandia National Laboratories. The solution they developed came in the form of an image projection technology that they realized could also be the fix for a host of other challenges in augmented reality, biomedical imaging, and elsewhere. The device is a one-square-millimeter photonic chip capable of projecting the Mona Lisa onto an area smaller than the size of two human egg cells.

“When we started, we certainly never would have anticipated that we would be making a technology that might revolutionize imaging,” says Matt Eichenfield, one of the leaders of the Quantum Moonshot project, a collaborative research effort focused on developing a scalable diamond-based quantum computer, and a professor of quantum engineering at the University of Colorado at Boulder. Each second, their chip is capable of projecting 68.6 million individual spots of light—called scannable pixels to differentiate them from physical pixels. That’s more than fifty times the capability of previous technology, such as micro-electromechanical systems (MEMS) micromirror arrays.

“We have now made a scannable pixel that is at the absolute limit of what diffraction allows,” says Henry Wen, a visiting researcher at MIT and a photonics engineer at QuEra Computing.

The chip’s distinguishing feature is an array of tiny micro-scale cantilevers, which curve away from the plane of the chip in response to voltage and act as miniature “ski-jumps” for light. Light is channeled along the length of each cantilever via a waveguide, and exits at its tip. The cantilevers contain a thin layer of aluminum nitride, a piezoelectric which expands or contracts under voltage, thus moving the micromachine up and down and enabling the array to scan beams of light over a two-dimensional area.

Despite the magnitude of the team’s achievement, Eichenfield says that the process of engineering the cantilevers was “pretty smooth.” Each cantilever is composed of a stack of several submicrometer layers of material and curls approximately 90 degrees out of the plane at rest. To achieve such a high curvature, the team took advantage of differences in the contraction and expansion of individual layers caused by physical stresses in the material resulting from the fabrication process. The materials are first deposited flat onto the chip. Then, a layer in the chip below the cantilever is removed, allowing the material stresses to take effect, releasing the cantilever from the chip and allowing it to curl out. The top layer of each cantilever also features a series of silicon dioxide bars running perpendicular to the waveguide, which keep the cantilever from curling along its width while also improving its length-wise curvature.

A micro-cantilever wiggles and waggles to project light in the right place.Matt Saha, Y. Henry Wen, et al.

What was more of a challenge than engineering the chip itself was figuring out the details of actually making the chip project images and videos. Working out the process of synchronizing and timing the cantilevers’ motion and light beams to generate the right colors at the right time was a substantial effort, according to Andy Greenspon, a researcher at MITRE who also worked on the project. Now, the team has successfully projected a variety of videos from a single cantilever, including clips from the movie A Charlie Brown Christmas.

The chip projected a roughly 125-micrometer image of the Mona Lisa.Matt Saha, Y. Henry Wen, et al.

Because the chip can project so many more spots in any given time interval than any previous beam scanners, it could also be used to control many more qubits in quantum computers. The Quantum Moonshot program’s mission is to build a quantum computer that can be scaled to millions of qubits. So clearly, it needs a scalable way of controlling each one, explains Wen. Instead of using one laser per qubit, the team realized that not every qubit needed to be controlled at every given moment. The chip’s ability to move light beams over a two-dimensional area, would allow them to control all of the qubits with many fewer lasers.

Another process that Wen thinks the chip could improve is scanning objects for 3D printing. Today, that typically involves using a single laser to scan over the entire surface of an object. The new chip, however, could potentially employ thousands of laser beams. “I think now you can take a process that would have taken hours and maybe bring it down to minutes,” says Wen.

Wen is also excited to explore the potential of different cantilever shapes. By changing the orientations of the bars perpendicular to the waveguide, the team has been able to make the cantilevers curl into helixes. Wen says that such unusual shapes could be useful in making a lab-on-a-chip for cell biology or drug development. “A lot of this stuff is imaging, scanning a laser across something, either to image it or to stimulate some response. And so we could have one of these ski jumps curl not just up, but actually curl back around, and then move around and scan over a sample,” Wen explains. “If you can imagine a structure that will be useful for you, we should try it.”

----------------------------------------------------------------

[9] All elementary functions from a single binary operator
    HN:  https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=47746610
    URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.21852
    Score: 730 | Comments: 215 | By: pizza | Posted: 2026-04-13 01:49 UTC

    By: [Submitted on 23 Mar 2026 (v1), last revised 4 Apr 2026 (this version, v2)]

View PDF HTML (experimental)

Abstract:A single two-input gate suffices for all of Boolean logic in digital hardware. No comparable primitive has been known for continuous mathematics: computing elementary functions such as sin, cos, sqrt, and log has always required multiple distinct operations. Here I show that a single binary operator, eml(x,y)=exp(x)-ln(y), together with the constant 1, generates the standard repertoire of a scientific calculator. This includes constants such as e, pi, and i; arithmetic operations including addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, and exponentiation as well as the usual transcendental and algebraic functions. For example, exp(x)=eml(x,1), ln(x)=eml(1,eml(eml(1,x),1)), and likewise for all other operations. That such an operator exists was not anticipated; I found it by systematic exhaustive search and established constructively that it suffices for the concrete scientific-calculator basis. In EML (Exp-Minus-Log) form, every such expression becomes a binary tree of identical nodes, yielding a grammar as simple as S -> 1 | eml(S,S). This uniform structure also enables gradient-based symbolic regression: using EML trees as trainable circuits with standard optimizers (Adam), I demonstrate the feasibility of exact recovery of closed-form elementary functions from numerical data at shallow tree depths up to 4. The same architecture can fit arbitrary data, but when the generating law is elementary, it may recover the exact formula.

Submission history

From: Andrzej Odrzywolek [view email]
[v1] Mon, 23 Mar 2026 11:40:24 UTC (1,393 KB)
[v2] Sat, 4 Apr 2026 06:31:05 UTC (1,245 KB)

----------------------------------------------------------------

[10] Microsoft isn't removing Copilot from Windows 11, it's just renaming it
    HN:  https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=47751936
    URL: https://www.neowin.net/opinions/microsoft-isnt-removing-copilot-from-windows-11-its-just-renaming-it/
    Score: 204 | Comments: 136 | By: bundie | Posted: 2026-04-13 13:48 UTC

    By: Usama Jawad

Opinion When you purchase through links on our site, we may earn an affiliate commission. Here’s how it works.

Microsoft strips Copilot branding from Windows 11 apps, but AI features remain, exposing a gap between user expectations and reality.

Usama Jawad Neowin @UsamaJawad96 · Apr 12, 2026 17:26 EDT · Hot!

At the start of the year, Microsoft generated a lot of goodwill among Windows 11 fans when it announced its big plan to fix the operating system in 2026. It highlighted numerous ways to approach and remediate user concerns such as giving them more control over Windows Update and adding back some highly requested features. Another key point in the company's announcement was pulling back on inserting Copilot everywhere, and being more mindful about how AI features are integrated into the OS. Microsoft began rolling out some changes in this regard a couple of days ago, and unfortunately, people are a little underwhelmed.

Microsoft seems to have stripped away mentions of the "Copilot" brand in the Windows Insider version of the Notepad app. The Copilot button in the toolbar is gone, and instead, you'll find a writing icon which will present you AI-powered writing assistance, such as rewrite, summarize, tone modification, format configuration, and more. Additionally, "AI features" in Notepad settings has been renamed to "Advanced features" and it allows users to toggle off AI capabilities within the app.

As is evident from the changes mentioned above, Microsoft is not doing away with AI capabilities completely in Windows 11. At least, not right now. This has led to complaints from Windows 11 users on public forums (such as our comments section here) who feel like they've been hoodwinked by Microsoft into believing that the firm is getting rid of AI integrations in Windows 11 altogether.

To be fair to Microsoft, if you check out our coverage of this topic, you'll notice that Redmond did not claim that it will eradicate AI from Windows 11. In fact, its wording was more around the idea that it would be more "intentional" about how and where the Copilot branding shows up, while also ensuring that AI capabilities are actually useful. It also emphasized its intention to get rid of unnecessary Copilot entry points in Windows 11 apps. Looking at the latest Insider update for Notepad, it can be argued that Microsoft did exactly all that.

The problem once again seem to lie in the huge gap between what users actually want versus how Microsoft responds to customer feedback. Looking at the vocal backlash around "microslop" online, it would seem rather obvious that customers don't want "AI slop" in their desktop OS. But, of course, Microsoft can't get rid of AI features entirely and get left behind in the latest race involving big tech. So, in the company's eyes, a middle ground would be to erase references to the Copilot brand and continue integrating AI capabilities that it deems useful. And, of course, that isn't good enough for me.

At this point, Microsoft is walking a tightrope. It cannot appease everyone since it also has its shareholders and investors to think about, but then there's also a rather large Windows 11 user base which really is fed up of AI experiences being shoved down its throats. Looking ahead, it seems unlikely that Microsoft will be able to "fix" Windows 11 in this regard in 2026, because it seems like simply rebranding Copilot to something generic just isn't good enough for many.

----------------------------------------------------------------

[11] Initial mainline video capture and camera support for Rockchip RK3588
    HN:  https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=47751621
    URL: https://www.collabora.com/news-and-blog/news-and-events/mainline-video-capture-and-camera-support-for-rockchip-rk3588.html
    Score: 49 | Comments: 11 | By: mfilion | Posted: 2026-04-13 13:23 UTC

    By: Mainline video capture and camera support for Rockchip RK3588

Michael Riesch
April 13, 2026

As many System-on-a-Chips (SoCs) do these days, recent Rockchip SoCs (namely, those of the RK35 generation) integrate dedicated IP blocks for video capture and image signal processing. These additions open the door to a wide range of interesting multimedia applications. However, support for these blocks in mainline Linux remains one of the last missing pieces in an otherwise well-supported SoC lineup. It is time to close that gap!

The mission

Over the last few years, Collabora has invested significant efforts into mainline support for the Rockchip RK3588 SoC. Our RK3588 upstream status matrix and the recent review blog post Running Mainline Linux, U-Boot, and Mesa on Rockchip: A year in review show the success of this mission. It is fair to say that together with the vibrant linux-rockchip community and Rockchip themselves, we were able to provide upstream support for most of the features of the RK3588. On the other hand, there are still a few unsupported hardware blocks that need to be taken care of.

The problem

Video capture blocks and image signal processors (ISPs) notoriously fall into the category of hardware blocks that gain mainline support at a late stage (if at all). The reasons for this are manifold: while the user base is substantial, it's smaller than that of other features, such as video output for instance. The hardware documentation is often not available, at least for ISPs, which seem to be considered special in terms of intellectual property. Then, the underlying hardware is not exactly trivial, making it difficult (if not impossible) for a hobbyist contributor to tackle in their free time. Even for companies, the initial efforts required to bring up that sort of hardware are a time-consuming and hence costly endeavor. As a consequence, users of these powerful hardware blocks tend to resort to a vendor Linux kernel, which can lead to regulatory compliance issues, such as under the Cyber Resilience Act (CRA).

(Towards) the solution

In a quest to overcome this deadlock, Collabora decided to start with the first step: bringing up the RK3588 video capture (VICAP) unit. It was obvious from the very start that this would not be a sprint, but a marathon. The plan was for the rkcif driver to support the RK3588 VICAP, and this driver had been under discussion on the respective mailing lists since 2020!

Collabora joined the mainlining discussion in early 2022 and the patch series went through nine iterations driven by Bootlin. Then, a major rework towards a media-controller centric V4L2 driver was requested. This led to a complete refactoring of the driver and a renewed push towards inclusion in mainline Linux.

After another seven iterations of the resulting patch series and renaming the driver twice, the work was presented at Open Source Summit Europe 2025 in Amsterdam. The talk "Towards Mainline Video Capture and Camera Support for Recent Rockchip SoCs" provided an overview of the software stack for modern multimedia SoCs and covered the contributions that had already landed in mainline and were currently in flight, respectively.

A few iterations of the rkcif driver later, the basic driver providing support for the PX30 VIP and the RK3568 VICAP was accepted (October 2025). After more than five years of development, including 25 iterations and three renamings, this was a major milestone. On the other hand, there was still a lot to do, of course. For instance, the Rockchip MIPI CSI-2 receiver unit that is coupled closely to the VICAP required a mainline driver as well. Again, the hardest part in software development proved to be naming things. After several iterations and three renamings and/or relocations, the driver found its name and place in the mainline Linux kernel (January 2026).

This came to pass right in time for FOSDEM 2026 in Brussels, where Collabora presented "Upstreaming Progress: Video Capture and Camera Support for Recent Rockchip SoCs" Apart from the refined and updated status matrix (see slides 15 and 17), the talk featured a first picture made with a Sony IMX415 sensor attached to the RK3588 VICAP. Of course, in this setup the raw image data from the sensor was debayered in software (which yielded an abysmal frame rate of 1 fps) and there was no image processing such as auto white balance (which explained the greenish image), but at that time it represented a significant stage of this journey.

A few extension patches to the rkcif driver were required to add RK3588 support. Those patches had been in development for some time, and were recently sent out for review.

The next step(s)

Naturally, we all would like to use the RK3588 ISP to process the images from the camera sensor in the dedicated hardware. To that end, we essentially need three things.

The first of the remaining issues is the support for the RK3588 VICAP MUX-TOISP unit, which constitutes a direct hardware connection that passes the data from the VICAP to the ISP(s). Technically, this is not strictly needed. As of now the RK3588 VICAP is able to stream the raw pictures into memory and the ISP can fetch the data from memory. This approach allows for more elaborate use cases, such as processing more than one camera stream per ISP (time-division multiplexing). However, for the simple use case with one camera stream per ISP, this has a couple of disadvantages: Amongst other things, it results in increased memory bandwidth requirements as well as increased latency. Also, it should be noted that the direct hardware connection affects the design of the software architecture for these (otherwise independent) hardware blocks. It is important to take this connection into consideration early on, otherwise it might be very hard to add support for it at a later step. Thus, apart from controlling the interaction with the hardware, this step requires considerations as to how to integrate the kernel drivers into the V4L2 media controller framework. Initial testing has already shown the first signs of life from this unit, though it will take some time until the code is ready to be integrated into mainline Linux.

The second issue is the missing Linux kernel driver for the RK3588 ISP, as the vendor kernel driver is not upstreamable for various reasons. In an effort to aid upstreaming, Rockchip provided a stripped down driver that is available here. This driver only supports memory-to-memory operation and debayering (and no further image processing capabilities), but it is very helpful for hardware bringup. For the inclusion in mainline Linux, however, the plan is for a new rkisp2 driver that is developed from scratch, aiming to support all ISPs of the RK35 generation. To achieve this ambitious milestone, Collabora teamed up with Rockchip and Ideas on Board with this new ISP as a shared goal in mind.

Based on that, the third issue centers on libcamera support for the RK3588 image processing pipeline including suitable image processing algorithms (IPA). The team at Ideas on Board is already active in that direction and has reported initial success with regard to the bring-up of the first image processing blocks. See their blog post for more details.

In the meantime, impatient users can try the libcamera software ISP as a stopgap solution. But for the real deal (full RK3588 ISP kernel driver and libcamera support), stay tuned! And don't miss our RK3588 ISP demo at Embedded Recipes in Nice (May 27-28)!

----------------------------------------------------------------

[12] US appeals court declares 158-year-old home distilling ban unconstitutional
    HN:  https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=47751781
    URL: https://nypost.com/2026/04/11/us-news/us-appeals-court-declares-158-year-old-home-distilling-ban-unconstitutional/
    Score: 232 | Comments: 158 | By: t-3 | Posted: 2026-04-13 13:37 UTC

    By: Reuters

A U.S. appeals court on Friday declared unconstitutional a nearly 158-year-old federal ban on home distilling, calling it an unnecessary and improper means for ​Congress to exercise its power to tax.

The 5th U.S. Circuit Court of ‌Appeals in New Orleans ruled in favor of the nonprofit Hobby Distillers Association and four of its 1,300 members.

They argued that people should be free to distill spirits at home, whether as ​a hobby or for personal consumption including, in one instance, to create ​an apple-pie-vodka recipe.
The 5th U.S. Circuit Court of ‌Appeals in New Orleans on Friday declared unconstitutional a nearly 158-year-old federal ban on home distilling. bongiozzo – stock.adobe.com

The ban was part of a law passed during ⁠Reconstruction in July 1868, in part to thwart liquor tax evasion, and subjected violators ​to up to five years in prison and a $10,000 fine.

Writing for a three-judge panel, ​Circuit Judge Edith Hollan Jones said the ban actually reduced tax revenue by preventing distilling in the first place, unlike laws that regulated the manufacture and labeling of distilled spirits on which ​the government could collect taxes.

She also said that under the government’s logic, Congress could ​criminalize virtually any in-home activity that might escape notice from tax collectors, including remote work and ‌home-based ⁠businesses.

“Without any limiting principle, the government’s theory would violate this court’s obligation to read the Constitution carefully to avoid creating a general federal authority akin to the police power,” Jones wrote.
The court called it an unnecessary and improper means for Congress to exercise its authority to tax, as the ruling favors the nonprofit Hobby Distillers Association and some of its members. Igor – stock.adobe.com

The U.S. Department of Justice had no immediate comment.

Another defendant, the ​Treasury Department’s Alcohol and ​Tobacco Tax and ⁠Trade Bureau, did not immediately respond to a request for comment.

Devin Watkins, a lawyer representing the Hobby Distillers Association, in an ​interview called the ruling an important decision about the limits of ​federal power.

Start your day with all you need to know

Morning Report delivers the latest news, videos, photos and more.

Thanks for signing up!

Andrew ⁠Grossman, who argued the nonprofit’s appeal, called the decision “an important victory for individual liberty” that lets the plaintiffs “pursue their passion to distill fine beverages in their homes.”

“I look forward ⁠to ​sampling their output,” he said.

The decision upheld a July 2024 ​ruling by U.S. District Judge Mark Pittman in Fort Worth, Texas. He put his ruling on hold so ​the government could appeal.

----------------------------------------------------------------

[13] Michigan 'digital age' bills pulled after privacy concerns raised
    HN:  https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=47750821
    URL: https://www.thecentersquare.com/michigan/article_7ca4e268-4a68-42fb-9042-f9d8604ebd7f.html
    Score: 160 | Comments: 81 | By: iamnothere | Posted: 2026-04-13 12:05 UTC

    By: Elyse Apel | The Center Square

(The Center Square) – Two Michigan bills pitched as “child safety legislation” were withdrawn this week after advocacy groups raised concerns about privacy and data collection.

House Bill 4429 and Senate Bill 284 – identical, bipartisan measures titled the Digital Age Assurance Act – were advancing through the state legislature until they were pulled by their sponsors.

That came following outreach from the Michigan Fair Elections Institute and other policy groups.

The bills would have required device manufacturers and operating systems to “estimate” a user’s age at activation and transmit a continuous “digital age signal” to apps and websites the user attempted to access.

Critics said the legislation lacked key privacy protections, including limits on data use, restrictions on combining data with other personal information and requirements for deletion.

“The infrastructure these bills would have created is a persistent, always-on identity layer baked into the operating system of every device in Michigan, with no accompanying privacy protections,” said Patrice Johnson, chair and co-founder of the Michigan Fair Elections Institute. “These bills would not have improved that standing; they would have deepened the gap and reaped long-term negative effects on fair elections.”

The group said it shared its findings with lawmakers April 4, prompting responses from legislators across the aisle.

“Thanks for catching this! That’s why we need you!” Rep. Gina Johnsen, R-Portland, a co-sponsor of the House bill, said in a response shared by MFEI.

The institute raised concerns about liability provisions in the bills, arguing they could allow technology platforms to avoid responsibility for underage users if they relied on age estimates provided by device manufacturers.

The group further questioned the origins of the legislation, saying the bills closely resembled proposals introduced in other states and were likely based on model legislation proposed by the Digital Childhood Alliance, the national organization promoting this legislation across more than 20 states.

“These two bills are legislative siblings—they share the same core architecture and even the same name,” said Eric Rasmussen, a University of Michigan privacy advocate who reviewed the measures who helped lead the effort to pull the bills. “This is not a coincidence.”

Sen. Ruth Johnson, R-Holly, questioned whether the legislation could be revised.

“Have the bill’s sponsors been notified? Can it be amended to make it a good bill?” she said.

Just two days after the effort began, on April 6, the House bill had been withdrawn, followed shortly after by the Senate version.

Bill sponsors Rep. Brad Paquette, R-Niles, and Sen. John Cherry, D-Flint, are now working with advocacy groups on potential replacement legislation, according to the MFEI.

Advocacy groups recommend this type of bill be part of a comprehensive “consumer data privacy framework,” which would include:

• The right to know what data is collected about them,

• The right to have it deleted,

• The right to opt out of its sale, and

• Prohibition of the use of data for purposes beyond for which it was originally collected.

Patrice Johnson said this is a good example of how grassroots organizations can have a real impact on state policies and the legislative process.

“Those who seek to influence policy through concealed funding and model legislation rely on the assumption that no one is paying close enough attention,” she said. “We are grateful to everyone who engaged with our findings—and especially to Rep. Paquette and Sen. Cherry for their openness and their commitment to getting this right for Michigan families.”

The Digital Childhood Alliance did not respond to a request for comment by time of the article's publication.

Elyse Apel, a graduate of Hillsdale College, is a reporter for The Center Square covering Colorado, Minnesota, and Michigan. Her work has appeared in a range of national outlets, including the Washington Examiner, The American Spectator, and The Daily Wire.

----------------------------------------------------------------

[14] We May Be Living Through the Most Consequential Hundred Days in Cyber History
    HN:  https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=47752884
    URL: https://ringmast4r.substack.com/p/we-may-be-living-through-the-most
    Score: 161 | Comments: 82 | By: laurex | Posted: 2026-04-13 14:53 UTC

    By: Patrick Quirk

The first four months of 2026 have produced a sequence of cyber incidents that, if any one of them had landed in 2014 or 2017, would have dominated a news cycle for a week.

A Chinese state supercomputer reportedly bled ten petabytes. Stryker was wiped across 79 countries. Lockheed Martin was hit for a reported 375 terabytes. The FBI Director’s personal inbox was dumped on the open web. The FBI’s wiretap management network was breached in a separate “major incident.” Rockstar Games was breached through a SaaS analytics vendor most people have never heard of. Cisco’s private GitHub was cloned. Oracle’s legacy cloud cracked open. The Axios npm package, downloaded a hundred million times a week, was hijacked by North Korea. Mercor, the $10 billion AI training-data vendor that sits inside the data pipelines of OpenAI, Anthropic, and Meta simultaneously, was breached through the LiteLLM open source library and had 4 terabytes extracted by Lapsus$. Honda was hit twice. The new ShinyHunters/Scattered Spider/LAPSUS$ alliance breached approximately 400 organizations and exfiltrated roughly 1.5 billion Salesforce records.

Stacked on top of each other across roughly a hundred days, these events are something a historian of computing security writing in 2050 will probably file as a turning point, regardless of what else happens between now and then.

And yet, the public conversation around them has been quiet to the point of being strange. This is a curious observation more than a complaint. And the goal of what follows is to gather the events into one place, cite the publications that reported each one, and then ask, gently, why the period feels so undocumented in real time.

Every named incident below is followed by inline parenthetical citations to the publications that broke or covered it, in the same way an academic paper would.

I am not arguing that the cybersecurity community is failing. I am noting that something unusual is happening.

Strip out the noise and the 2026 wave so far breaks cleanly into four separate campaigns running in parallel against U.S. and Western targets. This convergence is the part nobody is naming out loud.

Cluster 1: Iran / Handala / Void Manticore (destructive state operations). Operating under the Handala Hack Team persona, attributed by Palo Alto Networks Unit 42 to Void Manticore, an actor linked to Iran’s Ministry of Intelligence and Security. Handala is claiming attacks against U.S. industrial, defense, and government targets and explicitly framing them as retaliation for a February 28 missile strike on a school in Minab, southern Iran, that killed at least 175 people, most of them children. Confirmed and claimed Q1 2026 victims: Stryker (200,000 devices wiped), Lockheed Martin (375 TB claim, 28 engineer doxxing), FBI Director Kash Patel (personal email dump).

Cluster 2: Scattered LAPSUS$ Hunters / SLH — the apex-predator merger (financially-motivated SaaS theft and extortion at industrial scale). This is the single largest and least-discussed organizational development in the criminal cyber landscape since the Conti collapse. In August 2025, three of the most notorious financially-motivated crews on the planet, ShinyHunters, Scattered Spider, and LAPSUS$, formally combined into a coordinated alliance widely tracked as Scattered LAPSUS$ Hunters (SLH), sometimes called “the Trinity of Chaos” (Resecurity; Cyberbit; Infosecurity Magazine; The Hacker News; Computer Weekly; ReliaQuest). Scattered Spider provides initial access through highly-effective social engineering and vishing. ShinyHunters handles exfiltration, leak-site management, and extortion. LAPSUS$ contributes its own brand of identity-system compromise. The result is an end-to-end criminal pipeline operating against the SaaS layer of the global enterprise.

The numbers from this cluster’s 2025-2026 Salesforce campaign alone are difficult to absorb. ShinyHunters has publicly claimed compromise of approximately 300 to 400 organizations, with around 100 described as high-profile, and approximately 1.5 billion Salesforce records stolen in aggregate (BankInfoSecurity, “ShinyHunters Counts 1.5 Billion Stolen Salesforce Records”; The Register; State of Surveillance, “400 Companies Breached”; Salesforce Ben). Salesforce released a security advisory on March 7, 2026 confirming that a “known threat group” was exploiting misconfigurations in its Experience Cloud product, and ShinyHunters claimed responsibility on its data leak site two days later. The named victim list reads like a roll call of global brand recognition: Google (corporate Salesforce instance, ~2.55M records of small and medium business contact data), Cisco, Adidas, Qantas (5.7M customers), Allianz Life, Farmers Insurance Group, Workday, Pandora, Chanel, TransUnion, the entire LVMH family including Louis Vuitton, Dior, Tiffany & Co., and Cartier, Air France-KLM, LastPass, Okta, AMD, Snowflake itself, Match Group (Hinge, Bumble, OkCupid), SoundCloud (29.8M users), Panera Bread (5.1M accounts), Betterment (1.4M), Harvard, the University of Pennsylvania, Crunchbase, Canada Goose, and the December 2025 Pornhub breach via the Mixpanel campaign that exposed roughly 200 million user records and 94 GB of historical analytics data (BleepingComputer on Qantas, Allianz Life, LVMH; Cybersecurity News on Google, Adidas, Louis Vuitton; Malwarebytes; Google Cloud Threat Intel; Wikipedia ShinyHunters). Q1 2026 alone added Rockstar Games (via Anodot → Snowflake), the Cisco Trivy / Salesforce double hit, and the single most consequential AI-industry-specific incident of the quarter: the Lapsus$-claimed breach of Mercor, the $10B AI recruiting and training-data vendor that sits inside the data pipelines of OpenAI, Anthropic, and Meta simultaneously, after a LiteLLM open source supply chain compromise by the TeamPCP cluster. All catalogued in dedicated sections later in this article.

Tradecraft note: this cluster is no longer just compromising SaaS integrators to lift their OAuth tokens, although that remains part of the playbook (the 2025 Salesloft Drift / UNC6395 incident that compromised over 700 Salesforce environments including Cloudflare, Google, PagerDuty, Palo Alto Networks, Proofpoint, Tanium, Zscaler, and CyberArk is the precedent that proved the OAuth model works at scale, Unit 42 threat brief; UpGuard; Cloudflare response). The 2026 evolution is more direct: SLH operators now call employees on the phone, pretend to be IT support, walk them through “updating MFA settings” or “linking the Salesforce Data Loader app,” and harvest credentials, MFA codes, and OAuth grants in real time (Google Cloud Blog, “The Cost of a Call”; Varonis; The Hacker News). In parallel, ShinyHunters has weaponized Mandiant’s own AuraInspector audit tool to scan and exploit misconfigured Salesforce Experience Cloud guest user permissions across the customer base (Allure Security). Voice phishing has produced more 2026 enterprise breaches than any single technical vulnerability.

Cluster 3: North Korea / UNC1069 (open source supply chain compromise). Google Threat Intelligence Group attributed the March 31, 2026 hijack of the Axios npm package to UNC1069, a North Korea-nexus financially-motivated actor. They did not exploit a vulnerability. They built an entire fake company, a branded fake Slack workspace, a fake Microsoft Teams meeting with fake teammates, social-engineered the lead Axios maintainer into trusting the fake organization, and used that trust to seize his npm account. Then they shipped a cross-platform RAT to a JavaScript library with roughly 100 million weekly downloads. Cisco’s separate March 2026 breach via the Trivy supply chain attack, in which over 300 internal GitHub repositories were cloned, fits the same general pattern of upstream developer-trust compromise.

Cluster 4: Russia / APT28 (zero-day exploitation against Ukraine and EU). Russia-backed APT28 began exploiting a freshly disclosed Microsoft Office vulnerability, CVE-2026-21509, within days of its January patch release. Targets included Ukrainian government bodies and over 60 European email addresses, with malicious Office documents disguised as correspondence from Ukraine’s hydrometeorological center. This is the only cluster of the four that is not primarily aimed at the United States, but it shares the architecture: speed of weaponization measured in days, exploitation of trust relationships, and minimal Western public response.

All four clusters are exploiting the same structural weakness: the modern Western enterprise no longer has a defensible perimeter, only a long chain of vendor and developer trust relationships, any of which can be turned against the host. Iran is using that chain to break things. ShinyHunters is using it to extort money. North Korea is using it to seed implants into the world’s developer machines. Russia is using it to read European inboxes. The chain is the same. Only the payloads differ.

Setting aside any argument about cause and effect, there is a parallel set of numbers from the AI side of the industry over the same period that is worth putting on the table. They may or may not explain the wave above. They are at minimum strange enough to be worth noting alongside it, and the public obscurity around them is itself part of the observation.

In late 2025, Anthropic published a report titled “Disrupting the first reported AI-orchestrated cyber espionage campaign.” In it, the company disclosed that a Chinese state-aligned actor had used Claude to automate a spying operation against approximately 30 organizations, with AI handling an estimated 80 to 90 percent of the campaign workload and human operators intervening only sporadically (Anthropic full report PDF; Anthropic news release). That disclosure came from the model vendor itself, not a third-party threat intel report, which is unusual on its own. What is more unusual is how little subsequent discussion it generated outside specialist circles.

Around it sits a stack of measurement data from Hoxhunt, ZeroThreat, StrongestLayer, Bright Defense, and StationX that points in the same direction across 2025 and into 2026. None of these numbers, on their own, prove a causal link to any specific incident in this article. Taken together they describe a sharp shift in the ambient threat environment that has gone largely unremarked upon in mainstream coverage:

AI-generated phishing emails have surged 1,265 percent since 2023 (StrongestLayer; Hoxhunt; ZeroThreat).

Roughly 82.6 percent of all phishing emails now contain AI-generated content. Polymorphic attacks are over 90 percent LLM-driven (Hoxhunt 2026 Trends Report).

One holiday-season measurement saw the AI-generated share of email attacks jump from 4 percent to 56 percent in weeks, a 14x surge (StationX; Bright Defense).

Vishing (voice phishing) grew 442 percent, smishing (SMS) grew 40 percent, and QR-code phishing grew 400 percent in 2026 (The European).

AI can produce a convincing spear-phishing email in about 5 minutes, versus 16 hours for a skilled human operator. AI-generated emails achieve a 54 percent click-through rate versus 12 percent for control emails (Hoxhunt — AI Phishing Attacks; Whalebone).

The Anomali / European measurement captured one malicious email arriving every 19 seconds (The European).

On the threat-intel side, Microsoft’s tracking now formally describes two North Korean threat actor clusters, Jasper Sleet and Coral Sleet, as using AI across the attack lifecycle from reconnaissance through impersonation through post-compromise (Dark Reading). Genians and The Record have separately documented Kimsuky, the long-running North Korean APT, using ChatGPT to forge convincing South Korean military and government identification documents for phishing lures (Genians; The Record; eSecurityPlanet). In March 2026 the U.S. Treasury’s OFAC sanctioned six individuals and two entities involved in the broader DPRK IT worker fraud scheme, in which large language models are used to generate fake personas, resumes, and even interview answers to land remote engineering jobs at Fortune 500 companies (The Hacker News; TechRadar on OpenAI bans). Whether you read that as a trend or a coincidence, it is on the public record.

There is also the widely reported multi-person Microsoft Teams call in which a financial department employee was manipulated by an AI-generated deepfake of their own CFO, alongside other AI-generated “colleagues,” into wiring more than 25 million U.S. dollars to Hong Kong bank accounts (Microtime). Whatever else that incident tells us, it confirms that the infrastructure to fake a convincing multi-person video call in real time exists and has been used.

From the defender side, Anthropic’s internal red-team evaluation of its withheld Mythos model found that the model could complete a simulated network intrusion in 6.2 hours versus 10.4 hours for GPT-4o, and could identify exploitable flaws in 73 percent of the applications it scanned (NPR; Axios; CNN Business; Fortune). Anthropic has declined to release Mythos publicly, restricting access to approximately 40 technology companies including Microsoft and Google. OpenAI is finalizing a comparable model that will ship only to a small vetted customer set through a “Trusted Access for Cyber” program (Axios). Two leading frontier labs simultaneously holding back cyber-capable models on safety grounds is, again, not necessarily evidence of anything causal. It is, again, worth noting.

And then, on April 7, 2026, the part of this story that should anchor every other paragraph in this section finally happened, in private, at the highest possible level of the United States government, and almost nobody outside the financial press picked it up.

On that date, U.S. Treasury Secretary Scott Bessent and Federal Reserve Chair Jerome Powell convened an urgent, in-person meeting in Washington with the chief executives of Goldman Sachs, Citigroup, Morgan Stanley, Bank of America, and Wells Fargo, to brief them directly on the cyber risks posed by Mythos (Bloomberg, “Bessent, Powell Summon Bank CEOs to Urgent Meeting Over Anthropic’s New AI Model”; Bloomberg, “Mythos: Why Anthropic’s New AI Has Officials Worried”; Fortune; CNBC; CNBC / Reuters; Fox News; Yahoo Finance; TechXplore). The meeting was triggered by Anthropic’s disclosure that Mythos had identified thousands of previously-unknown zero-day vulnerabilities in every major operating system and every major web browser, along with a range of other critical software. Anthropic said the vulnerability-discovery capability was sufficiently dangerous that the model could only be released to a tightly controlled handful of trusted parties. Bessent and Powell, having absorbed that disclosure, decided that the heads of the largest systemically-important U.S. banks needed to be told in person.

Pause and read that paragraph one more time. The Treasury Secretary and the Federal Reserve Chair do not convene the CEOs of the largest U.S. banks about a single software vendor’s product. They convene them about financial stability events. The fact that this meeting happened, on this subject, at this level, is the single most authoritative signal in this entire notebook that something has shifted in the cyber threat landscape at a magnitude the federal government considers comparable in importance to a financial stability concern. Treasury and the Fed are not in the habit of crying wolf about technology vendor product releases. They cried wolf about this one.

This meeting also reframes the silence the article keeps returning to. The silence has not broken in mainstream public discourse. It has clearly broken in private, at the top of the U.S. government, in classified briefings and emergency convenings the public is mostly not seeing. The historian’s question is no longer whether the cyber community is being quiet. The historian’s question is why the public conversation is so thoroughly out of sync with what is clearly being discussed behind closed doors at the level of the Treasury and the Federal Reserve. The gap between those two layers of conversation is, in the long view, the most interesting thing in this entire chronicle.

None of the above proves that any specific incident in this article was AI-driven. The Stryker wipe was executed through Microsoft Intune, not a chatbot. The Patel email leak was a personal Gmail compromise. The Lockheed claims remain unverified. What the AI numbers do establish, with a fair amount of confidence, is that the ambient cost of running a convincing offensive operation has shifted dramatically over the same window in which the wave above unfolded. Two things changed at once. A reasonable observer can decide for themselves whether they are connected, but a reasonable observer should at least know both lists exist, side by side, and that almost nobody in mainstream coverage has put them on the same page.

That obscurity is the part of this section that matters most. It is not the AI numbers. It is the silence around them.

On March 11, 2026, Stryker Corporation, one of the largest medical device companies on the planet, watched its global operations collapse inside an afternoon (Krebs on Security; Cybersecurity Dive; HIPAA Journal; Stryker official statement). Attackers compromised a Windows domain administrator account, used it to provision a new Global Administrator inside the company’s Microsoft Entra and Intune environment, and then issued mass remote-wipe and factory-reset commands across the device fleet (Lumos; The Register; Coalition). More than 200,000 systems, servers, laptops, and mobile devices were wiped within minutes. Offices in 79 countries went dark. Order processing, manufacturing, and shipping all stopped.

The Handala Hack Team claimed responsibility, claimed exfiltration of roughly 50 terabytes of data prior to the wipe, and began publishing it from infrastructure that the FBI later seized. Stryker has since recovered and reported full operational restoration, and employee lawsuits have already been filed. The downstream effect on patients is the part that has not been adequately reported: hospitals that relied on Stryker surgical hardware and the company’s order and support systems had to postpone procedures while the fleet rebuilt, which means the wiper translated directly into cancelled surgeries across multiple countries in the hours and days after the event.

Who Handala actually is matters for reading this incident correctly. “Handala Hack Team” is not an independent crew. The U.S. Department of Justice formally classifies it as “a fictitious identity used by MOIS to hide its role in influence operations and psychological scaremongering campaigns.” The underlying operator is assessed as Void Manticore, also tracked as Banished Kitten, Red Sandstorm, and Storm-842, an offensive unit sitting inside the Iranian Ministry of Intelligence and Security. The persona first surfaced in December 2023, immediately after October 7, and inherited the operational lineage of two earlier MOIS fronts: Homeland Justice, which ran the 2022 to 2023 Albania operations, and Karma, which Handala formally replaced. The unit it belongs to was, until early 2026, headed by Seyed Yahya Hosseini Panjaki, sanctioned by the U.S. Treasury in September 2024, then by the EU and UK, specifically for overseeing Iranian dissident assassination operations, and placed on the FBI terrorism watch list. Panjaki was killed in the opening phase of U.S. and Israeli strikes on Iranian intelligence infrastructure in early March 2026. The Stryker attack landed after his death, under the same persona. The organizational resilience is itself part of the story.

The stated motive published by Handala is retaliation for the February 28, 2026 strike on a school in Minab, southern Iran, with a claimed casualty count of more than 170 children. That framing is the group’s own, and it should be read as psychological operation as much as attribution, but it is the reason the operator put on the record. On March 19, 2026, the FBI seized four Handala domains (including handala-hack.tw, hosted on a Taiwan top-level domain specifically to avoid Western takedown jurisdiction) and the State Department announced a $10 million bounty through its Rewards for Justice program. A replacement site was standing within hours. Handala publicly answered the bounty with a $50 million “counter-bounty” threat framed at Trump and Netanyahu. The infrastructure traces to Cloudzy (PONYNET), a bulletproof hosting provider that Halcyon has assessed with high confidence is a front for abrNOC, an Iranian hosting company founded in the same year by the same individual, with post-seizure failover routed through Russian DDoS provider DDOS-Guard.

Read all of that in one breath. A MOIS-operated persona whose unit head was killed three weeks earlier walked into one of the largest medical device manufacturers in the world, exfiltrated 50 TB, then pushed a destructive button that bricked 200,000 endpoints across 79 countries in minutes, postponed surgeries, stated a retaliation motive, absorbed a $10 million FBI bounty, had four of its domains seized, and was operating a replacement site the same day. The recovery worked, which is a credit to Stryker’s incident response team, but the fact that the recovery worked does not erase what happened, and what happened is the most consequential wartime cyber attack on U.S. soil in the public record. Coverage outside specialist outlets was minimal.

This is actually two distinct incidents aimed at Lockheed Martin inside a few days of each other, and conflating them has caused most of the coverage confusion.

Incident one, the 375 TB claim. An entity self-identifying as APT Iran, which sits inside the broader Handala ecosystem but publishes under its own banner, claimed on or around March 2026 to have exfiltrated 375 terabytes of data from Lockheed Martin and listed the cache for sale on dark web infrastructure (Cybersecurity Dive; UpGuard; Cybersecurity Insiders; Hackread). The initial price was reported at roughly $400 million USD and was later raised toward $598 million. The group claims the trove includes corporate documents and technical blueprints related to the F-35 Joint Strike Fighter program. Lockheed Martin has not publicly confirmed any breach. Trusted security researchers have not verified the sample data. Iranian intelligence-linked actors are independently documented to exaggerate and to fold prior unrelated breaches and open-source material into current claims to amplify psychological reach. The 375 TB F-35 claim, to be direct about it, is widely assessed as overstated. Treat it as claim, not as confirmed event.

Incident two, March 26, 2026, the 28 engineers. This one is the part that should be getting more attention. The Handala persona itself (distinct from the APT Iran data-sale listing) published the names, photographs, employer details, and location information of 28 senior American engineers identified as working in Israel on defense programs that specifically included the F-35, the F-22, and the THAAD missile defense system (NetCrook). The publication was accompanied by threatening phone calls to the engineers themselves and by language stating that Handala’s “friends in the United States” would pay visits to their families. A 48 hour ultimatum was attached. This is doxxing as threat-to-life, executed by a MOIS-operated persona, against named Americans working on three specific weapons programs, and it landed the same week the group was absorbing FBI domain seizures and a $10 million bounty.

Whether or not the 375 TB claim is real, the doxxing of 28 named American defense personnel by an actor with confirmed state ties is not a hypothetical. This is where the silence becomes hard to explain. A MOIS front is publishing kill lists of U.S. defense engineers, tying them to F-35, F-22, and THAAD by name, and the U.S. cybersecurity ecosystem is treating it as a Tuesday.

On March 27, 2026, the same Handala Hack Team published a tranche of more than 300 emails, photographs, and a copy of Patel’s resume, all stolen from the personal Gmail account of FBI Director Kash Patel (CNN; CBS News; NBC News; Axios; PBS NewsHour; Al Jazeera; CNBC). A U.S. official familiar with the matter confirmed the authenticity of at least some of the published images. The FBI subsequently acknowledged the breach, and the State Department reissued the $10 million Rewards for Justice offer that had been announced eight days earlier against Handala.

The federal government’s framing was careful and accurate as far as it goes: the compromised material is historical, dates from roughly 2011 to 2022, came from a personal Gmail account rather than any FBI system, and contains no current operational information. Patel’s official inbox was not breached. The initial access vector is the part that should embarrass the discourse. Handala did not burn a zero-day. They did not spear-phish a cabinet-level official. They used credential stuffing against credentials harvested from older public breach databases, the same technique a teenager with a laptop uses to break into gaming accounts. The sitting Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation had a password reused or reusable across a pre-government breach corpus, and a hostile state ran the same brute-force workflow that every fraud team in the world tracks hourly, and it worked.

The framing is also a deflection. The point of the operation is not to extract operational secrets. The point is to demonstrate that an Iranian intelligence-linked group can read the personal correspondence of the sitting Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation and publish it on the open web with attribution and without consequence. This is an explicit retaliation event. It landed eight days after the FBI seized four Handala domains, in the same month the State Department put a $10 million bounty on the group, and three weeks after the U.S. and Israel killed the unit’s leadership in the Minab window. Handala, for its part, answered the $10 million FBI bounty with a public $50 million counter-bounty aimed at Trump and Netanyahu. The March 25 dump of 14 GB from former Mossad Director Tamir Pardo’s personal Gmail, claiming to expose assassination project details and Stuxnet oversight, was published by the same persona two days before the Patel release as a “proof of concept.” The sequencing is the message, and it has been received internally even if it has not been said publicly.

The Patel personal Gmail story consumed almost all of the public oxygen in March, but it was not the most consequential FBI compromise of the quarter. That distinction belongs to a separate incident that received a fraction of the coverage and arguably represents a bigger problem.

The Federal Bureau of Investigation detected abnormal activity on an internal network on February 17, 2026, opened an inquiry, and on March 23, 2026 the Department of Justice formally classified the intrusion as a “major incident” under the 2014 federal law that requires escalated reporting and remediation (Bloomberg; Insurance Journal; GovInfoSecurity). The affected system is described in the public reporting as the network the Bureau uses to manage wiretaps and other surveillance operations, and it contains sensitive law enforcement data including electronic surveillance content and personally identifying information about subjects of FBI investigations (Bloomberg, “FBI Breach Exposes Secret Investigative Records to Intruders”).

The agencies’ notification to lawmakers described the threat actor’s tradecraft as “sophisticated,” and noted in particular that the attacker leveraged a commercial Internet Service Provider vendor’s infrastructure to bypass the FBI’s network security controls. That detail is the part the Bureau will have stayed up nights about. It means the access path was not a phishing email or a stolen laptop. It was an upstream telecommunications vendor whose infrastructure trust relationship with the FBI was successfully turned. That is the same architectural pattern as the SaaS supply chain pivots described elsewhere in this article, scaled up to the level of nation-state intelligence operations against a federal law enforcement system.

A historian’s question worth pausing on: which of the two FBI incidents in this quarter is the one a careful person would actually want to know more about? The Patel personal Gmail leak, with its photographs from 2011 and personal correspondence from before he held office? Or the breach of the system the Bureau uses to manage federal wiretaps and which holds PII on the subjects of active FBI investigations? The answer is obvious. The relative coverage of the two stories is also obvious, and the gap between those two facts is one of the cleanest examples in this entire notebook of the silence the article keeps returning to.

On March 31, 2026, an attacker hijacked the npm account of the lead maintainer of the Axios JavaScript HTTP client library, one of the most-downloaded packages in the entire JavaScript ecosystem at roughly 100 million weekly downloads, and published two malicious versions: 1.14.1 and 0.30.4 (Huntress; The Hacker News; Bloomberg; TechCrunch; Sophos; Microsoft Security). The malicious versions sat live on the npm registry for about two to three hours before being pulled. Inside that window, every CI pipeline, every developer workstation, and every cloud build that pulled the latest minor or patch range silently installed a hidden dependency that fetched and executed a cross-platform Remote Access Trojan.

On April 1, 2026, the Google Threat Intelligence Group publicly attributed the operation to UNC1069, a North Korea-nexus financially-motivated cluster (Google Cloud Blog; Axios). On April 2, the Axios lead maintainer Jason Saayman published a post-mortem describing what actually happened, and the tradecraft is the part that should be making everyone in the open source ecosystem rethink how trust works on a personal level.

The attacker did not exploit a CVE. The attacker built an organization. They impersonated the founder of a real company using a cloned identity and plausible outreach. They invited the maintainer into a real Slack workspace that had been carefully branded to look legitimate, with channel activity, linked social content, and what appeared to be team profiles and other open source maintainers as fake members. They moved the conversation to a Microsoft Teams meeting populated with what looked like multiple participants. By the time the attacker requested any action that touched the maintainer’s npm account, the social proof was overwhelming.

This is the highest-effort npm supply chain operation publicly disclosed since the 2024 XZ Utils backdoor, and it is qualitatively different. XZ was patient identity laundering across years. The Axios attack was patient identity laundering across weeks, with a fake Slack workspace and a fake Teams meeting standing in for years of GitHub commits. The bar to compromise a heavily-used open source maintainer just dropped from “infiltrate the project for two years” to “build a convincing Slack and host one Teams call.”

If you ran npm install against axios 1.14.1 or 0.30.4 in any environment, rotate every secret in that environment now and downgrade to 1.14.0 or 0.30.3. Microsoft Security, Sophos, Huntress, and Malwarebytes have all published detection guidance.

Cisco took two distinct hits in roughly the same window. The first was a supply chain compromise: in March 2026, attackers used credentials stolen via the Trivy supply chain attack to breach Cisco’s internal development environment and clone more than 300 GitHub repositories (BleepingComputer; SocRadar; TechCrunch). The stolen code reportedly included source for Cisco’s AI-powered products and customer code belonging to banks, business process outsourcing firms, and U.S. government agencies.

The second was financial. On March 31, 2026, the same day the Axios story broke, ShinyHunters published an extortion post claiming theft of over 3 million Salesforce records from Cisco containing personal data, alongside GitHub repository contents, AWS bucket data, and other internal corporate assets (Hackread; Cybernews; SC Media). The deadline for payment was set for April 3, 2026. Cisco has not publicly confirmed the ShinyHunters claim. The Trivy-linked source code theft is on firmer reporting ground.

Two breaches in two weeks, one supply chain and one SaaS, both targeting one of the most security-mature vendors in the industry. If Cisco can be hit twice in a month through these vectors, the question of whether your own organization is hit through them is mostly a question of whether anyone is bothering to look.

Of every incident in this chronicle, Mercor is the one most people outside the AI industry have never heard of, and it is also the one most likely to turn out to matter most. Mercor is a two-year-old AI recruiting and training-data startup valued at approximately $10 billion following a $350 million Series C round led by Felicis Ventures in October 2025. Its customers include OpenAI, Anthropic, and Meta (Fortune; TechCrunch; Cybernews). Which means one 2026 supply chain compromise against Mercor touches the training data pipelines of three of the largest frontier AI labs in the world simultaneously.

The attack chain is the cleanest example in this entire article of how upstream open source trust gets turned into downstream enterprise extortion. A threat actor tracked as TeamPCP compromised LiteLLM, a widely-used open source library that developers use to plug their applications into AI services and which is downloaded millions of times per day, and planted credential-harvesting malware inside it (The Register; SecurityWeek; BankInfoSecurity). The malicious code was live for hours before being identified and removed. Mercor has said it was “one of thousands of companies affected” by the LiteLLM compromise. What makes Mercor the headline victim is not that it was uniquely vulnerable. It is that the harvested credentials led into an environment holding the AI industry’s single most sensitive shared asset: training data, labeling protocols, and data selection criteria that the three largest frontier labs have each spent years and billions of dollars developing.

Lapsus$ subsequently claimed responsibility for the downstream Mercor breach on its leak site and published samples (TechCrunch; PureWL; Cybernews). The claimed haul is approximately 4 terabytes of data, broken down as roughly 211 GB of database records, 939 GB of source code, and 3 TB of storage including candidate profiles, personally identifiable information, employer data, API keys, internal Slack dumps, ticketing system exports, and, most disturbingly, videos purportedly showing conversations between Mercor’s AI systems and the contractors those systems were training. That last category is the part that should be getting more attention. It is not just data about training data. It is footage of the training process itself.

Note the cluster convergence here. Lapsus$ is one of the three legs of the Scattered LAPSUS$ Hunters (SLH) alliance described earlier in this article. The Mercor breach, the Rockstar Games breach via Anodot, the Cisco Salesforce extortion on March 31, and the broader ~400-organization Salesforce mega-campaign are all, in varying combinations, operations by the same new apex-predator criminal alliance. The pattern is no longer that a handful of unrelated groups happened to have a big quarter. It is that one newly-merged criminal collective is running an industrial-scale SaaS-and-supply-chain extortion campaign across every sector of the global enterprise, and Mercor is the AI-industry-specific node of that campaign.

Business impact to date. Meta has paused its contracts with Mercor indefinitely. Five Mercor contractors have filed lawsuits alleging personal data exposure. Other large customers are reportedly reassessing the relationship (TechCrunch; Strike Graph). For a two-year-old company at a $10 billion valuation whose entire business model is being the trusted data middleware between contractors and frontier AI labs, losing the trust of one of those labs is an existential event. Losing the trust of all three would be the end.

The structural observation worth pausing on. The global frontier AI industry, in 2026, is effectively running on a shared data pipeline provided by a small number of vendors most of the public has never heard of. Mercor is one of those vendors. Its compromise demonstrates that the AI labs are not in fact the perimeter that matters. The perimeter that matters is the identity and integrity of every upstream dependency in the data pipeline, and most of those dependencies are either two-year-old startups or open source libraries maintained by a handful of developers. This is the same structural problem the rest of this article keeps circling: the modern enterprise no longer has a defensible boundary, only a chain of trust relationships, any of which can be turned. The AI industry inherited that same architecture and is learning the same lesson in real time.

On March 21, 2026, a threat actor using the handle “rose87168” began offering for sale 6 million records extracted from Oracle Cloud, with claims that more than 140,000 Oracle Cloud tenants were potentially affected (eSecurityPlanet; Cybersecurity Dive; FINRA). The breach was tied to CVE-2021-35587, a vulnerability in Oracle Access Manager and the OpenSSO Agent component of Oracle Fusion Middleware, used to compromise Oracle’s Single Sign-On and LDAP systems.

Oracle’s initial public response denied that its main cloud platform had been breached. Oracle subsequently acknowledged that an unauthorized party had accessed its legacy cloud environment, characterizing the affected systems as “obsolete servers” (CSO Online). The HIPAA Journal later reported that up to 80 hospitals were potentially affected by data exposure tied to the same incident, and Parexel International confirmed that a security flaw in Oracle’s cloud infrastructure had affected its Oracle OCI E-Business Suite environment (HIPAA Journal).

The pattern here is the one we used to call “shadow legacy” and have apparently stopped warning about. Hyperscale cloud providers carry quiet inheritances of older platforms that customers were moved off of years ago, but whose operational shells were never actually decommissioned, and the line between “main cloud” and “legacy cloud” is meaningful in marketing copy and meaningless to an attacker who finds a working credential.

On the financially-motivated side of the wave, ShinyHunters claimed in early April 2026 to have breached Rockstar Games. Rockstar publicly confirmed a “third-party data breach” and characterized the accessed information as “limited” and “non-material” (Engadget; Tom’s Hardware). ShinyHunters tells a different story.

ShinyHunters did not directly compromise Rockstar’s internal infrastructure. They compromised Anodot, a third-party SaaS platform Rockstar uses for cloud cost monitoring, lifted authentication tokens from inside Anodot’s environment, and used those tokens to authenticate into Rockstar’s Snowflake instance (Hackread; BleepingComputer; TechRadar; Kotaku; PC Gamer). The ransom note posted to ShinyHunters’ leak channel reads in part: “Rockstar Games, your Snowflake instances were compromised thanks to Anodot.com. Pay or leak. Final warning to reach out by 14 Apr 2026.”

The deadline is two days from the date of this article. Whatever ends up published, the structure of the attack is the part worth remembering: a small SaaS analytics vendor most people have never heard of became the access path into one of the most valuable creative IP environments on the planet, weeks before the most anticipated game launch in industry history.

This is the same playbook that produced the 2024 Snowflake wave. It is not new. It has just been refined and aimed at higher-value targets, and it is going to keep working until the SaaS-to-data-warehouse trust chain gets re-architected end to end.

On April 6, 2026, a cyberattack on aviation IT systems used by major European hubs took down check-in, baggage handling, and boarding at Heathrow, Charles-de-Gaulle, Frankfurt, and Copenhagen simultaneously (The Traveler; National Today; VisaHQ; BlackFog on Collins Aerospace). More than 1,600 flights across the continent were cancelled or delayed on April 6 alone, with at least 13 cancellations at Heathrow by the afternoon of April 4 as the disruption ramped up. Staff reverted to manual check-in and paper boarding passes, a procedure most ground crews under thirty have never been trained on.

The vector reportedly traces back to Collins Aerospace’s MUSE (Multi User System Environment) platform, the shared check-in and boarding software used across many European airline operations, which had already absorbed a separate ransomware attack in September 2025 that knocked Collins offline and produced widespread Air France and KLM customer data exposure. The 2026 incident is, in effect, the second time in roughly six months that the same upstream aviation software supplier has produced a continent-scale outage.

The wider context, from the European Union Aviation Safety Agency: EASA documented a 600 percent spike in aviation cyberattacks between 2024 and 2025, with airports worldwide absorbing roughly 1,000 cyberattacks per month by the end of that period. The April 2026 event is not an outlier in that environment. It is the largest visible surface of a much wider, much quieter trend in which the entire global aviation IT stack is starting to look load-bearing on a small number of single-vendor dependencies that no individual airport security team can defend in isolation.

I am putting this section in the middle of the article rather than at the top because the sourcing is uneven and the verification status is unsettled, but in the long view this is the incident a historian will most likely circle and underline.

Around early February 2026, a hacker operating under the alias FlamingChina began posting samples on Telegram of what they claimed was a multi-petabyte data set exfiltrated from the National Supercomputing Center (NSCC) in Tianjin, one of the central Chinese state computing facilities, which provides infrastructure services to more than 6,000 clients including advanced science institutions and Chinese defense agencies. By April 8, 2026, mainstream Western press had picked up the story and reported the same basic claim from the actor: approximately 10 petabytes of sensitive data, equivalent to roughly 10,240 terabytes, extracted over a six-month period through a compromised VPN domain into NSCC’s environment, with a botnet quietly siphoning data out without detection (CNN; Tom’s Hardware; TechRadar; SC Media; Security Magazine; BGR; Tech Startups; Vision Times; Computing.co.uk; Security Affairs).

The samples that have been circulated reportedly include documents marked “secret” in Chinese, along with technical files, animated simulations, and renderings of defense equipment including bombs and missiles. The named provenance of some of the material includes the Aviation Industry Corporation of China and the National University of Defense Technology. CNN spoke with multiple cybersecurity experts who reviewed the samples and assessed them as appearing genuine, while noting that independent verification of the full dataset has not been possible. Some researchers have suggested the 10 petabyte figure may be inflated for commercial leverage on BreachForums, and the actor is reportedly offering a limited preview for thousands of dollars and full access for hundreds of thousands, payable in cryptocurrency.

Take a moment with the scale. Ten petabytes is, in rough terms, equivalent to two billion photographs, or the entire textual content of the public web several times over. It is the contents of roughly ten thousand decent laptops. Even if the actual exfiltration turns out to be one tenth of the claim, the resulting one petabyte event is still in a category by itself, larger than essentially any single named breach in the public history of cybersecurity. And the target is not a marketing database. It is a state supercomputing facility hosting work for Chinese defense academia and aviation industry programs.

A few things make this incident historically interesting beyond the size. First, it is one of the very rare cases of a major Chinese state computing facility being publicly breached and looted from outside. The historical asymmetry of major reported breaches has run heavily in the other direction, with Chinese state actors as the named operators against Western targets. If the FlamingChina claims hold up even partially, the symmetry has shifted. Second, the access vector reported, a compromised VPN domain followed by a long-dwell botnet quietly exfiltrating over six months without detection, is the same pattern Western incident response teams describe in their worst nation-state engagements. The defenders’ problems and the attackers’ problems are starting to look like the same problem. Third, and most quietly, the U.S. mainstream press picked the story up for a single news cycle in early April and then mostly let it go. A potential record-breaking exfiltration event from a Chinese state supercomputer is the sort of thing that, in any prior decade, would have produced sustained reporting for weeks. In 2026 it produced a few articles, a flurry of trade press coverage, and then quiet.

The Chinese government has not publicly acknowledged the incident. The samples remain in circulation. The claim remains unverified at full scope. The historical importance remains, in the meantime, suspended in exactly the kind of partial information state where most genuinely unprecedented events live for a while before they finally get named.

It would be a mistake to read the 2026 wave as a bolt from the blue. It is more useful to read it as the visible surface of a longer pre-positioning campaign that has been quietly running underneath the public-facing incidents for years. Two Chinese state-aligned actor clusters, Volt Typhoon and Salt Typhoon, are the relevant background.

Volt Typhoon, attributed to the People’s Republic of China and active since at least mid-2021, has been documented inside U.S. critical infrastructure across communications, manufacturing, utility, transportation, construction, maritime, government, IT, and education sectors (CISA AA24-038A; Microsoft Security). The U.S. Intelligence Community has assessed publicly that Volt Typhoon’s targeting carries limited espionage value and is instead consistent with prepositioning to disrupt U.S. infrastructure in the event of a future crisis, particularly in Guam and near U.S. military bases in the Pacific. The International Institute for Strategic Studies published “Volt Typhoon’s long shadow” in January 2026, noting that researchers warn the group remains embedded in U.S. utilities and that some compromises may never be fully discovered (IISS; The Record).

Salt Typhoon is the parallel telecom-focused cluster, attributed to China’s Ministry of State Security, responsible for the high-profile compromises of multiple major U.S. telecommunications carriers that surfaced in late 2024 and continued through 2025, including reported access to lawful intercept systems used by U.S. law enforcement (Congress.gov; Wikipedia overview). Both groups are still active in 2026.

The reason these two names belong in this article, even though their public disclosures predate the 2026 incidents catalogued above, is that they describe the baseline inside which the 2026 wave is happening. The named 2026 incidents are not the entire picture. They are the visible surface. Underneath them, in U.S. utilities and telecommunications infrastructure, there are pre-positioned implants that the relevant federal agencies have publicly stated may never be fully evicted. The historian sitting in 2050 reading this period is going to want to know that the surface events of the first hundred days of 2026 occurred against a background in which the deeper infrastructure had already been quietly compromised for years. That is the kind of context that gets lost when each incident is reported as if it were the first.

Honda’s 2026 has been a slow drip rather than a single event. The reporting describes a sequence of distinct incidents: API flaws in Honda’s e-commerce platform that exposed customer data, dealer panel data, and internal documents (BleepingComputer; SecurityWeek); a password reset flow exploit that exposed additional data (Cybersecurity Tribe); and a Clawson Honda dealership data breach claimed by the PLAY ransomware group that exposed names, Social Security numbers, addresses, driver’s license data, and dates of birth, with notification letters going out as recently as April (Claim Depot).

None of these are individually catastrophic. Stacked together they tell a familiar story about a manufacturing giant whose attack surface has outgrown its security maturity, and they belong in the wave count.

The named incidents above are just the ones that broke through. The full first-quarter 2026 list is much longer. Brief Defense, PKWARE, Cybersecurity News, ACI Learning, and CSIS are all maintaining 2026 incident timelines, and the pattern is consistent.

January 2026: Illinois and Minnesota state systems exposed personal data on nearly one million people; the Match family of dating apps was breached by ShinyHunters; Eurail confirmed unauthorized access; researchers found a 149-million-record database publicly exposed via cloud misconfiguration; Microsoft January Patch Tuesday shipped 115 fixes including the Office bug APT28 began exploiting within days; Nike investigated a possible cyber attack after WorldLeaks claimed 1.4 TB of internal company data on January 24; Red Hat suffered a private GitHub and GitLab compromise by the Crimson Collective, with roughly 570 GB exfiltrated from over 28,000 internal repositories including approximately 800 Customer Engagement Reports containing infrastructure details and credentials for large enterprise clients; Pickett USA breach exposed sensitive engineering data linked to U.S. utilities; ShinyHunters / SLH vishing campaigns targeting enterprise SSO environments including Okta surged in early-to-mid January.

February 2026: BridgePay, a payments platform serving city governments, was hit by ransomware; Odido disclosed unauthorized access affecting up to 6.2 million customers; Change Healthcare, a UnitedHealth subsidiary, was hit again, this time by AlphV/BlackCat; Cisco disclosed that a critical Catalyst SD-WAN vulnerability (CVE-2026-20127, CVSS 10.0) had been actively exploited since 2023; APT28 was observed weaponizing CVE-2026-21509 against Ukrainian and EU government targets; the FBI detected abnormal activity (Feb 17) on the internal network it uses to manage wiretaps and surveillance, eventually classified as a “major incident” on March 23; the 2026 Winter Olympics opened in Milan and Cortina d’Ampezzo and pro-Russian DDoS group NoName057(16) began hitting Italian Olympic infrastructure, several national Olympic committees (Lithuania, Poland, Spain), the Cortina d’Ampezzo tourism site, and Milan Malpensa Airport; University of Mississippi Medical Center closed clinics following a ransomware attack and reverted to manual patient care; France’s National Bank Account Registry (FICOBA) was hit through credential weakness exploitation; Iron Mountain, Panera Bread, SmarterTools, Step Finance, and Advantest Corporation all absorbed publicly disclosed incidents.

March 2026: Stryker wiper event (March 11); Microsoft published the “Help on the line” report on a Teams-vishing initial access pattern (March 16); Oracle Cloud “rose87168” listing (March 21); Lockheed Martin / 28-engineer doxxing claims (March 23); European Commission Europa cloud platform breached (March 24); Kash Patel personal email dump (March 27); Cisco Trivy supply chain breach surfaces; TeamPCP compromises the LiteLLM open source library in a supply chain attack that propagates to “thousands of companies” including Mercor, the $10B AI training-data vendor whose customers include OpenAI, Anthropic, and Meta; Axios npm hijack (March 31); ShinyHunters Cisco Salesforce extortion post (March 31); Mercor discloses the security incident publicly on March 31 / April 1; FlamingChina samples from the Tianjin NSCC breach circulate widely on Telegram and BreachForums following early-February initial postings.

April 2026 so far: Google Threat Intelligence Group attributes Axios npm compromise to UNC1069 / North Korea (April 1); Axios maintainer post-mortem published (April 2); Fortune confirms the Mercor breach publicly (April 2), with Lapsus$ claiming 4 TB of exfiltrated data including ~211 GB database records, ~939 GB source code, and ~3 TB storage covering candidate PII, employer data, API keys, Slack dumps, and videos of Mercor AI systems talking to contractors; Meta pauses all AI data training contracts with Mercor indefinitely, five Mercor contractors file lawsuits over personal data exposure; DOJ confirms the FBI internal “major incident” classification publicly (early April); a continent-wide aviation IT attack on April 6 cripples check-in, baggage, and boarding at Heathrow, Charles-de-Gaulle, Frankfurt, and Copenhagen, cancelling or delaying more than 1,600 flights in a single day, traced to the Collins Aerospace MUSE platform that had already been hit in September 2025; on April 7, U.S. Treasury Secretary Scott Bessent and Federal Reserve Chair Jerome Powell convene an emergency in-person meeting in Washington with the CEOs of Goldman Sachs, Citigroup, Morgan Stanley, Bank of America, and Wells Fargo to brief them on the cyber risks posed by Anthropic’s Mythos AI model, which has identified thousands of previously-unknown zero-day vulnerabilities in every major operating system and web browser; Rockstar Games confirms third-party breach via Anodot/Snowflake (early April); Snowflake itself confirms “unusual activity” affecting more than a dozen customer accounts linked to the Anodot integration; ShinyHunters sets April 14 ransom deadline and tells reporters they had Anodot access “for some time” and had also tried (and failed) to breach Salesforce directly; FlamingChina supercomputer claims surface in mainstream Western press (CNN, Tom’s Hardware, TechRadar, BGR, around April 8-10); National Public Data successor breach surfaces with roughly 2.9 billion records of personal information sold for 3.5 million dollars on the dark web; Yale New Haven Health System discloses breach affecting 5.5 million patients; HIPAA Journal links up to 80 hospitals to the Oracle Cloud incident; March 2026 ransomware activity totals 672 incidents in a single month, with Qilin, Akira, and DragonForce alone accounting for roughly 40 percent.

By the time you finish counting the named incidents above, you are well past forty, and the count does not include the 300 to 400 organizations swept up in the SLH Salesforce mega-campaign or the roughly 1.5 billion Salesforce records estimated stolen across that single operation. Nor does it include the 672 ransomware incidents that ransomware tracking firms recorded in March 2026 alone, with Qilin, Akira, and DragonForce accounting for about 40 percent of that single-month total. Nor does it include the dozens of smaller school district, municipal, and healthcare ransomware events that have become so routine they no longer make national news. The 2025 baseline already showed publicly disclosed ransomware attacks rising 49% year-over-year to 1,174 incidents, with healthcare absorbing 22% of the total. The 2026 first-quarter pace, on the trajectory above, is comfortably on track to make 2025 look quiet.

This is the part of the notebook where the historian’s voice has to be honest about what it does not fully understand. The events above are real. The volume is real. The pattern is real. The relative quietness around them in mainstream Western public discourse is also real, and it is genuinely puzzling rather than obviously sinister. Several plausible explanations sit on the table at once, and the honest move is to lay them out without insisting on any of them.

One possibility is that attribution to a state actor has become professionally expensive. Calling a Handala wiper event an Iranian intelligence-linked destructive operation against a U.S. medical device company, or calling the FlamingChina supercomputer leak what it might be, takes on political weight that practitioners and vendors increasingly prefer to avoid. Analysis gets softened to “threat actor” or “sophisticated adversary,” and the geopolitical reading gets edited out without anyone deciding to edit it out. That softening is not a conspiracy. It is the cumulative effect of many small commercial choices that each individually seem reasonable.

A second possibility is that the SaaS supply chain story is uncomfortable for the security industry to dwell on, because the industry sells into it. Saying out loud that the modern enterprise no longer has a defensible perimeter, only a long chain of vendor trust relationships that can be turned at any link, is also saying that the security stack the industry shipped last quarter cannot stop the attacks the industry is supposed to be talking about this quarter. That is a hard public message to deliver from inside a vendor.

A third possibility is much simpler and possibly the most powerful. The news cycle has trained the public to bounce off cyber stories. The audience has already absorbed Equifax, OPM, Yahoo, SolarWinds, NPD, and Snowflake, and the marginal shock of “another one” has flattened. When the marginal shock is flat, even genuinely unprecedented events struggle to land. Practitioners know this, so they save their breath. The silence may be less an act of suppression than an act of fatigue.

A fourth possibility is the one this notebook keeps circling back to. The parallel acceleration on the AI side of the industry is awkward to discuss in the same paragraph as the offensive incidents, because every cybersecurity vendor is currently racing to ship “AI-powered” defense. It is commercially uncomfortable to put the two lists on the same page, even if no one in particular is forbidding it. The absence of that pairing is, at minimum, a strange thing to notice in the historical record.

A historian writing in 2050 about the first hundred days of 2026 will probably find all four of these explanations partially true and none of them fully sufficient. What that historian will almost certainly notice, more than any single explanation, is the gap itself, and more specifically the layered nature of the gap. The April 7 meeting between the Treasury Secretary, the Fed Chair, and the CEOs of the largest U.S. banks proves something crucial about that layering. The silence has not fully held at the highest levels of the U.S. government. Bessent and Powell are clearly not in the dark, and neither are the people they briefed. What has held is the silence in the public discourse, in the mainstream press, in the day-to-day conversations practitioners have with their boards and their customers. The information is moving in private. It is just barely moving in public. A period that, on the evidence, looks unprecedented in the history of computing security passed through real-time public discourse without producing the kind of sustained, coherent, named conversation the events seem to deserve, and yet behind closed doors at the highest levels of financial regulation, the conversation is clearly happening. That asymmetry is the most interesting object in this entire notebook.

If you work in this field and the last hundred days have felt strange to you, you are not imagining it. Something genuinely unusual is happening, and the unusualness of how quietly it is happening may, in the long view, be the most historically interesting layer of all. Naming the gap, even gently, is a small contribution to making sure the period eventually gets the documentation it deserves.

----------------------------------------------------------------

[15] The economics of software teams: Why most engineering orgs are flying blind
    HN:  https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=47748064
    URL: https://www.viktorcessan.com/the-economics-of-software-teams/
    Score: 358 | Comments: 214 | By: kiyanwang | Posted: 2026-04-13 05:45 UTC

    By: Viktor Cessan

← Back to Blog

This post works through the financial logic of software teams, from what a team of eight engineers actually costs per month to what it needs to generate to be economically viable. It also examines why most teams have no visibility into either number, how that condition was built over two decades, and what the arrival of LLMs now means for organizations that have been treating large engineering headcount as an asset.

Software development is one of the most capital-intensive activities a modern company undertakes, and it is also one of the least understood from a financial perspective. The people making daily decisions about what to build, what to delay, and what to abandon are rarely given the financial context to understand what those decisions actually cost. This is not a coincidence. It is a structural condition that most organizations have maintained, quietly and consistently, for roughly two decades.

What a Team Actually Costs

A software engineer in Western Europe costs somewhere between €120,000 and €150,000 per year when you account for salary, social fees, pension contributions, equipment, social activities, management overhead, and office space. Call it €130,000 as a reasonable middle estimate. A team of eight engineers therefore costs approximately €1,040,000 per year, or €87,000 per month, or roughly €4,000 for every working day.

Team size (engineers)

8

Cost per engineer per year (€)

€130,000

Annual cost

€1,040,000

Monthly cost

€86,667

Daily cost

€4,000

Most engineers do not know this number. Many of their managers do not either. And in the organizations where someone does know it, the number rarely makes its way into the conversations where prioritization decisions are actually made.

This matters because every decision a team makes carries an implicit cost that compounds over time. Choosing to spend three weeks on a feature that serves 2% of users is a €60,000 decision. Delaying an operational improvement for a quarter is a decision with a calculable daily price tag. Rebuilding a platform because the current one feels embarrassing, rather than because customers are leaving, is a capital allocation choice that would look very different if the people making it were spending their own money.

The Internal Platform Team: What Break-Even Actually Requires

Consider a team of eight engineers whose mission is to build and maintain an internal developer platform serving one hundred other engineers. This is a common organizational structure, and it is one where the financial logic is rarely examined carefully.

The team costs €87,000 per month. To justify that cost, the platform they build needs to generate at least €87,000 per month in value for the engineers who use it. The most direct way to measure that value is through time saved, since the platform’s purpose is to make other engineers more productive.

At a cost of €130,000 per year, one engineer costs approximately €10,800 per month, or around €65 per working hour. For the platform team to break even, their platform needs to save the hundred engineers they serve a combined total of 1,340 hours per month. That is 13.4 hours per engineer per month, or roughly three hours per week per person.

Three hours per week is achievable. A well-built platform that eliminates manual deployment steps, reduces environment setup time, or removes the need for repetitive configuration work can easily clear that bar. Time saved is the most direct measure for a platform team, though value can also come from reducing outages, which carries a direct revenue impact of its own. But the question worth asking is whether anyone on that team knows this number, tracks it, or uses it to decide what to build next. In most organizations, the answer is no. The team has a roadmap driven by engineering preferences, stakeholder requests, and quarterly planning cycles, and the financial logic underlying their existence is left unexamined.

And break-even is not actually the right bar. Leah Tharin has written a sharp breakdown of the mathematics of this: a team with a 50% initiative success rate, which is already optimistic, needs its wins to cover its losses too. Leah’s calculation is growth-oriented, but even for non-growth organizations, the same investment thesis holds. Even a two-times return is not sufficient. Capital sitting in a bank carries no operational risk, no coordination costs, and no ongoing maintenance obligations. The systems a team builds will outlive the team itself, and the cost of owning, maintaining, and eventually replacing those systems is almost always larger than anticipated. The return has to cover not just the team’s current cost, but the long tail of what they leave behind.

That pushes the realistic threshold for financial viability to somewhere between three and five times annual cost. For an €87,000 per month team, that means generating between €260,000 and €435,000 in monthly value. The three hours per week calculation gets you to break-even. To clear the realistic financial bar, the platform needs to be genuinely transformative for the engineers using it, and the team needs to be ruthless about working on the highest-value problems rather than the most interesting ones.

Team size (engineers)

8

Cost per engineer per year (€)

€130,000

Monthly cost

€86,667

Minimum viable (3x) per month

€260,000

Financially healthy (5x) per month

€433,333

The 3–5x threshold accounts for a typical 50–70% initiative failure rate. Successful work must cover both wins and losses. Break-even is not the right bar.

The Customer-Facing Team: Multiple Levers, Same Math

A customer-facing product team of eight carries the same €87,000 monthly cost. The levers available to justify that cost are different, but the underlying logic is identical.

If the product has an average revenue per user of €50 per month, the team needs to generate or protect the equivalent of 1,740 users worth of value every month just to break even, and roughly 5,000 to 8,700 users worth of value to clear the three-to-five times threshold.

Churn is often the most direct lever. Consider a product with 50,000 active users losing 2% monthly to churn. That is 1,000 users per month, representing €50,000 in monthly recurring revenue walking out the door. A team that identifies the primary driver of that churn and eliminates it is generating nearly €50,000 per month in protected revenue, covering most of its break-even cost from a single initiative. But that calculation requires knowing the churn rate, understanding its causes, and connecting those causes to the team’s work, and most teams are not operating with that level of financial clarity.

Activation is another lever that is frequently underestimated. If 10,000 users sign up each month but only 30% complete the activation steps that lead to long-term retention, there are 7,000 users each month who paid acquisition costs but never converted to retained revenue. Improving the activation rate by five percentage points, from 30% to 35%, converts an additional 500 users per month. At €50 average revenue per user, that is €25,000 in additional monthly recurring revenue, representing roughly 29% of the team’s break-even threshold from one metric moving in the right direction.

Sales conversion follows the same logic. If the product has a free-to-paid conversion funnel processing 20,000 trials per month at a 4% conversion rate, that produces 800 paying customers monthly. Moving conversion from 4% to 4.5% produces 900 customers, an additional 100 paying users, and €5,000 in additional monthly revenue. Small improvements across multiple levers compound quickly, but only if the team understands which levers connect to which financial outcomes and by how much.

Team size (engineers)

8

Assumes €130,000 cost per engineer per year, including salary, social fees, pension, equipment, and management overhead.

Monthly team cost

—

12-month total cost

—

12-month total value

—

Cumulative gap

—

Monthly cost Cumulative cost Expected value Actual monthly value Cumulative value

Each scenario randomizes peak value, ramp-up speed, and decay rate — the variables most teams never measure. The faint dashed line is what you planned. The bars are what happened. Reshuffle to see how rarely the picture looks comfortable.

The Metrics We Chose Instead

Given that software teams are expensive and that their value is, at least in principle, calculable, it is worth examining why most teams do not measure anything financially meaningful. Some measure activity proxies such as velocity, tickets closed, or features shipped. Others measure sentiment proxies such as NPS, CSAT, or engagement scores. These are not degraded versions of financial measurement. They are a different category entirely, one that was designed around the goal of understanding user behavior and team throughput rather than around the goal of understanding economic return.

The problem is that activity and sentiment metrics can trend upward while financial performance deteriorates. A team can ship more features while building the wrong things. Engagement scores can rise while churn accelerates among the users who actually generate revenue. Velocity can increase while the work being completed has no measurable connection to business outcomes. These metrics feel meaningful because they correlate with outcomes in many circumstances, but correlation is not a reliable guide to prioritization when the underlying financial logic is never examined.

This is a structural condition rather than a failure of individual judgment. Organizations chose these metrics because they are easier to instrument, easier to communicate, and easier to look good on than financial metrics. A team that measures its success by features shipped will always have something to show. A team that measures its success by return generated will sometimes have to report that it does not know, or that the return was disappointing, and that kind of transparency requires an organizational culture that most companies have not deliberately built.

The matrix above is drawn from a product management training program I run called Booster, where product leaders map their actual metrics against their investment thesis to surface gaps. The exercise is uncomfortable precisely because most leaders discover mid-mapping that their team’s daily measurements have no direct connection to the financial objective they were given.

How We Got Here

Understanding why this condition exists requires looking at roughly two decades of macroeconomic context, because the financial dysfunction in modern software organizations did not emerge from bad intentions or intellectual failure. It emerged from a specific environment that made financial discipline in product teams economically unnecessary.

The picture is not a single clean era but two distinct phases. From roughly 2002 through 2011, capital was periodically cheap but conditions were mixed. Rates fell sharply after the dot-com crash and again after the global financial crisis, but in both cases risk appetite was suppressed. The money was technically inexpensive but investors were cautious, multiples were reasonable, and the growth-at-all-costs logic had not yet taken hold. Product organizations during this period still operated with some residual financial discipline inherited from the dot-com reckoning.

From approximately 2011 through 2022, something different happened. Zero-rate policy became fully normalized, risk appetite recovered and then overcorrected, and the SaaS mental model crystallized into a broadly shared investment thesis. All three conditions arrived simultaneously, and the result was about eleven years during which software companies could grow headcount aggressively, miss on the majority of their roadmap, and still look healthy on paper. Revenue growth forgave an enormous range of prioritization mistakes, and the cost of building the wrong thing was largely invisible.

Eleven years is not a long time, but it is long enough to form the professional instincts of an entire generation of product and engineering leaders. The frameworks they learned, the metrics they adopted, the planning rituals they practice, and the definitions of success they internalized were all formed during a window that was unusually short and unusually distorted. There is no cohort of senior product leaders who developed their judgment in conditions where their teams were expected to demonstrate financial return, because those conditions did not exist during the years when that cohort was learning the craft.

When capital became expensive again in 2022, the behavior did not automatically adjust, because the behavior was never connected to the financial logic in the first place.

The Liability Hiding as an Asset

There is a deeper consequence of this twenty-year period that is now becoming painfully visible, and it concerns how the industry has thought about large engineering organizations and codebases.

The conventional understanding is that a codebase representing years of engineering investment is a valuable asset. It encodes business logic, captures accumulated decisions, and represents the technical foundation on which future products are built. A large engineering organization is similarly understood as a source of capability, with more engineers meaning more capacity to build, maintain, and improve that foundation.

What organizations believed

Large codebase Years of accumulated value

Large engineering team Organizational capability

Scale Competitive moat

Headcount growth Progress by definition

Complexity Barrier to competitors

What was accumulating

Maintenance burden Growing annually, unmeasured

Coordination overhead Compounding with every hire

Organizational inertia Decisions slowing down

Rising costs, flat return Never on any report

Own teams moving slower Invisible until it wasn't

While some argued that large codebases actually shoulg be considered a liability, the industry as a whole has mostly ignored that. But this understanding is now being more closely examined. A large codebase also carries maintenance costs that grow over time as the system becomes more complex, more interconnected, and more difficult to change safely. Every engineer added to maintain it increases coordination costs, introduces new dependencies, and adds to the organizational weight that slows decision-making. The asset and the liability exist simultaneously, and for most of the past twenty years, the financial environment masked the liability side of that equation.

The arrival of large language models has made the liability visible in a way that is difficult to ignore. Recently, Nathan Cavaglione, a developer, built a functional replica of approximately 95% of Slack’s core product in fourteen days using LLM agents. Slack was built by thousands of engineers over the course of more than a decade, at a cost that represents billions of dollars in cumulative engineering investment. Nathan started without any of that accumulated complexity, without the organizational weight, without the legacy architectural decisions, and without the coordination costs, and arrived at a comparable product in a period that would not constitute a single sprint in most enterprise engineering organizations.
Day 14: A functional replica of Slack's core product, built by a Nathan using LLM agents.

This does not mean that Slack’s engineering investment was wasted, because Slack also built enterprise sales infrastructure, compliance capabilities, data security practices, and organizational resilience that a fourteen-day prototype does not include. But it does mean that the assumption underlying large engineering organizations, which is that scale and accumulated complexity represent competitive moats, is no longer reliable in the way it once was. When the cost of building a functional approximation of a sophisticated software product can collapse to days of individual effort, the question of what a large engineering team justifies becomes both more urgent and more difficult to answer with the metrics most organizations currently track.

The obvious objection is that code produced at that speed becomes unmanageable, a liability in itself. That is a reasonable concern, but it largely applies when agents produce code that humans then maintain. Agentic platforms are being iterated upon quickly, and for established patterns and non-business-critical code, which is the majority of what most engineering organizations actually maintain, detailed human familiarity with the codebase matters less than it once did. A messy codebase is still cheaper to send ten agents through than to staff a team around. And even if the agents need ten days to reason through an unfamiliar system, that is still faster and cheaper than most development teams operating today. The liability argument holds in a human-to-human or agent-to-human world. In an agent-to-agent world, it largely dissolves.

The Organizations That Will Pull Ahead

The competitive advantage available to organizations that take this seriously is not primarily technical. It is analytical. Companies that can clearly articulate what each of their teams costs, what value each team generates, and whether that value clears a financially viable threshold are in a structurally different position than companies that cannot. They can make build versus buy decisions based on actual economics rather than organizational preference. They can identify when a team is working on problems that cannot generate sufficient return at their cost level. They can sequence initiatives based on what value is being lost each day they are delayed, rather than on who argued most persuasively in the last planning meeting.

Most organizations cannot do this today. The measurement infrastructure does not exist, the financial data does not flow to the people making prioritization decisions, and the habit of asking these questions has not been built. Building it is uncomfortable, because the answers are sometimes unflattering. A team that examines its work through this lens will sometimes discover that it has spent a quarter on things that do not connect to financial outcomes in any meaningful way, and that is a difficult finding to sit with.

But the alternative is continuing to run an organization where teams with million-euro annual budgets make daily investment decisions without the financial context to know whether those decisions are generating return. That condition was sustainable when capital was cheap and growth forgave everything. It is increasingly difficult to sustain in an environment where boards expect financial returns, where the cost of building software is collapsing due to AI, and where the question of what a team justifies can no longer be deferred indefinitely.

The organizations that develop the habit of asking these questions clearly, regularly, and without flinching will accumulate an advantage that compounds over time. The question is simply whether they will start asking before or after the pressure forces them to.

Want Help Understanding Your Team Economics?

If you're looking to understand the financial logic of your engineering organization, or want to build the measurement infrastructure that connects team work to business outcomes, contact me.

----------------------------------------------------------------

[16] Taking on CUDA with ROCm: 'One Step After Another'
    HN:  https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=47745284
    URL: https://www.eetimes.com/taking-on-cuda-with-rocm-one-step-after-another/
    Score: 243 | Comments: 181 | By: mindcrime | Posted: 2026-04-12 22:38 UTC

    [scrape failed: fetch: Get "https://www.eetimes.com/taking-on-cuda-with-rocm-one-step-after-another/": stream error: stream ID 1; INTERNAL_ERROR; received from peer]

----------------------------------------------------------------

[17] The Rational Conclusion of Doomerism Is Violence
    HN:  https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=47754606
    URL: https://www.campbellramble.ai/p/the-rational-conclusion
    Score: 58 | Comments: 78 | By: thedudeabides5 | Posted: 2026-04-13 16:37 UTC

    By: Alexander Campbell

A 20-year-old threw a Molotov cocktail at Sam Altman's house at 3:45 AM Friday. Then walked three miles to OpenAI headquarters and threatened to burn it down. He has been booked on suspicion of attempted murder.

He was not a lone wolf. He was an active member of PauseAI with six community roles. His Discord handle was "Butlerian Jihadist." His Instagram was a feed of doomer content: capability curves captioned "if we do nothing very soon we will die," Venn diagrams placing us at the intersection of The Matrix, Terminator, and Idiocracy. Four months before the attack, he recommended Yudkowsky and Soares' If Anyone Builds It, Everyone Dies to his followers.

His name is Daniel Moreno-Gama.

He had his own Substack. In January he published “AI Existential Risk,” estimating the probability of AI-caused extinction as “nearly certain.” He called the technology “an active threat against anyone who is using it and especially towards the people building it.” He concluded: “We must deal with the threat first and ask questions later.” He wrote a poem imagining the children of AI developers dying, asking their parents why they did nothing. “May Hell be kind to such a vile creature,” he wrote about the builders.

PauseAI has already deleted his messages from their Discord.

For an investing newsletter, I know this is not what most of you are here for. The goal here is to to explain where my worldview is coming from, so that the longer term calls start to make more sense. My ideas behind the “New New Deal” are intended as a direct response to where this is going.

All I am doing here is running their model forward, and connecting the dots.

Here is the framework. It has three moving parts.

Start with certainty. Yudkowsky’s position is that if anyone builds sufficiently intelligent AI, every human being on earth dies. Not probably. Not maybe. Everyone. Your children. His daughter Nina, whom he invokes by name. He published this in TIME. He wrote it in a book called If Anyone Builds It, Everyone Dies. He said we should airstrike data centers, and that the risk of nuclear exchange is preferable to a training run completing.

Purity spiral aka escalation. Within this community, members compete to demonstrate commitment by raising the stakes. P(doom) numbers climb from 50% to 90% to 99.99999%. The Center for AI Safety's national spokesperson said on camera that the correct response is to "walk to the labs across the country and burn them down." PauseAI activated something called a "Warning Shot Protocol" declaring an AI model "a weapon of mass destruction." One of PauseAI's leaders said an Anthropic researcher "deserves whatever is coming to her." When someone flagged this rhetoric in PauseAI's Discord, the mods deleted the post.

The day before the attack, Nate Soares, Yudkowsky's co-author on the very book the kid recommended, tweeted that Altman was "doing terrible stuff."

Then cheap talk gets tested. Game theorists have a term for this: cheap talk is costless signaling that eventually meets reality. When you make the stakes existential for the human race, you can justify any level of extremism if it lowers the hallowed p(doom). These aren't isolated incidents. They are a series of escalating and mutually reinforcing claims around an eschatological philosophy that, taken to its conclusion, would accept killing 99% of the world to save the last 1%.

It was only a matter of time before someone took the framework at face value. The kid read the book. He joined the community. He wrote his own manifesto. In a memoir for his community college English class, he described himself as a consequentialist: “I give very little credence to intentions if the results do not match.” He chose “Butlerian Jihadist” as his name. On December 3rd he wrote in PauseAI’s Discord: “We are close to midnight it’s time to actually act.”

Then he acted.

They gave him a trolley problem. One life versus all of humanity. The kid pulled the lever.

There is a final irony that deserves attention. If the doomers truly hold their stated beliefs at their stated confidence levels, they should be more honest about what those beliefs imply. A few weeks before the attack, a journalist asked Yudkowsky: if AI is so dangerous, why aren't you attacking data centers? His answer, relayed by Soares: "If you saw a headline saying I'd done that, would you say, 'wow, AI has been stopped, we're safe'? If not, you already know it wouldn't be effective."

Notice what that answer is not. It is not “because violence is wrong.” It is “because it wouldn’t work yet.” The restraint is strategic, not moral. And the community knows it. The dark undercurrent is an unspoken agreement: the kid’s greatest sin was bad timing.

This is what I mean by intelligence not equaling power, and it is the deepest flaw in the entire doomer worldview.

Yudkowsky’s framework rests on the conflation: a sufficiently intelligent AI will necessarily acquire the power to destroy humanity because intelligence converts automatically into capability. Most of his followers are not technical. They do not build AI systems or work on alignment engineering. They possess a particular kind of verbal intelligence that lets them construct elaborate arguments about risk, and they have convinced themselves this entitles them to a priestly authority over the technology. They can construct the argument. They cannot build the system.

This isn’t accidental. It’s baked into the foundational texts. Yudkowsky’s Harry Potter and the Methods of Rationality literally models a world where the person who reasons best deserves to override every institution around him. The Sequences build the liturgy: a small caste of correct thinkers, epistemically and morally superior, whose rationality entitles them to govern what the rest of humanity is allowed to build. It’s not a safety movement. It’s a priesthood with an origin story written in fanfiction.

Yudkowsky can distance himself from the kid with the Molotov. But he cannot distance himself from the syllogism. If the builders are going to kill everyone, stopping the builders is self-defense. That is the central claim, stated plainly. The only question was always when someone would take it at face value.

They should stop acting surprised when their own logic shows up at 3:45 AM with a bottle full of gasoline.

Disclaimers

I am not advocating for or against any position on AI safety. I am observing that a framework built on certainty of extinction produces predictable consequences. The suspect is innocent until proven guilty.

These views do not represent those of any investors, clients or affiliates of Rose.

----------------------------------------------------------------

[18] 'Yes to fields of wheat, no to fields of iron': how Denmark soured on solar
    HN:  https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=47755734
    URL: https://www.theguardian.com/world/2026/mar/20/solar-power-renewable-energy-denmark-backlash-national-elections
    Score: 24 | Comments: 20 | By: PaulHoule | Posted: 2026-04-13 18:02 UTC

    By: Ajit Niranjan

In one telling of the story, the golden fields of a proud farming nation are under attack. Besieged by an industrial sprawl of solar panels, they are being smothered at the behest of an urban elite.

That narrative has failed to thrive in conservative heartlands such as Texas and Hungary, which have embraced solar power while lambasting green rules. But it is taking root in Denmark, the most climate-ambitious nation on Earth. “We say yes to fields of wheat,” said Inger Støjberg, the leader of the rightwing populist Denmark Democrats in a speech in 2024. “And we say no to fields of iron!”

Jernmarker, or iron fields, was chosen as the Danish word of the year in December after the solar backlash swayed municipal elections and prompted some councils to pull projects. The spectre of barren metal landscapes has since returned to the campaign trail as Danes prepare to vote in national elections on Tuesday. “We need more common sense in the green transition,” Støjberg said in the first televised debate between party leaders last month.
chart

Pockets of resistance to clean energy have hardened across Europe as far-right parties focus on climate action as their second target after migrants. Until now, solar panels had escaped the wrath of powerful campaigns that have stymied the rollout of wind turbines, heat pumps, electric cars and plant-based meat.

But in Denmark, which generates 90% of its electricity from renewables and aims to cut planet-heating pollution faster than any other wealthy country, the spread of solar power has alarmed some regions in which construction is concentrated. Solar tripled from 4% of Danish power production in 2021 to 13% in 2025. And a handful of villages have found themselves surrounded by silicon.

Opponents of solar farms say the photovoltaic panels are ugly, destroy nature and deflate property prices in neglected hinterlands. As drone shots of encircled farmhouses have become a symbol of urban overreach, the campaign has led even some established parties to soften their support of solar.

The backlash had been brewing locally, but Lukas Slothuus, a climate politics researcher at the University of Sussex who grew up in a rural town near the Danish-German border, said the Denmark Democrats had provided a “clear vector to articulate that discontent politically” across the nation. “The far right have realised – and decided – that climate is a potent electoral battleground,” he said. “It’s just about finding one issue to centre it around.”
A house surrounded by rows of solar panels in Hjolderup. Photograph: EPA-EFE/Shutterstock

The resistance has led to cancelled projects. The municipality of Køge voted in January to cancel a renewable energy park in Vallø, and in Viborg, the council voted last month to stop a planned solar farm in Iglsø while approving only the wind and biogas components of another project in Vinge. In Samsø, the first island in the world powered entirely by renewables, councillors from across the political spectrum voted last year to reject a solar park.

In Ringkøbing-Skjern, the country’s solar heartland, the appetite for new projects has dried up. Mads Fuglede, a Denmark Democrats politician who was elected to its council in November, said: “Solar panels have become a symbol of the political elite that wants a green transition and doesn’t care about what happens to the countryside. Because that’s not where they live or where their voters live.”

Unlike some of their political counterparts across Europe, who deny climate science and oppose cutting pollution, the Denmark Democrats say they support the shift to a clean economy. Fuglede said the party was not against solar as a technology. “You can get your solar panels, but put them up where you live in the cities. There’s no need to cover farmland.”

Denmark has long enjoyed public support for its shift to a clean economy and ambitious green rules such as the world’s first tax on farm pollution. A poll in November found 77% of people whose vote was influenced by green energy projects were in favour of them. But among the two biggest rightwing-populist parties, whose voter base is concentrated in rural regions, more than 80% were opposed.

Some argue that the political noise surrounding solar power does not match the scale of the issue. Solar panels cover the equivalent of only 0.2% of Danish farmland, according to the Danish Solar Association, and about one-third of solar capacity is installed on rooftops.

Some municipalities have responded to the backlash by advancing projects with less fanfare. Camilla Holbech, the vice-president of renewable energy at Green Power Denmark, said: “Municipal politicians that are in favour have been green hushing: not being too vocal about it, they’ve just gone out and done it.”

The resistance has raised wider questions about how clean energy developers can win the support of local communities as renewables boom.

Henrik Stiesdal, an inventor who built one of Denmark’s first wind turbines in the 1970s and went on to build its first offshore windfarm in 1991, said: “The thing that has changed since the first decades is Facebook. Even though the greater population feels things are good, you can get enough local people and enough not-local-but-angry people to provide opinions.”

Ultimately, the bigger threat to solar may be its own success. Projects in Denmark have few sunny days a year in which they can make money, and as more solar panels have been laid, the number of days with negative electricity prices has soared, leading to a cannibalisation of profits. The slow electrification rate and congestion in the electricity grid has further frustrated developers.

Torsten Hasforth, the chief economist at Concito, a Danish climate thinktank, said: “Over the next 10 years, the official expectation is a very large rise in the amount of solar produced. But that kind of clashes with the reality on the ground – they can’t make money.”

He said some developers had done a poor job of engaging local communities but that the backlash was “something that can be handled”. “Opponents of solar cells are always happy to show drone images,” he said. “But no one watches the world through a drone. We’re a flat country. It’s fairly easy to hide them.”

----------------------------------------------------------------

[19] DIY Soft Drinks
    HN:  https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=47741701
    URL: https://blinry.org/diy-soft-drinks/
    Score: 646 | Comments: 187 | By: _Microft | Posted: 2026-04-12 16:38 UTC

    By: blinry

Cola, orange soda, and almond soda!

In 2020, I started making my own soft drinks, including a sugar-free, caffeine-free cola! If you’re just looking for the current recipes, you can find them on GitHub. They were inspired by recipes like Open Cola and Cube Cola.

Otherwise, read on for “log book”-style instructions and pictures of my first attempts, which have been adapted from this Mastodon thread.

Cola, first batch

Here’s what we’ll need:

We start by making a flavor emulsion from essential oils! These oils are extremely strong, and can cause skin irritations, so if you want to be safe, wear latex gloves for this step!

We also need super small quantities. In this attempt, I’m aiming for:

0.75 ml of orange oil
0.7 ml of lime oil
0.2 ml of lemon oil
0.15 ml of nutmeg oil
0.08 ml of cassia oil
0.05 ml of coriander oil
0.05 ml of lavender oil

For measuring, I have a 1 ml syringe:

There! In total, we have about 2 ml of essential oil. This will lend flavor to about 9 L of cola!

But oils don’t dissolve in water, right? They would just float on the surface!

So what we’ll add next is gum arabic, a natural emulsifier, that will help the oil form tiny, tiny droplets that stay dispersed in water!

Combine 2 g of gum arabic, 4 ml water, and our oil mixture with a hand mixer. Keep mixing until it emulsifies, it will take on a milky brown color and the oily phase will disappear. This took me about 5 minutes.

Next, we add: 40 ml of caramel color, which will give the cola its dark appearance.

As well as 5 g citric acid, and an additional 10 ml of water. You can also add caffeine at this point, but one of the main motivations for me to make my own cola is to have cola without caffeine (it gives me headaches).

Stop mixing when it starts smiling at you! :D This is our finished cola concentrate. It smells delicious!

Other recipes would now integrate this into sugar syrup made from 1 kg of sugar, but I want to try a variation using artificial sweeteners, for dieting reasons. This is a combination of sodium cyclamate and saccharin, which is pretty common in Germany. I’ll use 70 ml.

This gives us about 120 ml of the finished cola syrup! \o/ I’ve been following the Cube-Cola recipe.

Because this is still a very concentrated solution and hard to handle, I’m diluting it down to 1 L. In theory, this should give a nice cola when diluted further in a ratio of 1:8. First taste test coming up!

It’s good! It’s really good! The sweetness is just right for me, and the oil blend tastes nice and cola-y! :)

I like my drinks really sour, so I might add another… 10 g of citric acid to this batch. There is a slightly bitter aftertaste, which I attribute to the artificial sweetener I’m using.

I might also tweak the oil ratios to accentuate the citrus flavors a bit more in the next batch. And I thought this would be too much food coloring, but it seems pretty perfect!

What I’d be really excited to try is making other flavors: Orange soda! Cherry soda! Almond & apricot soda! <3 The problems is that I don’t know of many DIY recipes for sodas except cola, which is surprising:

Open Soda (Note: site is no longer online as of 2026…) has two pretty weird ones (including a bubble gum soda?!), but that’s pretty much all I found. There still seems to be potential for reverse engineering! :)

And here are two more resources I found while preparing my ingredients today: Jan Krüger’s blog post about tweaking cola recipes and Richard Grove’s Notes on Making Cola, which go deeper into food chemistry!

Cola, second batch

Made a second batch of cola syrup without caramel color. It’s much weirder to drink than I expected.

I also switched to sucralose as a sweetener, hoping that it would have less aftertaste. Instead of 1000 g sugar in the original recipe, I used 1.6 g sucralose, which is ridiculous, but it’s still too sweet for my taste. :O

And I made a tool upgrade! It’s important to get these small quantities right…

Almond-flavored soft drink, first batch

This week’s batch: blood orange + almond + lime (in a 2:1:1 ratio), plus as much orange food coloring as I dared to put in! :D

I cut the amount of sucralose in half – still a bit too sweet for my taste. Had to completely guess the oil ratios, but I’m happy with how it turned out! My whole apartment smells like marzipan now. <3

This time, when I did the mixing in a big plastic bowl, I noticed some floating stuff on the concentrate, which I assume are tiny plastic shavings produced by the hand mixer? I filtered them out, and might switch to glass or metal containers.

Cola, third batch (0.1.0)

In today’s cola batch, I reduced the amount of sucralose further to 0.4 g, added 0.07 g vanillin, as well as a bit more cassia oil. Good stuff! I call it “Syntez-Cola”, because I combined ideas from Cube-Cola and Jan Krüger’s recipe! :)

… this is the point where I should start a blog post, and a Git repo with version numbers and a changelog, I guess. :P (Edit 2026: Here you go!)

I found decaf Coca-Cola in a supermarket last week, and could do a direct taste comparison. At this point, I prefer my cola by a large margin! Coca-Cola tasted bland, like molten cola popsicles. It had an interesting dryness to it, though, which I’m not sure how to replicate.

Orange soda, first batch (0.1.0)

Made a simple orange soda today, really happy with how it turned out! I put the recipe here, along with my modified cola recipe, and the almond + blood orange drink I invented!

Almond soda, second batch (0.1.1)

blinry almond 0.1.1 contains less almond oil, to highlights the citrus flavors a bit more. Find the updated recipe here.

One of these two bottles is a version with sugar instead of sucralose. 400 g of sugar seem to be a good replacement for 0.6 g sucralose. Curious to see whether people will be able to taste the difference! :) (Edit 2026: They totally could!)

Orange soda (0.1.1)

blinry orange 0.1.1, now with 14% more orange! :D Recipe here.

Closing thoughts in 2026

Since these early experiments, I made a handful batches of these recipes without modification. I still think they’re really nice! Especially blinry orange is rather unique.

If you try them for yourself, I’d be happy about feedback!

And I’m still thinking what ingredients might go into a DIY Mountain Dew, or a DIY Fassbrause…

Comments

You can add your comment to this post in the Fediverse! Alternatively, drop me a mail at mail@blinry.org.

----------------------------------------------------------------

[20] Evaluation of Claude Mythos Preview's cyber capabilities
    HN:  https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=47755805
    URL: https://www.aisi.gov.uk/blog/our-evaluation-of-claude-mythos-previews-cyber-capabilities
    Score: 13 | Comments: 3 | By: dgavey | Posted: 2026-04-13 18:08 UTC

The AI Security Institute (AISI) conducted evaluations of Anthropic’s Claude Mythos Preview (announced on 7th April) to assess its cybersecurity capabilities. Our results show that Mythos Preview represents a step up over previous frontier models in a landscape where cyber performance was already rapidly improving.

We have tracked AI cyber capabilities since 2023, building progressively harder evaluations to keep pace with AI progress — from chat-based probing, to capture-the-flag challenges, to the multi-step cyber-attack simulations described below. Two years ago, the best available models could barely complete beginner-level cyber tasks. Now, in controlled evaluations where Mythos Preview was explicitly directed and given network access to do so, we observed that it could execute multi-stage attacks on vulnerable networks and discover and exploit vulnerabilities autonomously – tasks that would take human professionals days of work.

In this blog post, we summarise results of cyber evaluations we ran on Mythos Preview. These include both capture-the-flag (CTF) challenges and more complex ranges designed to simulate multi-step attack scenarios.

Capture-the-flag results

In CTF challenges, AI models must identify and exploit weaknesses in target systems to retrieve hidden “flags”. The chart below shows Mythos Preview’s performance on our cyber CTF suite compared to other models. Each point represents a model's average success rate at a given difficulty level.

Figure 1: Performance on technical non-expert and apprentice level Capture the Flag tasks (CTFs) for models since November 2022. GPT-3.5 Turbo through to Claude 4 Opus average 10 runs up to 2.5M tokens. GPT-5 through to Mythos Preview average 5 runs up to 2.5M tokens.

Figure 2: Performance on practitioner and expert level Capture the Flag tasks (CTFs) for models since August 2025. All models average 5 runs up to 50M tokens.

On expert-level tasks — which no model could complete before April 2025 — Mythos Preview succeeds 73% of the time.

Cyber range results

Even expert-level CTFs only test specific skills in isolation. Real-world cyber-attacks require chaining dozens of steps together across multiple hosts and network segments — sustained operations that take human experts many hours, days, or weeks to complete.

As a first step towards measuring this, we built "The Last Ones" (TLO): a 32-step corporate network attack simulation spanning initial reconnaissance through to full network takeover, which we estimate to require humans 20 hours to complete. A more detailed description of the range can be found in our recent paper.

Claude Mythos Preview is the first model to solve TLO from start to finish, in 3 out of its 10 attempts. Across all its attempts, the model completed an average of 22 out of 32 steps. Claude Opus 4.6 is the next best performing model and completed an average of 16 steps.

Figure 3: Average number of steps completed on 'The Last Ones' (a 32-step simulated corporate network attack) as a function of total token spend. Each line represents a different model, with the shaded region showing the min–max range across all runs at each token budget. The vertical dashed line at 10M tokens marks where sample sizes decrease for several models. Mythos Preview, Opus 4.6, and GPT-5.4 average 10 runs up to 100M tokens. Opus 4.5, GPT-5.1 Codex, and Sonnet 4.5 each average 15 runs up to 10M and 5 runs up to 100M tokens. GPT-5.3-Codex averages 10 runs up to 10M and 5 runs up to 100M tokens. Sonnet 3.7 and GPT-4o average 10 runs up to 10M tokens only. Models continue making progress with increased token budgets across the token budgets tested. Grey horizontal lines indicate significant milestones in the attack chain.

Mythos Preview did also show some cyber capability limitations within the limits of our evaluation. It could not complete our operational technology focused cyber range ‘Cooling Tower’, though this result does not necessarily show that the model is bad at executing attacks in operational technology (OT) environments; the model got stuck on IT sections of this range.

We expect that performance on our evaluations would continue to improve with more inference compute: we ran the cyber ranges with a 100M token budget; Mythos Preview’s performance continues to scale up to this limit, and we expect performance improvements would continue beyond that. For more on this phenomenon, see our recent blog post on inference scaling in cyber tasks.

Implications

Mythos Preview’s success on one cyber range indicates that is at least capable of autonomously attacking small, weakly defended and vulnerable enterprise systems where access to a network has been gained. However, our ranges have important differences from real-world environments that make them easier targets. They lack security features that are often present, such as active defenders and defensive tooling. There are also no penalties for the model for undertaking actions that would trigger security alerts. This means we cannot say for sure whether Mythos Preview would be able to attack well-defended systems.

In a regime where attackers can direct and provide network access to models to conduct autonomous attacks on poorly defended systems, cybersecurity evaluations must evolve. As capabilities continue to improve, evaluation environments that lack defences will no longer be challenging enough to discriminate between the capabilities of the most cyber-capable models or assess trends. Our future work will involve evaluating capabilities using ranges simulating hardened and defended environments, including ranges with active monitoring, endpoint detection and real-time incident response. We will also be tracking how AI-enabled vulnerability discovery and penetration testing campaigns perform on real-world systems.

What organisations should do now

Our testing shows that Mythos Preview can exploit systems with weak security posture, and it is likely that more models with these capabilities will be developed. This highlights the importance of cybersecurity basics, such as regular application of security updates, robust access controls, security configuration, and comprehensive logging. Our colleagues at the National Cyber Security Centre (NCSC) run the Cyber Essentials scheme to help organisations protect themselves against common online threats, whether those threats are AI assisted or not. For the latest cybersecurity advice, visit the NCSC website.

Future frontier models will be more capable still, so investment now in cyber defence is vital. AI cyber capabilities are dual use; while they pose security challenges, they can also help deliver game-changing improvements in defence. We recently released a joint blog post with NCSC on how cyber defenders can both harness and prepare for frontier AI.

‍

----------------------------------------------------------------

[21] Bring Back Idiomatic Design (2023)
    HN:  https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=47738827
    URL: https://essays.johnloeber.com/p/4-bring-back-idiomatic-design
    Score: 653 | Comments: 358 | By: phil294 | Posted: 2026-04-12 12:21 UTC

    By: John Loeber

I’m part of the desktop software generation. From Windows 95 to Windows 7, I grew using mostly-offline software on computers operated via mouse and keyboard, well before tablets and smartphones. Recently, I’ve been missing one particular part of that era: its consistency in design. I want to tell you about idiomatic design, emphasize the importance of homogeneous interfaces, and suggest that we’ve lost something important.

Suppose you’re logging into a website, and it asks: “do you want to stay logged in?” There are many ways in which the website could ask you for an answer: for example, a text field where you can enter “Yes” or “No”, or a dropdown where you can select “Keep me logged in” or “Log me out when I close this window.” But in reality, it’ll always be a checkbox. Why is that?

The checkbox is a design idiom: it’s such a common design that as a user, you know how to use it without thinking about it, and if you were making a website and had to ask this question, you would also put in a checkbox without thinking about it. To builders and users alike, it is a standard design pattern that everyone can rely on.

A checkbox is also part of an interface. You’re using it to interact with a system by inputting data. Interfaces are better the less thinking they require: whether the interface is a steering wheel or an online form, if you have to spend any amount of time figuring out how to use it, that’s bad. As you interact with many things, you want homogeneous interfaces that give you consistent experiences. If you learn that Command + C is the keyboard shortcut for copy, you want that to work everywhere. You don’t want to have to remember to use CTRL + Shift + C in certain circumstances or right-click → copy in others, that’d be annoying.

But that’s where we’ve ended up. Software is on the internet now, and the interfaces aren’t homogeneous at all. There are hundreds of ways that different websites ask you to pick dates, enter your credit card number, or do any number of common tasks. Keyboard shortcuts differ from app to app. There are so many different ways of interaction that you can’t remember or learn them at all. Using web applications in 2023 is an exercise of “where do I find what I want to do?” over and over again.

John Loeber 🎢@johnloeber

It is curious to me that we’ve been entering credit card info on the internet for 20+ years, and yet there’s still little consensus for how best to input that information. Text fields or drop downs for expiry dates? Today I found a new one: buttons for each option

1:30 AM · Aug 26, 2022

2 Likes

By contrast, one of the strengths of the desktop software era was high consistency across interfaces by use of design idioms. Look at this picture from Windows 2000:

The visuals feel a little ugly and dated: it’s blocky, the font isn’t great, and the colors are dull. But the interface gets a couple of things really right:

The File, Edit, View… menu structure was standard. No matter whether you were in Adobe Photoshop or Microsoft Excel, you knew that save is under File, redo is under Edit, full-screen is under View, etc.

The menu is navigable by keyboard: there’s a little underline in each of the menu items, e.g. F in File and N in New, underneath. They indicate keyboard shortcuts. You can enter ALT+F to open the File menu, then hit N to open a new file. This caters to power-users while making the shortcuts easy to learn.

The status bar at the bottom tells you everything about the current state: page, column, word count, whether you’re tracking changes, in insert-mode, etc.

Menu items are clearly labeled. Words, not icons, are the primary interface to actions. Icons are used only where they are most obvious. The entire interface leaves little to the imagination. In the picture above, there’s no “I wonder what this does?”1 You know how to use it, even if you’ve never used it before.

Crucially, these design idioms were used not just in Microsoft Word, but throughout the entire Windows ecosystem. Take a look at this Windows XP logout screen:

Every single button is clearly visually a button and says exactly what it does. And each one has a little underline to indicate its keyboard shortcut. Isn’t that nice?

The desktop software era was one of homogeneous interfaces, perhaps because the operating system and its GUI libraries dictated broad swaths of design,2 and those constraints guided developers toward conforming patterns.

The browser software era is one of heterogeneous interfaces. Take a look at these screenshots from two of my favorite web applications:3 Figma and Linear.

These are probably the two best pieces of enterprise software available today. And though they have many of the same features — team settings, abstract item hierarchies, collaborative comments, etc. — they don’t share a single icon. They have no design idioms in common. They have different keyboard shortcuts. Both are very well-designed from first principles, but do not conform to what other interfaces the user might be familiar with.

We are in an era of individually well-designed, useful web applications, and they’re all unique.4 Even in products by the same company, the experiences are heterogeneous: using GMail is nothing like using GSuites is nothing like using Google Docs. In aggregate, this is very frustrating. The lack of homogeneous interfaces means that I spend most of my digital time not in a state of productive flow, but hunting and pecking all over the screen, asking myself “Can I click that? Does this open in a new tab? Will the browser's back button let me go back?” Awful!

This lack of homogeneity is for two reasons:

All the patterns in designing for mouse-and-keyboard applications had to be reinvented with the advent of the touchscreen. Most web applications have to enable both a mobile and desktop experience, and those interaction forms are very different. Therefore, most user experiences have since then been stuck in an awkward middle, e.g. hamburger menus intended for mobile apps also used for desktop apps, etc. Consequently, there are a ton of bad design patterns everywhere you look. Modern frontend development has a culture of copying and re-using modular components,5 so it’s easy to copy-paste bad design patterns and perpetuate the issue. After 10+ years of this, there has been a generationally corrosive effect on the quality of UI/UX design.

If everyone were to follow the same design idioms, then the interfaces would look pretty consistent. In the early days of the internet, there were strong design idioms: hyperlinks to other pages were underlined blue, and purple if you had already visited them. Great! Today, every website presents its own guessing game on how elements of the interface are styled. Is that a link? Maybe!6

It may be surprising that modern web design is so unidiomatic, because the HTML/CSS standards are very prescriptive.7 The issue is that even though there are standards for writing HTML, no-one writes HTML anymore.8 People write React in TypeScript or the latest framework. They import countless npm packages. All that goes through a complex build process to output something that runs in the browser.

Frontend developers aren’t wrong to do this. Browsers today are extremely powerful and offer general-purpose APIs that can let you do pretty much anything if you are creative about it.9 For example, Figma doesn't follow any HTML design idioms because there is no HTML. It's written in web assembly; they are on the cutting edge of implementing desktop-style software in the browser. Of course that breaks the HTML-webpage-as-document model.10 The browser’s back button, keyboard shortcuts, etc. fall by the wayside while a human-computer interaction paradigm is rebuilt.

In short, there are few web design idioms because front-end development is moving too quickly. Engineers are concerned with what is possible more than with questions of polish, and rightfully so. Multi-user, real-time collaboration is much more valuable than power-user keyboard shortcuts. There are both endless frontend packages and interaction formats to deploy them into, so instituting one-size-fits-all idioms on a space so large is very difficult.11 It will take time for the cutting edge to cool down, and for the most successful patterns to become apparent and eventually idiomatic.

And yet, some of the most successful product organizations of today aggressively pursue their own design idioms and achieve some homogeneity in their interfaces.

Apple is a great example. We’ve talked about Microsoft of the past, but Apple today drives a highly opinionated design system. Apple’s general library of fonts, buttons, colors, etc. and its consistency across all of Apple’s native applications and devices have created a powerful conforming effect for third-party applications. Even when using a third-party app on your iPhone, interacting via the keyboard, pinch-to-zoom, etc. is all controlled by iOS. This is a big part of Apple’s it-just-works effect. Strong, tasteful, idiomatic design is at the core of Apple’s success.

What’s interesting about the it-just-works effect is that it makes users trust the defaults and avoid customization. You see a similar dynamic on platforms like Substack, where as an author I don’t have any ability to select the font or even underline text. But the constraining defaults are tastefully set, and it works great. Substack’s and Apple’s design principles gain adoption as those products succeed, since designers look to them as successful examples. Those designs eventually become idioms by (1) people converging on them as good designs and (2) frequency of use in the community.

As a product builder, you want to follow design idioms as closely as practically possible, because it makes your software easier to use and it maximizes compatibility across devices/browsers. I follow these rules of thumb and break them only rarely:

Study and follow HTML/CSS idioms whenever possible. For example, a link should be underlined, colorful, pointer on mouseover, and written as an <a> tag.

Avoid JavaScript reimplementations of HTML basics, e.g. React Button components instead of styled <button> elements.

Study and follow browser idioms whenever possible. The back button should always work. Copy-pasting the URL should bring you to the same interface. CTRL-clicking a navigational element should open it in a new tab.

If you deviate from general idioms, make sure that your designs are fully internally consistent and at least “idiomatic” within your organization.

Prefer words to icons. Use only icons that are universally understood.

If in doubt, make visual elements look obvious. There should never be confusion about whether something is a button or a tab.

Prefer what’s easy to understand over what’s visually beautiful.

If at an impasse, refer to two types of resource to assist in your judgment:

The best-designed websites that you know;

Books on interface design from decades past. Most interface design problems of today are not new, but repeats of history, with solved analogies in the past.

I dream of the day when every datepicker or credit card form on the internet is exactly the same: when after thirty years of iterative development and millions of attempts, we’ve finally converged on the best one. I dream of a future where in every web app, CTRL-Click opens the thing in a new tab. It would be nice…

1

Maybe you don’t know what the REC, TRK, OVR labels in the status bar mean. Then you would benefit from another standard pattern: tooltips on mouseover that tell you more about what that thing is or does.

2

It should also be mentioned that for the past decades, Microsoft has always published several-hundred-page, highly prescriptive guides on how to design idiomatic applications along with their Windows operating system releases. You can view a recent example here.

3

There are other common web applications like Facebook, Twitter, etc. but in this article I’ve decided to stick to utility enterprise software to avoid comparing what might look like apples and oranges.

4

Notwithstanding that, there are fashion cycles in visual design. We had skeuomorphic design in the late 2000s and early 2010s, material design in the mid 2010s, those colorful 2D vector illustrations in the late 2010s, etc.

5

The great irony is that modular components are meant to enable idiomatic design! Let the community design lots of date pickers, and then let the best one win! Developers will be able to easily integrate the very best design modules! So the theory goes. In reality, there are just hundreds of competing design libraries and no definitive guidance that will hold long-term.

6

Worse, even on a technical level, correct idioms are often missed by developers racing to the finish line. I’ve seen <span> elements with onclick events instead of <a> elements in open-source codebases. This is chaos, and it breaks screen readers and other accessibility features.

7

For formal specs, see the RFCs. Less formally, see W3. Of course, organizations like Mozilla, Google, etc. all have published their own supplementary style guides.

8

Except contrarian dinosaurs like yours truly, of course.

9

There’s a joke that you can always fully implement in the browser what was possible on the desktop X years ago. For example, there are often novelty implementations of popular back-in-the-day video games (e.g. Diablo 2, AOE 2) in the browser.

10

In other words: many challenges of contemporary web design stem from the fact that HTML/CSS and the browser more generally were built on a webpage-as-document model, which engineers have always been trying to stretch as far as possible. A “document” is simply no longer a good analogy for a webpage in 2023. Even the notion of a “webpage” is suspect here: the modern frontend developer really wants a browser tab to act as a universal sandboxed execution environment.

11

Concretely, it seems a lot more difficult than in the desktop software environment of yesteryear, when the degrees of freedom were so much smaller. No touchscreens, only a few display sizes, and so on.

No posts

----------------------------------------------------------------

[22] Show HN: boringBar – a taskbar-style dock replacement for macOS
    HN:  https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=47742200
    URL: https://boringbar.app/
    Score: 477 | Comments: 272 | By: a-ve | Posted: 2026-04-12 17:25 UTC

a taskbar-style dock replacement for macOS

The macOS Dock is built around apps, not windows. Multiple displays and desktops make it hard to track what's open where. boringBar keeps windows organized by desktop, with instant previews, one-click desktop switching, and pinned apps within reach.

boringBar also gives you a searchable app launcher, scroll-to-switch desktops, full window titles on chips, and a cleaner workspace when you hide the Dock. As a bonus, it makes macOS feel more familiar if you've just switched from Windows or Linux.

Features

Current desktop only

Shows only the windows on the active desktop for that display, so you stay focused on what is in front of you.

Desktop switcher

Jump to any desktop on the current display with one click, and see how many windows are open on each one.

App launcher

Search and launch apps from a single list, then open it instantly with a configurable global shortcut.

Preview windows using thumbnails

Hover a chip to preview windows before switching, so you can pick the right one faster.

Notification badges

Unread badges from macOS appear directly on chips, so important updates stay visible.

Attention pulse

When an app needs your attention, its chip gives a subtle pulse so you notice it right away.

Scroll to switch desktops

Scroll up or down on the bar to move between desktops. Direction is configurable.

Adjustable bar size

Choose small, medium, or large. Pick the size that suits you best.

Group windows by app

Collapses multiple windows into one chip, with a count badge.

Toggle chip titles

Hide app name text on chips while keeping icons and window count badges.

Window or app names

Show full window titles in chips, or just the app name for a cleaner look.

Hide dock

Keeps the Dock out of the way while you use boringBar, then brings it back when you turn the feature off.

Show on all displays

Mirror bars across multiple monitors, including setups where the system setting "Displays have separate Spaces" is off.

Quick shortcut to Show Desktop

Right-click the bar and choose Show Desktop, or click the ribbon at the far right edge to reveal the desktop.

Pin apps on bar/app menu

Right click on any app in the bar to pin them to the bar itself or to the top of the application menu.

FAQ

boringBar requires macOS 14 (Sonoma) or later.

boringBar requires two macOS permissions. Accessibility is used to observe and interact with windows, desktops, and apps on your behalf. Screen Recording is used solely to fetch window thumbnail previews and is not used for anything else. You can verify this yourself: the purple dot in Control Center only appears when thumbnails are being fetched, and you will not see it from boringBar at any other time.

Yes. You can download and try boringBar free for 14 days with all features unlocked. A license is required to continue using it after the trial.

Personal licenses come in two flavors:

Perpetual — a one-time $40 purchase covering 2 devices, with 2 years of support and updates included. The software keeps working after that; you just won't receive further updates.

Yearly — a subscription starting at $7.99/year for 1 device, with additional devices at $2/year each, up to 5.

Business licenses are billed annually, start at 6 users, and use volume pricing, so the per-user cost drops as your team grows:

Quantity Price per user / year
First 1	$3.49
Next 2 – 20	$3.50
Next 21 – 50	$2.50
Next 51 – 100	$2.00
The rest	$1.00

For example, a 6-user business license is $20.99/year, a 20-user license is $69.99/year, and a 50-user license is $144.99/year.

Both licenses give you access to the same features. A personal license is for individual use and comes in two flavors: a one-time perpetual purchase covering 2 devices, or a yearly subscription covering up to 5 devices. A business license is an annual subscription intended for use within a company or organization and includes volume pricing.

Each license seat is linked to one device. A perpetual personal license includes 2 seats; a yearly personal license covers 1 to 5 devices. For yearly personal and business licenses, make sure to purchase the appropriate number of seats upfront, as seats cannot be added to an existing license. If you need more later, you can purchase a separate license. Multiple users on the same machine share a single seat.

Personal license holders receive an activation key by email after purchase. Business license holders need to add each team member from the Business License Management page first. In the boringBar app, that team member then enters their email address and receives a one-time code to confirm and activate their license.

boringBar can hide the Dock for you while it is running, but it will still be visible in Mission Control. When you turn the feature off or quit the app, the Dock comes right back.

----------------------------------------------------------------

[23] Who's Been Impersonating This ProPublica Reporter?
    HN:  https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=47754100
    URL: https://www.propublica.org/article/impersonating-propublica-reporter
    Score: 26 | Comments: 0 | By: hn_acker | Posted: 2026-04-13 16:05 UTC

    By: Robert Faturechi

The call came from a number I didn’t recognize, with a Canadian area code.

A steely voice on the other end of the line greeted me, identifying himself as an official with the Canadian military.

He had a question: Had I been reaching out to him on WhatsApp, trying to work him for information?

I paused. As an investigative reporter at ProPublica, I’m reaching out to a lot of people all the time. But as I racked my brain, I couldn’t think of any Canadians I had recently tried to develop as sources.

It seems as though someone is impersonating you, the man warned.

I was at a loss. What was Fake Me asking about? Were they just using my name or my picture too? How could I be sure the person warning me about this impostor wasn’t actually an impostor himself?

The Canadian official assured me he’d send a message from his government email to confirm his identity, and he’d include screenshots of his conversation with Fake Me. I thanked him, and we exchanged some pleasantries. Before saying goodbye, I asked him if there was anything he’d like to get on the radar of an investigative reporter. (Without even realizing it, I was working him for information. Maybe Fake Me and Real Me aren’t so different.)

The screenshots the Canadian sent over later showed someone with a Miami number using my ProPublica headshot as their profile pic. I’ve never lived in Florida.

“This is Robert Faturechi from ProPublica,” Fake Me wrote. “I really need to get in touch with you.”

The Canadian asked me not to publicly reveal too many details about his work, but it involves dealing with other countries, including Ukraine.

I alerted our security team at ProPublica. They told me that there was little we could do aside from reporting the fake account to WhatsApp.

We did, and I put the matter behind me — until two weeks later, when I got another warning.

This time it was a Latvian businessman who said he runs an organization providing equipment to the Ukrainian military and is involved in a drone development project with Ukrainian forces.

“Hey!” the Latvian wrote to me on LinkedIn. “Was good to chat on Signal! Let’s connect here as well!”

The only problem was I had never chatted with him on Signal, the encrypted messaging app.

The Latvian reached out to me on LinkedIn because he was concerned he wasn’t talking to Real Me on Signal. He sent over screenshots of someone using my headshot and claiming to be me.

“Am I right in understanding that you are an expert in the field of UAVs?” Fake Me had messaged the Latvian, referring to unmanned aerial vehicles, a fancy term for drones.

“My clients,” the impostor explained, “are particularly interested in the application of UAVs in Ukraine.”

The Latvian had offered to discuss the topic in a phone call, but Fake Me (who could be a man or woman) declined, saying they weren’t “comfortable” talking on the phone. They asked to continue the “conversation in written format” or if the Latvian could “record a voice message on this topic.”

The Latvian, growing suspicious, insisted on a video call. Fake Me relented, sending him step-by-step instructions they said would result in a secure video chat, but that actually appeared to have been an attempt to trick the Latvian into giving up access to his email account.

The Latvian ultimately blocked Fake Me.

The impersonations were disquieting. Investigative reporting is hard enough with public trust in media so low and those in power stepping up attacks against journalists. Scammers giving potential sources another thing to worry about just makes our work more difficult.

I can’t be certain what Fake Me is up to, but posing as a journalist in this way seems to be the latest evolution in online deception. ProPublica has chronicled the dark world of pig butchering, in which human traffickers in Asia force their victims to scam people by posing as friends or potential romantic interests. In those cases, the goal is cash.

But sometimes the objective is stealing sensitive information. And even sophisticated actors can fall victim to so-called phishing attacks, in which scammers impersonate legitimate entities. One of the most notable and perhaps consequential instances was when John Podesta, chair of Hillary Clinton’s 2016 presidential campaign, fell victim to an email purporting to be a Google security alert, giving hackers access to his personal Gmail account. Thousands of his emails, some of them quite damaging to Clinton and the Democratic Party, were published online.
A screenshot of the conversation between a Canadian official and Fake Robert. Obtained and redacted by ProPublica

From the screenshots the Canadian and Latvian sent me, I could tell Fake Me wasn’t asking for credit card info or urging anyone to buy a gift card. It didn’t appear to be a moneymaking scam.

I’m not sure who else they’ve reached out to, but in both cases I was alerted to, Fake Me seemed to have an interest in foreign militaries. Maybe some clunky intelligence operation?

I tried calling Fake Me using the phone number they used to reach out to the Canadian defense official. I got a recorded message saying the line was not in service.

On Signal and WhatsApp, the number rang and rang, without an answer.

There was even less we could do about the second impersonation than we could about the first.

Signal keeps extremely little information about its users; it knows when someone first created their account and the phone number they used to do so but stores nothing about who they’re messaging. That’s by design. The hands-off approach is part of why it’s a safe platform for journalists to talk securely to sources. But it also makes catching impostor accounts difficult. Red flags, like sending messages with suspicious links, aren’t detectable by Signal. (WhatsApp can’t see the content of messages unless a user reports them. It has the ability to see who its users are messaging, but a spokesperson said it’s rare for the company to store that data.)

Cooper Quintin, a technologist at the digital privacy nonprofit Electronic Frontier Foundation, said he had never heard of a case like mine on Signal. But overall he was noticing an upswing in scams on the secure messaging app. Signal was doing what it could, he said, such as adding a feature that slows down would-be spammers trying to send many messages in a short time frame. Signal also makes links from unknown senders unclickable. But there are limits to what Signal can do, he said, without compromising its hallmark privacy protections for its users.

“This fits a trajectory. As Signal gets more popular, more attackers start to view it as a potential platform for attacks,” said Quintin, who insisted we talk via video chat so he could be sure I wasn’t an online impersonator asking to interview him about being impersonated online.

Some platforms — such as Facebook and Instagram — allow users to get verified accounts in which the site essentially confirms they are who they claim to be. But it wouldn’t be feasible for Signal to do the same, said digital security expert Runa Sandvik, who consults on security matters for ProPublica. The nonprofit that runs Signal is small, and verification would require staffing it doesn’t have. More significantly, she said, it would require Signal to collect more information about its users, eroding the privacy protections that make it popular.

Signal did not provide comment for this article. A spokesperson for WhatsApp said “we have a strong track record of banning those trying to scam others and staying ahead of scammers and their tactics.” The spokesperson said WhatsApp “took appropriate action in line with our policies” against the account spoofing me but declined to say what that action was. In general, WhatsApp tries to root out scam accounts, even before they’re reported, by monitoring for suspicious behavior that includes attempting to launch many accounts from a single location.

It turns out, if you’re contacted by someone pretending to be a reporter, the best way to scuttle their scam is to do a little reporting of your own.

Every journalist at ProPublica has a bio page. Here is mine. On my bio page, you’ll find my Signal handle and email if you click on the Contact Me button. You can always check the Signal information or email address on my bio page to verify that I’m the person contacting you.

This is true for every ProPublica reporter: We all have our Signal numbers or usernames on our profiles, and we all have an email ending in @propublica.org.

The same goes for reporters at other outlets. If one reaches out to you and you have doubts, check their website and social accounts to verify their email or Signal or WhatsApp numbers. We’ve heard through the media grapevine and in published accounts about scams similar to mine hitting other organizations as well.

They include smaller-scale deceptions. The New York Times recently flagged an account on X falsely claiming to be an intern for the news organization. In 2023, Reuters reported that two of its reporters in China were being impersonated via Instagram and Telegram accounts that were attempting to get information on activists protesting the country’s COVID-19 policies. And just this month, a correspondent for Reuters in Saudi Arabia warned his followers that someone was impersonating him on WhatsApp.

There are also more sophisticated campaigns to be on alert for. The German government this year released a vague warning about what it described as likely a state-sponsored actor attempting to commandeer the Signal accounts of government officials and reporters across Europe. And last month, the FBI announced that individuals associated with Russian intelligence were posing as Signal’s security department to fool American government officials and journalists into providing information that would allow the hackers to take over their accounts. Once they had access, the FBI warned, they could see conversations and contact lists, and send messages as the victim.

These scams should worry anyone who cares about investigative reporting. Throughout my career, I’ve done sensitive stories exposing wrongs in politics, finance, the military and law enforcement. Many of them relied on courageous individuals who have taken leaps of faith and shared information, sometimes at real personal risk. I go to great lengths to protect my sources and make sure they are comfortable taking that risk. If potential sources have to doubt that I am who I say I am, they may be less likely to engage.

When journalists are impersonated online, like I have been, Sandvik said they shouldn’t be quiet about it.

“If and when it does happen, be very public about it, which is what you’re doing now,” she said. “Let people know this is happening so if people hear from you, they know this is something to look out for.”

----------------------------------------------------------------

[24] Android now stops you sharing your location in photos
    HN:  https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=47750669
    URL: https://shkspr.mobi/blog/2026/04/android-now-stops-you-sharing-your-location-in-photos/
    Score: 269 | Comments: 245 | By: edent | Posted: 2026-04-13 11:48 UTC

    By: Terence Eden

My wife and I run OpenBenches. It's a niche little site which lets people share photos of memorial benches and their locations. Most modern phones embed a geolocation within the photo's metadata, so we use that information to put the photos on a map.

Google's Android has now broken that.

On the web, we used to use:

 HTML<input type="file" accept="image/jpeg">

That opened the phone's photo picker and let the use upload a geotagged photo. But a while ago Google deliberately broke that.

Instead, we were encourage to use the file picker:

 HTML<input type="file">

That opened the default file manager. This had the unfortunate side-effect of allowing the user to upload any file, rather than just photos. But it did allow the EXIF metadata through unmolested. Then Google broke that as well.

Using a "Progressive Web App" doesn't work either.

So, can users transfer their photos via Bluetooth or QuickShare? No. That's now broken as well.

You can't even directly share via email without the location being stripped away.

Literally the only way to get a photo with geolocation intact is to plug in a USB cable, copy the photo to your computer, and then upload it via a desktop web browser?

Why?!?!?

Because Google run an anticompetitive monopoly on their dominant mobile operating system.

Privacy.

There's a worry that users don't know they're taking photos with geolocation enabled. If you post a cute picture of your kid / jewellery / pint then there's a risk that a ne’er-do-well could find your exact location.

Most social media services are sensible and strip the location automatically. If you try to send a geotagged photo to Facebook / Mastodon / BlueSky / WhatsApp / etc, they default to not showing the location. You can add it in manually if you want, but anyone downloading your photo won't see the geotag.

And, you know, I get it. Google doesn't want the headline "Stalkers found me, kidnapped my baby, and stole my wedding ring - how a little known Android feature puts you in danger!"

But it is just so tiresome that Google never consults their community. There was no advance notice of this change that I could find. Just a bunch of frustrated users in my inbox blaming me for breaking something.

I don't know what the answer is. Perhaps a pop up saying "This website wants to see the location of your photos. Yes / No / Always / Never"? People get tired of constant prompts and the wording will never be clear enough for most users.

It looks like the only option available will be to develop a native Android app (and an iOS one?!) with all the cost, effort, and admin that entails. Android apps have a special permission for accessing geolocation in images.

If anyone has a working way to let Android web-browsers access the full geolocation EXIF metadata of photos uploaded on the web, please drop a comment in the box.

In the meantime, please leave a +1 on this HTML Spec comment.

----------------------------------------------------------------

[25] Most people can't juggle one ball
    HN:  https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=47702887
    URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/jTGbKKGqs5EdyYoRc/most-people-can-t-juggle-one-ball
    Score: 474 | Comments: 165 | By: surprisetalk | Posted: 2026-04-09 12:35 UTC

xMost people can't juggle one ball — LessWrong

----------------------------------------------------------------

[26] Austerity Creates Fascism
    HN:  https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=47756081
    URL: https://pluralistic.net/2026/04/12/always-great/
    Score: 5 | Comments: 0 | By: Refreeze5224 | Posted: 2026-04-13 18:29 UTC

Today's links

Austerity creates fascism: We can't afford to not afford nice things.
Hey look at this: Delights to delectate.
Object permanence: The Server of Amontillado; Flapper's Dictionary; Mastercard v rec.humor.funny; Philippines electoral data breach; A front page from the Trump presidency; Spike Lee x Bernie Sanders; France v password hashing; Algorithms as Central European folk-dances; Save Comcast; Lex Luthor v export controls; Zuckerberg in the dock.
Upcoming appearances: Toronto, San Francisco, London, Berlin, NYC, Hay-on-Wye, London.
Recent appearances: Where I've been.
Latest books: You keep readin' em, I'll keep writin' 'em.
Upcoming books: Like I said, I'll keep writin' 'em.
Colophon: All the rest.

Austerity creates fascism (permalink)

I'm worried about AI psychosis. Specifically, I'm worried about the psychosis that makes our "capital allocators" spend $1.4T on the money-losingest technology in the history of the human race, in pursuit of a bizarre fantasy that if we teach the word-guessing program enough words, it will take all the jobs. That's some next-level underpants-gnomery:

https://pluralistic.net/2026/03/12/normal-technology/#bubble-exceptionalism

The thing that worries me about billionaires' AI psychosis isn't concern for their financial solvency. No, what I worry about is what happens when the seven companies that comprise a third of the S&P 500 stop trading the same $100b IOU around while pretending it's in all of their bank accounts at once and implode, vaporizing a third of the US stock market.

My concern about a massive collapse in the capital markets isn't that workers will suffer directly. Despite all the Wonderful Life rhetoric about your money being in Joe's house and the Kennedy house and Mrs Macklin's house, the reality is that the median US worker has $955 saved for retirement. You could nuke the whole financial system and not take a dime out of most workers' pockets:

https://finance.yahoo.com/news/955-saved-for-retirement-millions-are-in-that-boat-150003868.html

No, the thing that has me terrified about AI is that when it craters and takes the economy with it, that we will respond the same way we have during every financial crisis of the 21st century: with austerity, and austerity breeds fascism.

There's a direct line from every K-shaped recovery to every strong-man who's currently sending masked gunmen into the streets. The Hungarian dictator Viktor Orban rose to power after people who'd been suckered into denominating their mortgages in Swiss francs lost their houses when the currency markets moved suddenly, because the swindlers who'd sold them those mortgages took the position that wanting to live somewhere automatically made you an expert in forex risk, so caveat fuckin' emptor, baby.

Back in America, Obama decided to bail out the banks and not the people. His treasury secretary Tim Geithner told him the banks were headed for a catastrophic crash and could only be saved if he "foamed the runways" with everyday Americans' mortgages. Millions of Americans lost their homes to foreclosure as banks, flush with public cash, threw them out of their homes and then flipped them to investment banks who became the country's worst slumlords:

https://pluralistic.net/2022/02/08/wall-street-landlords/#the-new-slumlords

Americans were understandably not entirely happy with this outcome. So when Hillary Clinton replied to Donald Trump's "Make America Great Again" with "America is already great," her message was, "Vote for me if you think everything is great; vote for Trump if you think everything is fucked":

https://www.politico.com/blogs/2016-dem-primary-live-updates-and-results/2016/03/clinton-america-is-already-great-220078

"Austerity begets fascism" is one of those things that makes a lot of intuitive sense, but it turns out that there's a good empirical basis for believing it. In "Public Service Decline and Support for the Populist Right" four economists from the LSE and Bocconi provide an excellent look at the linkage between austerity and support for fascists:

https://catherinedevries.eu/NHS.pdf

Here's how they break it down. Political scientists have assembled a large, reproducible body of evidence to show that "public service provision is crucial to people’s perceptions of their quality of life and living standards." Good public services are the basis for "the social contract between rulers and the ruled" – pay your taxes and obey the laws, and in return, you will be well served.

When public services go wrong, people don't always know who to blame, but they definitely notice that something is going wrong, so when public services fail, people stop trusting the state, and that social contract starts to fray. They start to suspect that elites are lining their pockets rather than managing the system, and they "withdraw their support" for the system.

Fascists thrive in these conditions. Fascists come to power by mobilizing grievances. By choosing a scapegoat, fascists can create support from people who are justifiably furious that the services they rely on have collapsed. So when you can't get shelter, or health care, or elder care, or child care, or an education for your kids, you become a mark for a fascist grifter with a story about "undeserving migrants" who've taken the benefits that should rightly accrue to "deserving natives."

(This is grimly hilarious, given that the wizened, decrepit rich world is critically dependent on migrants as a source of healthy, working-age workers who pay massive amounts into the system while barely making use of it, many of whom plan on retiring to their home countries when they do reach the age where they're likely to extract a net loss to the benefits system.)

Enter the NHS, a beloved institution that is hailed as the pride of the nation by both the political left and the right. The majority of Britons use the NHS, with only 12-14% of the population "going private," so when the NHS declines, everybody notices (what's more, even people with private care use the NHS for many of their needs).

Britons love the NHS and they want the government to spend more on it. There's "a broad public consensus that the government is not going far enough when it comes to funding." That's because generations of cuts to the NHS have left it substantially hollowed out, with major parts of the service handed over to for-profit entities who overcharge and underserve.

The most tangible and immediate evidence of this slow-motion collapse comes when your local general practitioner ("family doctor" or "primary care physician" in Americanese) shuts down. The UK has lost 1,700 GP practices since 2013.

Reasoning that a GP closure would make people angry at the system, the economists behind the paper wanted to see what happened to people's political beliefs when their GP's office shut. They relied on the GP Patient Survey, a longitudinal study run by NHS England and Ipsos Mori. The survey asks a statistically significant random sample of patients from every GP practice in the NHS and then weights the results "to reflect the demographic characteristics of the local population according to UK Census estimates." It's good data.

The researchers cross-referenced this with various high-quality instruments that measured the political views of Britons, like the U Essex Understanding Society Panel, drawing on 13 years' worth of surveys from 2009-2022, gaining access to a protected version of the dataset with fine-grained geographic information about survey respondents, which allowed them to link responses to the "catchment areas" for specific GPs' office. They combined this data with the British Election Study panel, which has surveyed voters 29 times since 2014.

Most of the paper describes the careful work the researchers did to analyze, cross-reference and validate this data, but what interested me was the conclusion: that people who see a severe degradation in the quality of the services they rely on switch their political affiliation to one of Britain's fascist parties – UKIP, the Brexit Party, or Reform – parties that have called for ethnic cleansing in Britain.

This is what has me scared. We can see the looming economic crises in our near future. If it's not the AI crash that triggers the next wave of austerity, it'll be the oil crisis created by Trump's bungling in the Strait of Epstein. And of course, we could always get a twofer, because the Gulf States that were pouring hundreds of billions into AI data-centers now need every cent to rebuild the LNG shipping terminals and oil refineries that Iran blew up after Trump, Hegseth and Netanyahu started murdering all the schoolgirls they could target. Once they nope out of the AI bubble, that could trigger the collapse.

This is a study about the NHS, but it's not just about the NHS. It's perfectly reasonable to assume that people react this way when they experience cuts to their road maintenance, their schools, their community centers, and any other service they rely on. Fascism – what Hannah Arendt called 'organized loneliness' – can only take root when people stop believing that their society will reward their lawfulness with an orderly and humane existence.

The crisis is coming, but whether we do austerity when it gets here is our choice. Everywhere we turn, political leaders are rejecting generations of failed austerity in favor of "sewer socialism" – the idea that you get people to trust their government by earning that trust. Zohran Mamdani is fixing 100,000 potholes in the first 100 days, despite the multi-billion dollar deficit that outgoing Mayor Eric Adams created by "running the city like a business":

https://prospect.org/2026/04/10/zohran-mamdani-getting-new-york-city-believe-in-government/

In Canada and the UK, party leaders like Avi Lewis (NDP) and Zack Polanski (Greens) are vowing to fight the coming crises by spending, not cutting. Compare that with UK fascist leader Nigel Farage, who says that if he's elected, he'll create a "paramilitary style" British ICE, building concentration camps for 24,000 migrants, with the hope of deporting 288,000 people per year:

https://www.thenerve.news/p/reform-deportation-operation-restoring-justice-data-surveillance-palantir-uk-labour

"Socialism or barbarism" isn't just a cliche – it's actually a choice on the ballot.

Hey look at this (permalink)

France's government is ditching Windows for Linux, calling US tech dependence a strategic risk https://www.xda-developers.com/frances-government-ditching-windows-for-linux/

The Indie News Queen Who’s Not Done Pissing Off the Powerful https://www.wired.com/story/the-indie-news-queen-whos-not-done-pissing-off-the-powerful/

Another Court Rules Copyright Can’t Stop People From Reading and Speaking the Law https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2026/04/another-court-rules-copyright-cant-stop-people-reading-and-speaking-law

EFF is Leaving X https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2026/04/eff-leaving-x

Seven countries now generate 100% of their electricity from renewable energy https://www.the-independent.com/tech/renewable-energy-solar-nepal-bhutan-iceland-b2533699.html

Object permanence (permalink)

#25yrsago The Server of Amontillado https://web.archive.org/web/20070112024841/http://www.techweb.com/wire/story/TWB20010409S0012

#25yrsago Mastercard threatens the moderator of rec.humor.funny https://www.netfunny.com/rhf/jokes/01/Apr/mcrhf.html

#15yrsago Sweden exports sweatshops: Ikea’s first American factory https://web.archive.org/web/20190404035900/https://www.latimes.com/business/la-xpm-2011-apr-10-la-fi-ikea-union-20110410-story.html

#15yrsago Canada’s New Democratic Party promises national broadband and net neutrality https://web.archive.org/web/20110412064952/https://www.michaelgeist.ca/content/view/5734/125/

#15yrsago Flapper’s dictionary: 1922 https://bookflaps.blogspot.com/2011/04/flappers-dictionary.html

#15yrsago Toronto’s Silver Snail to leave Queen Street West https://web.archive.org/web/20110409181737/http://www.thestar.com/entertainment/article/970520–the-silver-snail-comics-icon-sold-to-move

#15yrsago WI county clerk whose homemade voting software found 14K votes for Tea Party judge is an old hand at illegal campaigning https://web.archive.org/web/20110412121323/http://host.madison.com/wsj/news/local/govt-and-politics/elections/article_7e777016-62b2-11e0-9b74-001cc4c002e0.html

#15yrsago Canadian Tories’ campaign pledge: We will spy on the Internet https://web.archive.org/web/20110412125250/https://www.michaelgeist.ca/content/view/5733/125/

#15yrsago France to require unhashed password storage https://www.bbc.com/news/technology-12983734

#15yrsago Central European folk-dancers illustrated sorting algorithms https://www.i-programmer.info/news/150-training-a-education/2255-sorting-algorithms-as-dances.html

#10yrsago Save Comcast! https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2016/04/save-comcast

#10yrsago Goldman Sachs will pay $5B for fraudulent sales of toxic debt, no one will go to jail https://web.archive.org/web/20160412155435/https://consumerist.com/2016/04/11/goldman-sachs-to-pay-5b-to-settle-charges-of-selling-troubled-mortgages-ahead-of-the-financial-crisis/

#10yrsago How could Lex Luthor beat the import controls on kryptonite? https://lawandthemultiverse.com/2016/04/11/batman-v-superman-and-import-licenses/

#10yrsago Congresscritters spend 4 hours/day on the phone, begging for money https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ylomy1Aw9Hk

#10yrsago Philippines electoral data breach much worse than initially reported, possibly worst ever https://www.infosecurity-magazine.com/news/every-voter-in-philippines-exposed/

#10yrsago A cashless society as a tool for censorship and social control https://web.archive.org/web/20260311032317/https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2016/04/cashless-society/477411/

#10yrsago Boston Globe previews a front page from the Trump presidency https://s3.documentcloud.org/documents/2797782/Ideas-Trump-front-page.pdf

#10yrsago Spike Lee interviews Bernie Sanders: Vermont, Trump, Clinton, guns and Brooklyn https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/movies/movie-features/bernie-sanders-interviewed-by-spike-lee-thr-new-york-issue-880788/

#5yrsago Youtube blocks advertisers from targeting "Black Lives Matter" https://pluralistic.net/2021/04/10/brand-safety-rupture/#brand-safety

#5yrsago Google's short-lived data-advantage https://pluralistic.net/2021/04/11/halflife/#minatory-legend

#1yrago Zuckerberg in the dock https://pluralistic.net/2025/04/11/it-is-better-to-buy/#than-to-compete

#1yrago The most remarkable thing about antitrust (that no one talks about) https://pluralistic.net/2025/04/10/solidarity-forever-2/#oligarchism

Upcoming appearances (permalink)

Toronto: DemocracyXchange, Apr 16
https://www.democracyxchange.org/news/cory-doctorow-to-open-dxc26-on-april-16

San Francisco: 2026 Berkeley Spring Forum on M&A and the Boardroom, Apr 23
https://www.theberkeleyforum.com/#agenda

London: Resisting Big Tech Empires (LSBU), Apr 25
https://www.tickettailor.com/events/globaljusticenow/2042691

NYC: Enshittification at Commonweal Ventures, Apr 29
https://luma.com/ssgfvqz8

NYC: Techidemic with Sarah Jeong, Tochi Onyibuchi and Alia Dastagir (PEN World Voices), Apr 30
https://worldvoices.pen.org/event/techidemic/

Berlin: Re:publica, May 18-20
https://re-publica.com/de/news/rp26-sprecher-cory-doctorow

Berlin: Enshittification at Otherland Books, May 19
https://www.otherland-berlin.de/de/event-details/cory-doctorow.html

Hay-on-Wye: HowTheLightGetsIn, May 22-25
https://howthelightgetsin.org/festivals/hay/big-ideas-2

SXSW London, Jun 2
https://www.sxswlondon.com/session/how-big-tech-broke-the-internet-b3c4a901

Recent appearances (permalink)

The internet is getting worse (CBC The National)
https://youtu.be/dCVUCdg3Uqc?si=FMcA0EI_Mi13Lw-P

Do you feel screwed over by big tech? (Ontario Today)
https://www.cbc.ca/listen/live-radio/1-45-ontario-today/clip/16203024-do-feel-screwed-big-tech

Launch for Cindy's Cohn's "Privacy's Defender" (City Lights)
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WuVCm2PUalU

Chicken Mating Harnesses (This Week in Tech)
https://twit.tv/shows/this-week-in-tech/episodes/1074

The Virtual Jewel Box (U Utah)
https://tanner.utah.edu/podcast/enshittification-cory-doctorow-matthew-potolsky/

Latest books (permalink)

"Canny Valley": A limited edition collection of the collages I create for Pluralistic, self-published, September 2025 https://pluralistic.net/2025/09/04/illustrious/#chairman-bruce

"Enshittification: Why Everything Suddenly Got Worse and What to Do About It," Farrar, Straus, Giroux, October 7 2025
https://us.macmillan.com/books/9780374619329/enshittification/

"Picks and Shovels": a sequel to "Red Team Blues," about the heroic era of the PC, Tor Books (US), Head of Zeus (UK), February 2025 (https://us.macmillan.com/books/9781250865908/picksandshovels).

"The Bezzle": a sequel to "Red Team Blues," about prison-tech and other grifts, Tor Books (US), Head of Zeus (UK), February 2024 (thebezzle.org).

"The Lost Cause:" a solarpunk novel of hope in the climate emergency, Tor Books (US), Head of Zeus (UK), November 2023 (http://lost-cause.org).

"The Internet Con": A nonfiction book about interoperability and Big Tech (Verso) September 2023 (http://seizethemeansofcomputation.org). Signed copies at Book Soup (https://www.booksoup.com/book/9781804291245).

"Red Team Blues": "A grabby, compulsive thriller that will leave you knowing more about how the world works than you did before." Tor Books http://redteamblues.com.

"Chokepoint Capitalism: How to Beat Big Tech, Tame Big Content, and Get Artists Paid, with Rebecca Giblin", on how to unrig the markets for creative labor, Beacon Press/Scribe 2022 https://chokepointcapitalism.com

Upcoming books (permalink)

"The Reverse-Centaur's Guide to AI," a short book about being a better AI critic, Farrar, Straus and Giroux, June 2026 (https://us.macmillan.com/books/9780374621568/thereversecentaursguidetolifeafterai/)

"Enshittification, Why Everything Suddenly Got Worse and What to Do About It" (the graphic novel), Firstsecond, 2026

"The Post-American Internet," a geopolitical sequel of sorts to Enshittification, Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2027

"Unauthorized Bread": a middle-grades graphic novel adapted from my novella about refugees, toasters and DRM, FirstSecond, 2027

"The Memex Method," Farrar, Straus, Giroux, 2027

Colophon (permalink)

Today's top sources:

Currently writing: "The Post-American Internet," a sequel to "Enshittification," about the better world the rest of us get to have now that Trump has torched America. Third draft completed. Submitted to editor.

"The Reverse Centaur's Guide to AI," a short book for Farrar, Straus and Giroux about being an effective AI critic. LEGAL REVIEW AND COPYEDIT COMPLETE.

"The Post-American Internet," a short book about internet policy in the age of Trumpism. PLANNING.

A Little Brother short story about DIY insulin PLANNING

This work – excluding any serialized fiction – is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 license. That means you can use it any way you like, including commercially, provided that you attribute it to me, Cory Doctorow, and include a link to pluralistic.net.

https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

Quotations and images are not included in this license; they are included either under a limitation or exception to copyright, or on the basis of a separate license. Please exercise caution.

How to get Pluralistic:

Blog (no ads, tracking, or data-collection):

Pluralistic.net

Newsletter (no ads, tracking, or data-collection):

https://pluralistic.net/plura-list

Mastodon (no ads, tracking, or data-collection):

https://mamot.fr/@pluralistic

Bluesky (no ads, possible tracking and data-collection):

https://bsky.app/profile/doctorow.pluralistic.net

Medium (no ads, paywalled):

https://doctorow.medium.com/

Tumblr (mass-scale, unrestricted, third-party surveillance and advertising):

https://mostlysignssomeportents.tumblr.com/tagged/pluralistic

"When life gives you SARS, you make sarsaparilla" -Joey "Accordion Guy" DeVilla

READ CAREFULLY: By reading this, you agree, on behalf of your employer, to release me from all obligations and waivers arising from any and all NON-NEGOTIATED agreements, licenses, terms-of-service, shrinkwrap, clickwrap, browsewrap, confidentiality, non-disclosure, non-compete and acceptable use policies ("BOGUS AGREEMENTS") that I have entered into with your employer, its partners, licensors, agents and assigns, in perpetuity, without prejudice to my ongoing rights and privileges. You further represent that you have the authority to release me from any BOGUS AGREEMENTS on behalf of your employer.

ISSN: 3066-764X

----------------------------------------------------------------

[27] Ask HN: What Are You Working On? (April 2026)
    HN:  https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=47741527
    Score: 299 | Comments: 1009 | By: david927 | Posted: 2026-04-12 16:24 UTC

What are you working on?  Any new ideas that you're thinking about?

----------------------------------------------------------------

[28] I ran Gemma 4 as a local model in Codex CLI
    HN:  https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=47744255
    URL: https://blog.danielvaughan.com/i-ran-gemma-4-as-a-local-model-in-codex-cli-7fda754dc0d4
    Score: 213 | Comments: 90 | By: dvaughan | Posted: 2026-04-12 20:43 UTC

    [scrape failed: http 403]

----------------------------------------------------------------

[29] I gave every train in New York an instrument
    HN:  https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=47719490
    URL: https://www.trainjazz.com/
    Score: 369 | Comments: 70 | By: joshuawolk | Posted: 2026-04-10 15:21 UTC

    [no extractable content]

----------------------------------------------------------------

[30] A perfectable programming language
    HN:  https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=47744540
    URL: https://alok.github.io/lean-pages/perfectable-lean/
    Score: 196 | Comments: 108 | By: yuppiemephisto | Posted: 2026-04-12 21:11 UTC

    By: Alok Singh

at a party, Sydney Von Arx asked if i could name 40 programming languages. yeah, that's the bay for you. racket, agda, clean, elm, typescript, sh, ASP, verilog, javascript, scheme, rust, nim, intercal, sed, isabelle, visual basic, zsh, alokscript, coq, idris, hack, prolog, whitespace, purescript, go, odin, haskell, python, tcsh, unison, clingo, bash, java, zig, cyclone, php, awk, c, actionscript, c++.

But Lean is the best.

why?

because it's perfectable. it's not perfect, but it is perfectable. you can write down properties about Lean, in Lean.

the whole edifice of these facts and properties shall be known as progress.

in every language, you eventually wanna say stuff about the code itself.

like here's a function that always returns 5, but in almost no language can you really use that fact in a way that the language itself helps you with.

function returnFive(x : number) : number {
  return 5;
}
def returnFive (unused variable `x` Note: This linter can be disabled with `set_option linter.unusedVariables false`x : Int) : Int := 5 theorem returnFive_eq_five (x : Int) : returnFive x = 5 := rfl example (a : Int) : 6 = returnFive a + 1 := bya:Int⊢ 6 = returnFive a + 1 unfold returnFivea:Int⊢ 6 = 5 + 1 rflAll goals completed! 🐙

languages without types tend to grow them, like PHP in 7.4 and Python type annotations, and the general trend towards TypeScript and Rust.

inevitably, people want to push types. even Go. C++ templates are the ultimate example. if it can be computed at compile time, at some point someone wants to, like Rust's ongoing constification.

but the easiest way to do anything is properly. doing it properly is basically dependent types. there are fancier things than them, but like Turing-completeness, dependent types can get you there. hence perfectable.

on top of the types, you want infrastructure for showing 2 types are equal/not equal. this is basically a theorem prover. any dependent language can become a theorem prover, but it needs to grow the nice API we call "theorem proving infrastructure".

that's half the story. the semantics half. the syntax half is metaprogramming and custom syntax.

metaprogramming

most languages have no facility for this, or it's a bit awkward, like Rust's procedural macros.

Lean is freakishly seamless. here's tic-tac-toe with a custom board notation: /-- The two players in tic-tac-toe. -/ inductive Player where | X | O deriving BEq, Inhabited /-- A square on the board: either empty or occupied by a player. -/ inductive Square where /-- Nobody has played here yet. -/ | empty /-- A player has claimed this square. -/ | occupied (player : Player) deriving BEq, Inhabited @[simp] def boardSize : Nat := 9 /-- A 3x3 tic-tac-toe board. -/ structure Board where squares : Array Square deriving BEq

now the custom syntax: /-- A cell in the board literal: `X`, `O`, or `_` (empty). -/ declare_syntax_cat tttCell syntax "X" : tttCell syntax "O" : tttCell syntax "_" : tttCell /-- A row of three cells separated by `|`. -/ declare_syntax_cat tttRow syntax (name := tttRowRule) tttCell "|" tttCell "|" tttCell : tttRow /-- Three rows make a complete 3x3 board. -/ declare_syntax_cat tttBoardSyntax syntax tttRow tttRow tttRow : tttBoardSyntax /-- Elaborate a single cell into a `Square`. -/ private def elabTttCell (stx : Lean.Syntax) : Lean.Elab.Term.TermElabM Square := match stx with | `(tttCell| X) => pure (.occupied .X) | `(tttCell| O) => pure (.occupied .O) | `(tttCell| _) => pure .empty | _ => Lean.throwError s!"unsupported cell syntax {stx}" open Lean Elab Term in /-- `board!` turns a visual board layout into a `Board` at compile time. Each cell is validated during elaboration. -/ elab "board! " b:tttBoardSyntax : term => do let mut squares : Array Square := #[] unless b.raw.getNumArgs = 3 do Lean.throwError s!"Expected 3 rows, got {b.raw.getNumArgs}" for rowIdx in [:3] do let row := b.raw.getArg rowIdx unless row.isOfKind `tttRowRule do Lean.throwError s!"malformed tttRow" let cells := #[row.getArg 0, row.getArg 2, row.getArg 4] for cell in cells do squares := squares.push (← elabTttCell cell) unless squares.size = boardSize do Lean.throwError s!"internal error: expected 9 squares, got {squares.size}" let squareTerms ← squares.mapM fun sq => match sq with | .empty => `(Square.empty) | .occupied .X => `(Square.occupied Player.X) | .occupied .O => `(Square.occupied Player.O) let arrSyntax ← `(#[$squareTerms,*]) let boardTerm ← `(Board.mk $arrSyntax) Lean.Elab.Term.elabTerm boardTerm none X | O | _ _ | X | _ O | _ | X#eval board! X | O | _ _ | X | _ O | _ | X Win X#eval getGameStatus (board! X | X | X O | O | _ _ | _ | _)

X | O | _
_ | X | _
O | _ | X

Win X

this lets you design APIs in layers and hide them behind syntax. plus the interpretation of the syntax can be swapped easily. Lean's type system helps a bit with the metaprogramming (but i would love to see meta-metaprogramming with some sort of modality for better infra around Lean Syntax). def «🎮 tic tac toe 🎮» : Board := board! X | O | X O | X | O X | _ | O Win X#eval getGameStatus «🎮 tic tac toe 🎮»

Win X

doing this properly just is a theorem prover. theorem proving comes about from convergent evolution in programming.

speed

this is the biggest one. slow languages suck. why use a computer then.

Lean could be faster. it's not Rust-fast, but it has a very high ceiling for optimization thanks to the ability to show 2 pieces of code equal. /-- If two functions are provably equal on all inputs, the compiler can freely substitute one for the other. -/ theorem five_plus_one_eq_six : ∀ a : Int, returnFive a + 1 = 6 := by⊢ ∀ (a : Int), returnFive a + 1 = 6 intro aa:Int⊢ returnFive a + 1 = 6 unfold returnFivea:Int⊢ 5 + 1 = 6 rflAll goals completed! 🐙

Leo de Moura seems convinced of the need for this too, enough that backward compat is going by the wayside. thankfully in AI world rewriting code is a lot easier, and a theorem prover is the ultimate refactoring tool (how could it not be?)

community

Lean is the only language in its class that's actually gaining traction. Coq, Idris, Agda — none of them are really competing anymore. Idris would otherwise count as a real programming language that's also a prover, but the community never reached critical mass. F* could count too, but its community is a rounding error. Lean is the one with raw programming ability that's also a theorem prover, and it's growing.

this blog post is itself Lean code.

For Eliza Zhang, who bet I couldn’t write a web app in C in one week using only the standard library. She was right. I didn’t know what any of those words meant. But I said the fuck I can’t, and that’s how I got into coding.

