Hacker News Top 30 — 2026-06-08

Generated on 2026-06-08 03:18 UTC

1. DeepSeek V4 Pro beats GPT-5.5 Pro on precision

Source: https://runtimewire.com/article/deepseek-v4-pro-beats-gpt-5-5-pro-on-precision
Site: RuntimeWire
Author: RuntimeWire
Published: 2026-06-08
HN activity: 108 points · 20 comments
Language: en

No extractable content.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

2. Teenage Engineering: Introducing APC-2

Source: https://teenage.engineering/products/apc-2
Site: teenage engineering
Submitter: vthommeret (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-08 01:27 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 114 points · 56 comments
Length: 364 words (~2 min read)
Language: en

professional audio disc recording system

introducing: APC–2

a professional record cutter built and designed for producing
original playback discs with superior sound quality in real time. available
exclusively via our collaborative partners and masters of analog media,
SUPERSENSE. our shared vision is to enable access to anyone who wants
their music or sound on a physical record. so far, only a limited set of
machines has been built. email us to find out how to get this machine.

technical
specifications

motordirect drive precision polished tungsten shaft variable speed
control wow and flutter < 0.01% WRMS 1.5 ppm accurate
reference clock
pitch motorvariable pitch control
automation possible directly
from DAW allows locked grooves
and other specialty cuts
cutting headstereo feedback cutting head
automated lift mechanism

vacuum systemintegrated vacuum hold
down and swarf removal

heatingtemperature controlled heating
amplifierintegrated power amplifier with feedback and riaa encoder
monitoringriaa amplifier with
headphone/line output
custom tonearm
networkremote control over ethernet
or wifi
powerone 230V/120V IEC connector
for the entire system

colorblack
materialpowder coated aluminium granite
dimensions1300 x 600 x 400 mm
51 x 23.6 x 15.7 in
weight140 kg
308 lbs
product nameAPC–2

professional audio disc recording system

introducing: APC–2

a professional record cutter built and designed for producing original playback discs with superior sound quality in real time. available exclusively via our collaborative partners and masters of analog media,
SUPERSENSE. our shared vision is to enable access to anyone who wants their music or sound on a physical record. so far, only a limited set of machines has been built. email us to find out how to get this machine.

technical
specifications

motordirect drive precision polished tungsten shaft variable speed control
wow and flutter < 0.01% WRMS 1.5 ppm accurate
reference clockpitch motorvariable pitch control
automation possible directly from DAW allows locked grooves and other specialty cutscutting headstereo feedback cutting head automated lift mechanism vacuum systemintegrated vacuum hold
down and swarf removalheatingtemperature controlled heatingamplifierintegrated power amplifier with feedback and riaa encoder

monitoringriaa amplifier with
headphone/line output
custom tonearmnetworkremote control over
ethernet or wifi powerone 230V/120V IEC connector for the
entire systemcolorblackmaterialpowder coated aluminium granitedimensions1300 x 600 x 400 mm
51 x 23.6 x 15.7 inweight140 kg
308 lbsproduct nameAPC–2

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

3. The Smallest Brain You Can Build: A Perceptron in Python

Source: https://ranpara.net/posts/perceptron-explained-from-scratch/
Site: Devarsh Ranpara
Author: Devarsh Ranpara
Published: 2026-06-07
HN activity: 74 points · 8 comments
Length: 1.8K words (~8 min read)
Language: en

A perceptron is the smallest brain you can build. One number goes in. One yes-or-no answer comes out. That is the whole thing.

It sounds too simple to matter. But this tiny idea is the seed of every neural network running today. In this post we build a perceptron from scratch in Python, and we watch it learn, live, in your browser. No heavy math. No big libraries. Just a weight, a bias, and a loop.

I am not a native English speaker, and I am still learning this field myself. So I will explain it the way I needed someone to explain it to me. Slowly, and from the ground up.

What is a perceptron?

In 1958, a researcher named Frank Rosenblatt built a machine he called the perceptron.

It was inspired by a single brain cell, a neuron. A neuron takes in signals, and if those signals are strong enough, it fires. Rosenblatt copied that idea in math:

output = 1   if (w · x + b) > 0
         0   otherwise


Here x is the input, w is the weight, and b is the bias. Do not worry about those words yet. We will meet each of them by building something real.

Think like a human first

Before a machine decides anything, let us watch a human decide. Meet John Doe. He has a job offer, and he must answer one question: should he take it?

John does not flip a coin. He weighs things. Some factors matter to him more than others.

Factor (input)	Value	How much John cares (weight)
Extra pay	high	a lot
Stays in the same city	no, he must move	a lot

John multiplies each factor by how much he cares about it, then adds everything up. If the total is high enough, he says yes. If not, he says no.

That is a perceptron. The factors are the inputs. How much he cares is the weight. And “high enough” is a threshold he carries in his head. Hold on to that threshold. Later we will give it a name: the bias.
How John Doe decides: each input is multiplied by a weight, the results are summed with a bias, and the total becomes one yes-or-no answer.

The simplest possible decision: is this number positive?

Let us shrink the problem until almost nothing is left. One input. One question.

Is this number positive?

That is it. Feed the machine a number. It should answer True for positive and False for negative.

The machine makes its guess like this:

prediction = (weight * value + bias) > 0


Multiply the input by the weight, add the bias, and check if the result is above zero. If yes, it predicts True. If no, it predicts False. This little formula is the classifier, also called the decision function.

At the start, the weight and bias are just random numbers. So the machine guesses badly. Now comes the only clever part: it learns from its mistakes.

if prediction != result:
    error = result - prediction      # True - False = 1, False - True = -1
    weight += learning_rate * error * value
    bias   += learning_rate * error


When the guess is wrong, we nudge the weight and bias in the right direction. The error tells us which way to nudge. The learning rate decides how big each nudge is. We do this for every example, then repeat the whole pass again. One full pass over the data is called an epoch. Repeating epochs is training.

Here is that exact machine. Press Train and watch it learn. Each green dot is a positive number (True), each red dot is negative (False), and the blue dashed line is where it has decided to split them.

epoch 0 weight 0 bias 0 boundary – accuracy 0%

It snaps into place almost immediately. Look at the readout: the boundary lands right around 0, and the bias settles near 0 too.

That is not an accident. For this problem, we never needed the bias at all. Which is strange, because bias is supposed to be important. To see why it matters, we need a harder question.

What is a decision boundary?

That blue line has a name: the decision boundary. It is the exact point where the machine flips from saying False to saying True.

We can compute it. The boundary sits where w · x + b = 0. Solve for x:

decision_boundary = -bias / weight


For “is this number positive,” the boundary should be at 0. And it is. Now watch what happens when the right answer is not at zero.

Why do we need bias? The student-pass example

New problem. Same machine. We give it exam scores from 0 to 100, and we ask:

Did the student pass?

The rule is simple: a score of 50 or higher passes. So the decision boundary should sit at 50, not at 0.

Let us try to solve it the way we solved the last one, using the weight only. In the demo below, turn off “Use bias” and press Train.

epoch 0 weight 0 bias 0 boundary – accuracy 0%

Use bias

Watch the accuracy. It climbs to around 50 percent and then gets stuck. It cannot do better, no matter how long you train it.

Here is why. With no bias, the formula is just weight * score. Every exam score is a positive number. So if the weight is positive, the machine calls every student a pass. If the weight is negative, it fails everyone. The boundary is glued to 0, and it cannot move. A line forced through zero simply cannot separate “below 50” from “50 and up.”

Now turn “Use bias” back on and press Train again. The accuracy climbs all the way to 100 percent, and the boundary slides over and parks near 50.

That is the whole job of the bias. The weight sets the steepness. The bias moves the boundary left or right so it can sit wherever the answer actually is. Remember decision_boundary = -bias / weight. With a bias, the boundary can be anything. Without one, it is stuck at zero forever.

The one sentence to remember: when your inputs sit far from zero, you need a bias to move the line to them.

How does a perceptron learn? Epochs and learning rate

You saw two dials while training: epochs and learning rate.

An epoch is one full pass over all the data. The machine rarely gets everything right in a single pass, so we go again, and again. More epochs means more chances to fix mistakes. That is why accuracy climbs as you keep training.

The learning rate is the size of each correction. In the code it is the learning_rate multiplier:

weight += learning_rate * error * value


Small steps are careful but slow. Big steps are fast but can overshoot and bounce around. Choosing it well is part of the craft. Here we used 0.1, which is gentle enough to stay stable.

Why do we normalize data?

There is a quiet problem hiding in the pass example. Look at that update line again:

weight += learning_rate * error * value


The correction is multiplied by value. For exam scores, value can be as large as 100. So a single wrong guess can throw the weight by a huge amount. The machine still learns, but it lurches around instead of settling smoothly.

The fix is normalization: shrink the inputs to a small, tidy range before training. The simplest version is to divide every score by the largest possible score, so 0 to 100 becomes 0 to 1.

In the demo below, first press Train with normalization off and watch the accuracy line jump around on its way up. Then turn “Normalize data” on, reset, and train again. Same machine, same answer, but it gets there in a fraction of the epochs, and the climb is smooth.

accuracy per epoch

epoch 0 weight 0 bias 0 boundary – accuracy 0%

Normalize data

One honest note. With a single input like this, normalization mostly buys you speed and calm. It becomes essential when your inputs live on very different scales. Think back to John Doe: his pay was measured in thousands of dollars, but “same city” was just a 0 or a 1. Without normalization, the dollars would drown out everything else, and the machine would basically ignore the city. Putting both on the same scale lets each factor get a fair say. (Dividing by the max is the easy version; a common general method is to subtract the mean and divide by the spread, called standardization.)

The full perceptron in Python

Here is the complete program for “is this number positive,” with nothing hidden. It is short enough to read in one sitting.

import random

learning_rate = 0.1
EPOCHS = 100

weight = random.uniform(-1, 1)
bias   = random.uniform(-1, 1)

# positive numbers are True, negative numbers are False
data  = [(i * 0.1, True)  for i in range(1, 501)]
data += [(i * 0.1, False) for i in range(-500, 0)]
random.shuffle(data)

for epoch in range(EPOCHS):
    for value, result in data:
        prediction = (weight * value + bias) > 0
        if prediction != result:
            error = result - prediction          # +1 or -1
            weight += learning_rate * error * value
            bias   += learning_rate * error

decision_boundary = -bias / weight
print(f"weight = {weight:.3f}")
print(f"bias   = {bias:.3f}")
print(f"decision boundary = {decision_boundary:.3f}")


To turn this into the student-pass machine, you change two things: make the data exam scores with result = score >= 50, and, if you want to feel the pain of a missing bias, freeze the bias at 0. Everything else stays the same.

Acknowledgments

The core inspiration for this post came from the fantastic video ChatGPT is made from 100 million of these [The Perceptron] by Welch Labs. If you are a visual learner and want to see the rich history and hardware behind these concepts, I highly recommend watching it!

What’s next?

You just built a working perceptron. It takes an input, weighs it, adds a bias, and decides. It learns from its own mistakes, one epoch at a time.

A single neuron can only draw one straight line. The magic starts when you stack them: the output of one neuron becomes the input of the next. Layer enough of them together and you get a neural network that can learn shapes far more tangled than a single line. But every one of those neurons is doing exactly what you just watched. A weight, a bias, a decision.

If you want the non-technical story of how I ended up writing code in Canada at all, I wrote about it here: The Outsider Who Shipped Anyway.

Thanks for building this with me. Now go change the numbers and break it. That is the fastest way to learn.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

4. Building from zero after addiction, prison, and a felony

Source: https://gavinray97.github.io/blog/building-from-zero-after-addiction-prison-felony
Site: Gavin Ray
Author: Gavin Ray
Published: 2026-06-07
HN activity: 465 points · 206 comments
Length: 2.6K words (~12 min read)
Language: en

Building from Zero After Addiction, Prison, and a Felony

I spent ages 14–16 in a maximum-security juvenile prison, became a felon at 19, lost almost everything to addiction, and later rebuilt my life through software, open source, and a few people who took a chance on me.

I've wanted to write this for a while, but kept finding reasons not to. It felt too personal, too risky, and too easy to misread.

Recently, I decided on two things:

After seeing Preston Thorpe speak publicly about his own background, I wondered how many others like us were silently lurking in tech
I'm far enough in my career with enough contributions to OSS and community involvement, that I think I'll probably be alright

I wrote this for anyone quietly wondering whether they have no chance at a future.

Below is the much-condensed life story of my struggles with addiction, poverty, and incarceration + life after being a felon. My hope is that it serves as encouragement to others who are in similar circumstances that things CAN get better.

Amphetamine Addict and Prison at 14

I was a model student up until around puberty and middle school. Then, I think a combination of being bullied for being overweight and teenage hormones, led me to be just the wrong combination of resentful, angry, unhappy, and rebellious.

I started getting in fistfights with people that made fun of me, being a huge asshole to teachers, stopped doing schoolwork, and started experimenting with drugs.

The beginning of the end: The day I bought an Adderall from a classmate. When that amphetamine feeling kicked-in, it was as if life was perfect for the first time. I was happy, confident, felt I could do anything. I wanted to feel this way every waking moment for the rest of my life.

Being 14, I had no job, and I do not come from money. So, logically, I did the thing one must do if one wishes to sustain a drug habit: Devise a way to make money.

The easiest way to make money at 14 turned out to be dealing drugs, so I started selling various prescription medications on a "buy-low-sell-high" basis from other students at school.

This was short-lived, as I had the huge mouth of a rebellious "I'm invincible" 14-year old boy, and I was shortly arrested and charged with 17 counts of Possession with Intent to Manufacture or Distribute a Scheduled II Controlled Substance.

I wound up spending 2 years, from 14-16 at a maximum security juvenile prison (Lookout Mountain YSC, Golden CO).

Freedom - Shortly Lived

In prison, I got my GED, and after release briefly enrolled in community college. I was working as a landscaper doing manual labor for $8/hr and then riding a bus 1hr each way to night classes. Not to say this sort of thing can't be done (people do it all the time), but I didn't have the tenacity or motivation to keep it up, so I dropped out.

I stayed sober for a brief period between 16-17. Not having learned my lesson, I again started selling drugs. I had learned about The Silk Road and the Darknet and was ordering (what was then) a legal "Research Chemical" with effects similar to MDMA (Methylone/bk-MDMA) shipped to my parents house. Eventually, my dad got home early from work and intercepted a package. Asking me what it was before I left for work, I told him "I don't know, never heard of the return address name". My father was not an idiot; he told me he was going to open it while I was at work, so I confessed "it's drugs."

Cue huge argument, him insisting he was going to remove everything from my room except my clothes and bed (most of which I paid for myself) and I would not be allowed to leave except for work. This was not an agreeable circumstance to me, so I refused -- at which point my dad said "then you won't be living here anymore!".

It's important to note that in Colorado (at the time, at least), emancipation of a minor was not a status one could file for, but instead purely a court status to be recognized during legal proceedings. That meant there was technically no avenue for me to legally move out before 18 with proper legal status.

So this, to me, sounded like sweet freedom & release, rather than a punishment. "You really won't call the police if I leave?" "Nope." I packed my backpack with my laptop and cash savings, and a suitcase with my clothes, and left. I had no plan but that was a bridge to be crossed.

It turned out that the parents of a friend had an unused bedroom in their trailer they would rent to me under-the-table for $300/mo. I jumped at that and slept on the floor of a trailer for 6 months.

I worked as a landscaper, at a lumber mill, and as a cashier at Walgreens, continuing to sell drugs on the side.

Inevitably, I wound up being arrested again on drug-related charges, and spent 18-19 in county jail. It was then that I became a convicted felon with a low-class felony.

A Serendipitous News Article & a Software Job

While I was in county jail, one day the newspaper had a small article in it: "Tech company offers internships to at-risk & underprivileged youth"

I had spent my childhood on the computer, playing videogames and eventually teaching myself to program to make game mods. I knew from a young age I wanted to be a programmer (I thought I wanted to make videogames, as most young children do).

This to me, seemed like a fortuitous opportunity. I cut the article out and put it in a documents folder.

Eventually, I was moved from regular jail population into the Work-Release jail program, where they let you out during the day for work. You had 1 week to find a job, and if you couldn't secure employment you were sent back permanently to finish out your sentence.

The first day out, I walked into the offices of the company from the article and asked to speak to someone. I explained that I was fresh out of jail and had seen their article while inside.

They interviewed me, decided to hire me, and I was now an intern Full-Stack Web Developer! I knew nothing of web dev, and didn't even particularly have an interest in it originally, but the job was already beyond my hopes. I had assumed I was going to spend the rest of my life working construction or similar, because of my felony.

The same news reporter that had done the original article later came to visit, and after interviewing me, did a whole writeup on it!

https://www.dailycamera.com/2017/05/12/boulder-tech-academies-swamped-as-they-race-to-retrain-workers/

Working at Techtonic was the best possible early-career experience I think anyone could have had. They did contract development, a lot of which was greenfield Saas MVP launches, across various tech stacks. There was not a lot of time for mentorship so it a very "trial-by-fire" experience -- either figure things out and ship stuff, or get the boot.

I learned frontend, backend, and dev-ops while there and worked across several languages + DB's. This was around the time Ruby on Rails + MongoDB was the hip thing. ES6 JS was still fresh and new, and it was there that our CTO did a company meeting on this new thing called "React" that we were to start learning to replace jQuery.

It's also where I met my now-wife, who I pulled into my drug use and unstable life.

Drugs, Part 2: Electric Boogaloo

Being possibly the most hardheaded individual in the universe, I fell back into drug use shortly thereafter. I managed to remain mostly-functional, until the manager at Techtonic (who did not like me) lied to the owner that I was showing up hours late every day.

She fired me (and my now-wife), and I was later redeemed when they found the truth in his Slack message history after firing him many moons later. But oh whale, "them's the breaks", as they say.

Not having a job, I spiraled harder into addiction, and eventually ran out of money to pay my rent and bills. We moved in with my biological father in Florida. He was also an addict, and instead of stability, the situation became enabling and destructive. It exploded in short order.

From Zero

After the living situation with my father exploded, I was fortunate enough to have a friend who had a spare room in the house and agreed to let me and my (now wife) stay with them for some tiny sum of money, but only temporarily until we could find work + save enough to move out and get back on our feet.

It was at this point we had nothing: A few dollars to our name, no vehicle, some clothing and a single laptop.

I had lost everything. And I had dragged this poor woman into it with me who had lost everything, too.

It was at this point my sobriety began. I had hit what we addicts call "a bottom". Not the first one, but the one that was finally grim and bleak enough to make me look at myself and go "What the fuck are you doing?" The one that finally knocked it into my skull that I didn't want to live like this anymore.

I started washing dishes at a restaurant, and my wife took a job delivering and installing large appliances (ovens, fridges, etc) at the same warehouse where the friend worked. Having no vehicle, she had to borrow the friend's bicycle and ride 30 minutes in the dark before work, and 30 minutes in the sweltering heat after work home. The hours were very long, because it was often on-site installation paid by the appliance, so many days she would work 10-12 hours + 1 hour bike ride, and come home so exhausted all she could do was sob a little before getting just enough sleep to do it all over again the next day.

Eventually, she told me that it made more sense for me to quit my job while she worked, so that I could spend all of my free time trying to get another tech job. So she alone carried us for several months. I sent out hundreds of applications. I went through final-round interviews and received offer letters from 8 companies, only to have them rescinded each time due to corporate "No Felons" HR policies. It was like having the carrot dangled right in front of my face, to be snatched away each time.

Finally, I got an interview with a tiny startup in Miami. I passed their phone screen, and drove 4 hours each way to do the in-person.

They offered me the job, and helped pay for us to relocate and temporarily stay in Airbnb's. It paid $50k, with the promise of a significant raise in 1 year when the company had more revenue. I was overjoyed with the offer and immediately accepted.

Hasura, Open Source, and the Door That Stayed Open

The system at work was an ageing Rails app that had accrued significant tech debt and was the result of an amalgam of outsourced development shops. One of them was clearly quite proficient, and the others... not so much. Part of my job was designing and implementing a V2 rewrite. While evaluating technologies for this, I stumbled upon Hasura

https://github.com/hasura/graphql-engine

Put simply, it automated the work of generating CRUD for Postgres apps, and was designed by people who clearly had hit the limitations of traditional Backend-as-a-Service type platforms. Only core CRUD was automated, and you integrated the rest of your app through wiring up your own API endpoints and implementing your own AuthN + AuthZ.

The first time I plugged in our localhost Postgres URL for dev, and had a full working CRUD API, I was hooked. Coming from a background of rapidly churning out SaaS MVP's, this was solving a very real problem for me, and it was PERFORMANT.

I became heavily involved in the Discord server, answering other people's questions, and also started sending PR's to implement features I felt were missing.

When my 1 year anniversary came around at work, the founders unfortunately still were not in a position to pay me much more. I knew the financials of the business and they weren't lying, but it was still somewhat of a disappointment. One of the Hasura employees had recently made a joke that I should just apply to work there. I figured that it couldn't hurt to at least get more info.

I went through the interview rounds more as a formality and was given an offer letter. I was offered slightly more than double my current salary! I genuinely loved working with the founders at my current job and felt terrible about leaving, but I did accept the offer and stay on for another month to finish up current work and make sure there was someone to hand off to.

The company was so small back then that there was no background check done during the interview process. After working there a while, I eventually disclosed to the Hasura founders that I had a low-grade felony, and, thank the stars, they were cool with it.

I had my dream job: Working on a developer-facing tool I genuinely loved and was a power-user of, that was also part of the Postgres ecosystem. I could not have conceived of such a perfectly-fit position. I have been working at Hasura (now PromptQL) since 2020, and I plan on riding this one all the way to it's end: either fired, bankrupt, or bought-out. (Hopefully bought-out).

Conclusion

I don't tell this story because I think it is clean, heroic, or universally applicable -- It isn't. I made TERRIBLE choices. I hurt people who loved me. I wasted chances that other people would have killed for. And even when I finally started doing the right things, I still needed luck, help, timing, forgiveness, and people willing to judge me by what I could do next instead of only by what I had done before.

But that is exactly why I wanted to write this.

If you are reading this from the middle of addiction, poverty, a criminal record, or some other hole that feels permanent: I won't insult you by claiming it's easy. It may be unfair for a long time. You may have to hear "no" from people who never even look at your work. You may have to rebuild with less room for mistake than everyone around you.

But you are not necessarily finished.

And if you are in a position to hire, mentor, review pull requests, or let someone into a room they normally would not be allowed into: please remember that talent is not evenly distributed by background check. Sometimes the person who looks risky on paper is also the person who will spend years trying to become worthy of the chance they were given.

I am alive, sober, married, employed, and working on software I care about because a handful of people took that risk on me.

I wake up grateful for that every day. And I hope, over time, to become the kind of person who gives that same chance to someone else.

AI Use Disclaimer: claude code was used to generate the OpenGraph SVG image.

No part of the prose was machine-generated. You will not find machine-written prose on this blog. I consider it deeply disrespectful.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

5. New drug 'functionally cures' many hepatitis B virus infections

Source: https://www.science.org/content/article/new-drug-functionally-cures-many-hepatitis-b-virus-infections?user_id=66c4bf745d78644b3aa57b08
Site: science.org
Submitter: gmays (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-08 01:41 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 24 points · 1 comments

Scrape failed: http 403

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

6. Algorithmic Monocultures in Hiring

Source: https://algorithmichiring.github.io/
Site: algorithmichiring.github.io
Author: Rishi Bommasani* Stanford University
Submitted: 2026-06-08 01:54 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 20 points · 1 comments
Length: 1.1K words (~5 min read)
Language: en

Paper Code Blog Cite

Over 90% of U.S. employers rely on hiring algorithms to screen job applicants. Many different employers use algorithms from the same few vendors. We conduct the largest empirical study of algorithmic hiring with data for 3.4 million real job applicants submitting 4 million applications to 156 employers across 11 market sectors. Every application was assessed by algorithms from a single vendor: we test whether this algorithmic monoculture bottlenecks job opportunities. We are the first to demonstrate large-scale evidence of racial disparities and homogeneous outcomes in high-stakes hiring decisions.

Key Findings

1 Large-scale adverse impact for Asians and Blacks. We are the first to demonstrate adverse impact in deployed algorithmic hiring as one of the largest demonstrations of unfair outcomes in real high-stakes AI decisions. 25.87% of applications submitted by Black applicants and 14.74% of applications submitted by Asian applicants are directed to positions that adversely impact them based on the standards of the relevant U.S. employment law (Title VII).

2 Adverse impact only revealed by disaggregated position-by-position analysis. While empirical studies of algorithmic hiring are very constrained due to data access limitations, prior studies showed minimal adverse impact due studying all of the vendor's data as a whole. By studying each position separately, in accordance with the standards of Title VII, we identify positions that demonstrate adverse impact that gets washed out in aggregate.

3 Algorithmic monocultures in hiring yield systemic rejections. We are the first to demonstrate systemic rejections in deployed algorithmic hiring as posited in prior theoretical research about algorithmic monoculture. The observed systemic rejection rate significantly exceeds that of the baseline of statistically independent decisions, even though the baseline accurately predicted observed systemic rejection rates in other hiring data in the absence of centralized algorithmic monocultures.

4 Data access inhibits independent research into hiring algorithms. We are the first and only group to independently conduct empirical research deployed hiring algorithms at scale, even though hiring algorithms mediate high-stakes decisions and are pervasively adopted. Given the data barriers, policy intervention may be necessary to enable scientific inquiry and increase accountability into this high-impact application of AI.

Algorithmic Hiring Pipeline

Many employers procure hiring algorithms from the same third-party vendors. Over 60% of the Fortune 100 use HireVue's algorithms. When hiring algorithms from a single vendor mediate hiring decisions at multiple employers, they constitute an algorithmic monoculture.
Figure 1. Job applications are assessed by hiring AI to be recommended or not recommended. If an applicant is not recommended by the algorithm, they are likely to be rejected without further consideration by a human.

Revealing Adverse Impact

Title VII of the US Civil Rights Act governs discrimination in hiring. Prior studies found very limited adverse impact in algorithmic hiring data as a whole. We surface previously-overlooked adverse impact by studying positions separately. Black applicants are the most likely to be adversely impacted: 30% of Black applicants apply to at least one position that demonstrates adverse impact against Black applicants. In terms of total effect, Asian applicants experience the largest shortfall: if Asians were selected at the same rate as the most selected racial group for each position, then 29000 additional Asian applications would be recommended.
Figure 2. Adverse impact according to the Title VII four-fifths rule measured at the level of positions (left) and applications/applicants (center). The shortfall (right) is the number of applications that would have been selected if the adversely impacted racial group was selected at the same rate as the most selected group.

Identifying Systemic Rejection

When applicants apply to multiple positions, they can receive the same outcomes. Algorithmic monoculture could make this most likely. If so, the systemic rejections where applicants are rejected everywhere would be especially concerning. Of applicants that submit 4 applications, 10% are systemically rejected. The observed systemic rejection rate significantly exceeds the baseline rate expected under independent decisions (χ2 = 18,481, p < 0.001).
Figure 3. Systemic rejection rates in hiring AI data. The observed rates always exceed the baseline: shared dependence on one vendor yields homogeneous outcomes.

To contextualize the observed systemic rejection rates, we introduce the baseline of independent decisions (Toups et al., 2023). To test the predictivity of this baseline, we use data from the largest prior study of hiring (Kline et al., 2022), which sent 83,000 applications to 108 Fortune 500 firms. The baseline accurately predicts the observed rates (χ2 = 20.05, p = 0.69). Therefore, excess homogeneity is distinctive of centralized algorithmic assessment.
Figure 4. Systemic rejection rates for data from Kline et al. (2022). Unlike the algorithmic hiring data, the baseline accurately predicted the observed rates.

Simulating Counterfactual Outcomes

What would happen if applicants applied more broadly than they did in reality? Would this lessen their chances of systemc rejection? When applicants apply everywhere, we find that at least one model recommends them. But under more realistic behavior, applicants need to submit 25 applications to ensure at least one recommendation with 99.9% probability — compared to just 10 applications for independent decisions.
Figure 5. Simulated systemic rejection rates if applicants applied where they applied in reality, as well as to neighboring models that share applicants.

Policy Recommendations

Hiring AI is governed by employment discrimination law, general AI regulation, and specific rules for algorithmic hiring. In the U.S., Title VII already evaluates adverse impact at the level of specific jobs rather than blended aggregates. More broadly, hiring systems are increasingly treated as high-risk AI, including under the EU AI Act. At the municipal level, New York City Local Law 144 established an early framework for regulating automated employment decision tools, but current guidance does not adequately address the position-level effects we document.

1

Measure adverse impact per position. Regulators and auditors should evaluate adverse impact ratios at the level of individual positions. Aggregate-only analyses can conceal disparate impact.

2

Strengthen market surveillance. Federal agencies should quantify the rate of homogeneous outcomes. Without cross-employer links, existing reporting won't capture systemic rejection.

3

Monitor algorithmic monoculture. Policymakers should surveil shared dependencies in the hiring supply chain. Concentrated reliance on the same systems can yield correlated failures, systemic rejection, and reduced competition in hiring.

4

Expand researcher access. Legislators should stimulate independent research, including underlying data access, into major hiring platforms. Issues will be difficult to diagnose, let alone rectify, without the foundation of empirically-grounded externally-conducted inquiry.

Citation

@article{bommasani2026algorithmic, title={Algorithmic Monocultures in Hiring}, author={Bommasani, Rishi and Bana, Sarah H. and Creel, Kathleen A. and Jurafsky, Dan and Liang, Percy}, booktitle={Proceedings of the 2026 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency}, year={2026} }

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

7. A Matter Wi-Fi Light Bulb in Rust on the Raspberry Pi Pico 2 W

Source: https://github.com/melastmohican/rust-rpico2-embassy-examples
Site: GitHub
Submitter: melastmohican (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-08 00:17 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 53 points · 3 comments
Length: 1.2K words (~6 min read)
Language: en

This repository contains examples for the Raspberry Pi Pico 2 (RP2350) board, written in Rust using the Embassy async framework.

Project generated

cargo generate --git https://github.com/ImplFerris/pico2-template.git --name rust-rpico2-embassy-examples

Hardware

Board: Raspberry Pi Pico 2

MCU: RP2350 (Dual-core Arm Cortex-M33 and RISC-V cores)
On-board peripherals:

LED on GPIO25

Pinout

Common Pin Assignments

I2C pins:

I2C0 SDA: GPIO4
I2C0 SCL: GPIO5
I2C1 SDA: GPIO2
I2C1 SCL: GPIO3
UART pins:

UART0 TX: GPIO0, UART0 RX: GPIO1
UART1 TX: GPIO8, UART1 RX: GPIO9

Examples

I2C Examples

hs3003_i2c

Reads temperature and humidity from an HS3003 sensor using the Embassy async framework.

cargo run --example hs3003_i2c

Wiring (Arduino Modulino Thermo):

     Modulino -> RPi Pico 2
----------    --------------
GND (black) -> GND
VCC (red)   -> 3.3V
SCL (yellow)-> GPIO5 (Pin 7) (I2C0 SCL)
SDA (blue)  -> GPIO4 (Pin 6) (I2C0 SDA)


About HS3003:

The Renesas HS3003 is a high-performance temperature and humidity sensor:

Temperature range: -40°C to +125°C (±0.2°C accuracy)
Humidity range: 0% to 100% RH (±1.5% accuracy)
14-bit resolution for both measurements
Ultra-low power consumption

adxl345_i2c

Reads accelerometer data from an ADXL345 sensor over I2C0 using Embassy.

cargo run --example adxl345_i2c

Wiring:

     ADXL345 -> RPi Pico 2
----------    --------------
GND (black) -> GND
VCC (red)   -> 3.3V
SCL (yellow)-> GPIO5 (Pin 7) (I2C0 SCL)
SDA (blue)  -> GPIO4 (Pin 6) (I2C0 SDA)


About ADXL345:

The ADXL345 is a small, thin, low power, 3-axis accelerometer with high resolution (13-bit) measurement at up to ±16 g. Digital output data is formatted as 16-bit twos complement and is accessible through either an SPI (3- or 4-wire) or I2C digital interface.

SPI Display Examples

zermatt

Displays a 320x240 image of Zermatt on the Adafruit 2.2" TFT LCD display in landscape mode.

cargo run --example zermatt

Wiring (Eye-SPI Breakout):

     Raspberry Pi Pico 2              Eye-SPI Breakout
   +-----------------------+      +---------------------------+
   |                       |      |                           |
   |  3V3 (Pin 36) --------+------+-> VIN   (Red Wire)        |
   |  GND (Pin 38) --------+------+-> GND   (Black Wire)      |
   |  GPIO18 (Pin 24) -----+------+-> SCK   (Blue Wire)       |
   |  GPIO19 (Pin 25) -----+------+-> MOSI  (Green Wire)      |
   |  GPIO16 (Pin 21) -----+------+-> MISO  (Yellow Wire)     |
   |  GPIO20 (Pin 26) -----+------+-> DC    (White Wire)      |
   |  GPIO21 (Pin 27) -----+------+-> RST   (Orange Wire)     |
   |  GPIO17 (Pin 22) -----+------+-> TCS   (Blue Wire)       |
   |                       |      |                           |
   +-----------------------+      +---------------------------+


zermatt_snow

Displays a 320x240 image of Zermatt on the Adafruit 2.2" TFT LCD display with animated falling snow, utilizing a physics engine and the Embassy async framework to draw to an off-screen lcd-async framebuffer and dispatch via DMA without blocking the CPU.

cargo run --example zermatt_snow

Wiring is identical to the zermatt example.

1-Wire Examples

ds18b20

Reads temperature from a DS18B20 waterproof temperature sensor probe over a 1-Wire bus using Embassy. It utilizes a custom, cycle-accurate PreciseDelay implementation to achieve jitter-free sub-microsecond timing required by the 1-Wire protocol on the RP2350's Cortex-M33 core.

cargo run --example ds18b20

Wiring Schematic:

                              Raspberry Pi Pico 2
                           +-----------------------+
                           |                       |
                           | [ ] 1      40 [ ] USB |
                           | [ ] 2      39 [ ]     |
                           | [ ] 3      38 [G]ND --+-------+ (black)
                           | [ ] 4      37 [ ]     |       |
                           | [ ] 5      36 [3]V3 --+---+   |
                           |  ...        ...       |   |   |
                           | [ ] 20     21 [ ] ----+---+---|---+ (white, GPIO16)
                           +-----------------------+   |   |   |
                                                       |   |   |
                                                       |   |   |
                   +-----------------------------+     |   |   |
                   |     DS18B20 Sensor / Probe  |     |   |   |
                   |      (Bottom/Flat Side)     |     |   |   |
                   |                             |     |   |   |
                   |     [GND]   [DAT]   [VCC]   |     |   |   |
                   +-------|-------|-------|-----+     |   |   |
                           |       |       |           |   |   |
                           |       +-------+--[5K1]----+   | (Pull-Up Resistor
                           |       |       |   Resistor    |  between DAT & VCC)
                           |       |       +---------------+ (red)
                           +-------|-----------------------+ (black)
                                   |
                                   +--------------------------- (white)


Breadboard Layout:

About DS18B20:

The DS18B20 is a 1-Wire digital thermometer that provides 9-bit to 12-bit Celsius temperature measurements. It communicates over a 1-Wire bus, requiring only one data line (and ground) to interface with the microcontroller. It has a temperature range of -55°C to +125°C with ±0.5°C accuracy from -10°C to +85°C.

dht11

Reads temperature and humidity from a DHT11 sensor using the Embassy async framework. It utilizes the async API of the dht-sensor crate combined with our cycle-accurate PreciseDelay implementation.

cargo run --example dht11 --release

Note: Due to timing sensitivity of the DHT11 protocol during the bit-read phase, you must run this example in release mode.

Wiring Schematic:

                     Raspberry Pi Pico 2             DHT11 Module
                   +---------------------+      +---------------------+
                   |                     |      |                     |
                   | GND (Pin 38) -------+----->| GND                 |
                   | 3V3 (Pin 36) -------+----->| VCC                 |
                   | GPIO16 (Pin 21) ----+----->| DAT (Data)          |
                   |                     |      |                     |
                   +---------------------+      +---------------------+


Important

Pull-up Resistor:

If using a DHT11 module board: It likely already has a built-in pull-up resistor. No extra component is needed.
If using a bare 4-pin DHT11 sensor: You must add an external 4.7kΩ to 10kΩ pull-up resistor between the DAT (Data) and VCC lines.

About DHT11:

The DHT11 is a basic, ultra low-cost digital temperature and humidity sensor. It uses a capacitive humidity sensor and a thermistor to measure the surrounding air, and spits out a digital signal on the data pin (no analog input pins needed). It has a temperature range of 0°C to 50°C (±2°C accuracy) and humidity range of 20% to 90% RH (±5% accuracy).

Wi-Fi & Matter Examples

matter_wifi_light

Implements a Matter-compatible Wi-Fi light bulb using the rs-matter stack. It uses BLE for commissioning and Wi-Fi for network connectivity, allowing you to add the Pico 2 W directly into Apple Home, Google Home, or Home Assistant! When toggled from your smart home app, it turns an external LED on and off.

cargo run --example matter_wifi_light --release

Provisioning in Home Assistant:

Run the example on your Pico 2 W. It will begin advertising over Bluetooth.

Open the Home Assistant companion app on your smartphone.

Go to Settings -> Devices & Services -> Add Integration -> Add Matter device.

When prompted for a setup code, enter the default 3497-0112-332 (or scan the QR code link printed in the terminal logs).

Home Assistant will connect to the Pico 2 W over BLE, ask for your Wi-Fi credentials, and securely transmit them to the device.

The Pico 2 W will connect to your Wi-Fi network and immediately appear as a standard light bulb. You can use the Home Assistant interface to toggle the light on and off!

The external LED wired to your Pico 2 W will instantly mirror the state!

Wiring Schematic:

           Raspberry Pi Pico 2 W                   External Components
         +------------------------+
         |                        |
         |         GP15 (Pin 20)  |---------[ 220-330 Ohm Resistor ]-----+
         |                        |                                      |
         |         GND (Pin 18)   |------------------[ LED - ] <---+     |
         |                        |                                |     |
         +------------------------+                     (Cathode / |     |
                                                         Short Leg) |     |
                                                                   |     |
                                                        [ LED + ] -+-----+
                                                        (Anode /
                                                         Long Leg)


Basic GPIO Examples

blinky

Blinks an external LED connected to GPIO15. This is useful for boards like the Raspberry Pi Pico 2 W, where the onboard LED is connected to the wireless chip rather than a standard microcontroller GPIO.

cargo run --example blinky

Wiring: Same wiring as the matter_wifi_light example.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

8. Show HN: I Derived a Pancake

Source: https://www.absurdlyoptimized.com/recipes/pancakes/
Site: Absurdly Optimized
Author: Ben
Published: 2026-05-31
HN activity: 154 points · 48 comments
Length: 11.8K words (~52 min read)
Language: en

Calculator output, plated. The lacy edges are Section IX; the rest is Sections I through VIII.

I have been making pancakes for twenty-five years. It was the first food I ever learned to cook, starting with Dorie Greenspan’s recipe from Pancakes: From Morning to Midnight. I made her recipe dutifully for close to twenty years until someone mentioned Kenji López-Alt’s buttermilk pancakes, and I switched to making those dutifully instead.

But I started to wonder whether I had actually found the optimal pancake, or just the most recently recommended one. And every time I made Kenji’s recipe I was annoyed at two things: having to run out for buttermilk (or do mental stoichiometry to substitute yogurt while in a pre-caffeinated state), and the use of imprecise cup measurements rather than weights. I was also curious about competing recipes that used sour cream, Greek yogurt, cottage cheese. Each one claimed to be the best. None of them showed their work.

So I did what any reasonable person would do. I derived the pancake from first principles.

Every recipe in every cookbook is a frozen snapshot of one point in this parameter space. This calculator lets you explore the space freely. Change what you have, change what you want, and the stoichiometry adapts.

1. What Actually Matters

A pancake has four axes of quality, and most recipes optimize for at most one of them while neglecting the other three. In order of what you will actually notice while eating:

Interior texture. The inside should be light and custardy, not dense and bready. This is controlled by leavening (both chemical and mechanical), protein structure, and hydration ratio. A pancake that requires chewing has failed at its only job.

Tang. A flat-flavored pancake is a vehicle for maple syrup. A good pancake has its own acid brightness from residual lactic and citric acid that was intentionally left un-neutralized. This is a stoichiometric decision: how much of your available acid to consume with baking soda (producing CO2) versus how much to leave behind (producing flavor).

Rise and structure. The pancake should be tall without being cakey. This comes from three independent CO2 sources (baking powder, baking soda reacting with acid, and steam from high-moisture ingredients) plus one mechanical source (whipped egg whites). The four sources operate on different timescales, which is why they all contribute independently.

Exterior crisp. A thin Maillard-browned shell that provides textural contrast. Requires surface temperature above 140°C, reducing sugars, amino acids, and a micro-frying zone where clarified butter creates rapid surface dehydration. The crisp here is built from that Maillard crust and the lacy ghee-fried edges, not from cornstarch: amylose gives a brittle, glassy shell, but past a small fraction it reads as an artificial fried-coating crunch rather than a pancake crust, so the calculator leaves it out (with a note for anyone who wants to experiment).

3. Background

The oldest continuously prepared food

Pancakes are, in all probability, the oldest cooked food that modern humans would still recognize. Analysis of starch grains on 30,000-year-old grinding tools from sites in Italy (Bilancino II), Russia (Kostenki 16), and the Czech Republic (Pavlov VI) revealed flour made from cattails and ferns, likely mixed with water and cooked on hot stones (Revedin et al., 2010). This is not a pancake in the modern sense, but it is a batter cooked on a flat hot surface, which is the definition of one.

Otzi the Iceman (c. 3300 BCE) carried einkorn wheat with charcoal particles consistent with flatcake cooking (Maixner et al., 2018). By the 5th century BCE, the Greeks were making teganites (from teganon, “frying pan”): wheat flour, olive oil, honey, and curdled milk, served for breakfast (Athenaeus, c. 200 CE; Albala, 2008). The Roman Ova Sfongia Ex Lacte (“egg sponge with milk”) from Apicius calls for eggs, milk, and oil beaten into a batter, fried, and served with honey and pepper (Apicius, 4th century CE).

The word “pancake” first appears in Middle English in the 15th century (Austin, 1888). It became associated with Shrove Tuesday because households needed to exhaust their eggs, milk, butter, and fats before the forty-day Lenten fast. Pancakes efficiently combined all these perishable ingredients into a single preparation. The Olney Pancake Race in Buckinghamshire has been run since 1445, making it possibly the oldest continuously held sporting event motivated entirely by breakfast (Albala, 2008).

The leavening revolution

For most of human history, all pancakes were thin. A batter of flour, eggs, and liquid, cooked on a hot surface, produces a crepe. The thick fluffy pancake is a 19th-century invention made possible by chemical leavening.

The timeline: pearlash (potassium carbonate, refined from wood ash) appeared in American kitchens in the 1780s and was the first chemical leavener (Simmons, 1796). Saleratus (sodium bicarbonate) replaced it in the 1840s. In 1843, English chemist Alfred Bird created the first baking powder by combining bicarbonate of soda with tartaric acid and starch, motivated by his wife’s allergy to both eggs and yeast (Bird, 1843). In 1856, Harvard professor Eben Norton Horsford (a student of Justus von Liebig) patented monocalcium phosphate as a baking powder acid, eliminating expensive imported cream of tartar and founding the Rumford Chemical Works (Horsford, 1856; ACS). Double-acting baking powders (which release CO2 in two stages: once when wet, again when heated) appeared around 1890.

The consequence was the thick American pancake. Before chemical leavening, pancakes were structurally limited to the thin batter that eggs and yeast could support. Baking powder gave batters an internal gas source that did not depend on yeast fermentation or whipped eggs, enabling the heavy, high-hydration batters that produce a tall, fluffy disc. The first commercial pancake mix (1889, Pearl Milling Company, St. Joseph, Missouri) combined wheat flour, corn flour, lime phosphate, and salt into what is widely considered the first ready-mix food product in commercial history (Pearl Milling Company, 1889).

What baking soda actually does

Baking soda has a reputation as a pure leavener, and recipe comment threads regularly argue over whether it is there for rise, for browning, or for cutting acidity. The honest answer is all three at once, because they are the same reaction seen from three angles. Sodium bicarbonate reacts with the batter’s acid to release CO2 (the rise); that same reaction consumes acid and raises the batter’s pH (less tang); and the higher pH then accelerates browning. The three effects are not separable knobs. You cannot dial in one without moving the other two.

The browning claim is the contested one, so it is worth pinning down. The Maillard reaction is not merely “catalyzed in both acidic and basic conditions” at some flat rate; its rate climbs steeply with pH. The first and rate-determining step is a nucleophilic attack by an amino group on the carbonyl of a reducing sugar, and an amino group is nucleophilic only when it is deprotonated. In an acidic batter most amino groups sit as unreactive protonated ammonium ions, so browning is slow; raising the pH frees them, and the rate rises smoothly from pH 6 to 8 and sharply from 8 to 10, with very little browning below pH 6 (Martins & van Boekel, 2005). J. Kenji López-Alt showed the same thing photographically, stepping up the soda in otherwise identical batters and getting visibly darker pancakes each time, until the excess soda turned soapy (López-Alt, 2015). So soda does brown, the commenter who said it was “for loft, not browning” had the wrong half, and the one who invoked an alkaline environment was right about the chemistry even if “you need it” overstates the case (an acidic batter still browns, just reluctantly, given enough heat and time).

The catch is that the browning and the tang are drawn from the same well. Every increment of pH you spend on a darker crust is acid you have neutralized and tang you have lost, which is the central conflict this calculator is built around. The resolution, developed in the methodology, is to stop using pH as the browning lever at all and brown by other means (concentrated reducing sugars and lysine, a clarified frying fat) so that the acid can be spent on flavor instead.

The ricotta pancake: Sydney, 1993

The ricotta pancake as a distinct category was created by Bill Granger (1969–2023), who opened his first restaurant, “bills,” in Darlinghurst, Sydney in 1993. He was twenty-two, self-taught, and had studied art. His signature ricotta hotcakes with honeycomb butter appeared in bills Sydney Food (Murdoch Books, 2000) and became the defining dish of Australian cafe culture (Granger, 2000).

The innovation was structural: ricotta’s pre-denatured whey proteins provide body without flour, while separated and whipped egg whites provide mechanical leavening. The result is a pancake with dramatically less gluten development and dramatically more protein structure than any flour-forward recipe. The New Yorker credited Granger as “the restaurateur most responsible for the Australian cafe’s global reach.” He opened restaurants in Tokyo, Seoul, and London before his death in December 2023 at age 54.

Global variants and what they reveal

Every culture with access to grain and a flat hot surface invented pancakes independently, and the variations reveal which parameters each culture optimized for:

Dutch pannenkoeken: Large (30cm), moderately thin, served as a full meal with savory fillings. Optimized for size and versatility. The earliest mention in a Dutch manuscript dates to 1183 (Albala, 2008).
Russian blini: Small buckwheat pancakes predating Christianity, originally pagan sun symbols. Optimized for ritual significance and nutty flavor from buckwheat. The Maslenitsa festival (Butter Week) maintains the tradition (Moscow Times, 2023).
Ethiopian injera: Spongy fermented teff flatbread, naturally leavened by 1–3 days of wild lactic acid bacteria fermentation. Teff has been cultivated in the Ethiopian highlands for at least 3,000 years (Mezber/Ona Adi excavations, 2021). Optimized for serving as both plate and utensil.
Japanese souffle pancakes: Extremely tall, jiggly, steamed in ring molds. Codified by Gram Cafe (Osaka, 2014). Optimized for height and spectacle at the expense of Maillard browning (Honolulu Magazine).
Korean hotteok: Filled with brown sugar, cinnamon, and peanuts. Originated from Chinese merchants in 1880s Korea. Optimized for textural contrast between crispy shell and molten filling.

4. Methodology

I. Leavening: four independent CO2 sources

The four sources at work: interior crumb from a blueberry batch. The voids were CO2 and steam; the walls around them are coagulated egg protein.

A pancake’s rise comes from gas cells expanding during cooking. Unlike bread (which relies on a single source: yeast fermentation), an optimized pancake batter uses four independent gas sources operating on different timescales:

Source 1: Baking soda + acid (immediate). The reaction is instantaneous upon mixing:

\text{NaHCO}_3 + \text{H}^+ \rightarrow \text{Na}^+ + \text{H}_2\text{O} + \text{CO}_2 \uparrow

One mole of sodium bicarbonate (84 g/mol) reacts with one mole of hydrogen ions to produce exactly one mole of CO2 (44 g/mol). At 100°C and 1 atm, one mole of CO2 occupies 30.6 L (ideal gas law). This reaction is the primary reason to include acid ingredients (buttermilk, lemon juice, yogurt): each acid source is simultaneously a flavor contributor and a CO2 feedstock.

Source 2: Baking powder. A self-contained acid-base system: sodium bicarbonate plus a powdered acid, with cornstarch as a buffer (BAKERpedia). The acid is what matters. Some powders use sodium aluminum sulfate, which leaves the faintly metallic, bitter aftertaste people blame on “too much baking powder.” Use an aluminum-free powder instead; a monocalcium-phosphate one such as Rumford (cornstarch, sodium bicarbonate, monocalcium phosphate; not Clabber Girl, which uses the aluminum) is the cleanest-tasting. Monocalcium phosphate releases its CO2 on wetting, so add the powder shortly before cooking and cook promptly, which both modes do anyway.

Source 3: Steam (thermal). High-moisture ingredients (ricotta at 70–80% water, buttermilk, eggs at 74% water) provide a reservoir of liquid that vaporizes during cooking. Steam is not a chemical reaction; it is a phase transition. But it expands existing gas cells significantly, particularly in the high-moisture environment of a ricotta batter.

Source 4: Whipped egg whites (mechanical). When egg whites are whipped, the mechanical force denatures ovalbumin (the major protein, 54% of egg white protein mass), exposing hydrophobic residues that align at the air-water interface to form a stable protein film around each air bubble (McGee, 2004). These pre-formed air cells do not require any chemical reaction; they are already present in the batter and expand thermally during cooking. Ovalbumin coagulates irreversibly at 80°C (Weijers et al., 2003), permanently setting the foam structure.

II. Acid-base stoichiometry: the tang equation

The central optimization problem in pancake chemistry is this: acid serves two competing purposes. It reacts with baking soda to produce CO2 (desirable for rise), but the unreacted residual acid is what provides tang (desirable for flavor). You cannot maximize both simultaneously. The question is what fraction of available acid to neutralize.

The available acid sources, their concentrations, and their H+ contribution at typical recipe quantities:

Source	Acid type	Concentration	Typical qty	H+ (mmol)	Maillard contribution
Buttermilk	Lactic	0.9%	100 mL	10.3	Lactose + protein (269 mg lysine/100g)
Greek yogurt	Lactic	1.05%	60g	7.0	Lactose + protein (832 mg lysine/100g)
Ricotta	Lactic	0.2%	250g	5.6	Lactose + whey protein
Sour cream	Lactic	0.6%	55g	3.7	Lactose + protein, 18–20% fat
Lemon juice	Citric	4.8%	30 mL	18.8	None (acid only)
Meyer lemon	Citric	3.4%	30 mL	13.3	None
Orange juice	Citric	1.0%	30 mL	3.9	None

Cream of tartar is surprisingly potent. Potassium hydrogen tartrate (KHC4H4O6, MW 188) is a pure dry acid: its acid mass fraction is 1.0, meaning 100% of its weight participates in the acid-base reaction. Compare this to kefir at 1.0% acid and 90% water, or ricotta at 0.2% acid and 74% water. A mere 1.5g of cream of tartar (1/4 teaspoon) provides approximately 8 mmol H+, which is 57% of the acid target at tang level 4. The intuition that “a tiny pinch cannot matter” is wrong by an order of magnitude. Cream of tartar also stabilizes egg white foam by lowering pH toward ovalbumin’s isoelectric point (4.5), serving double duty as both acid source and foam stabilizer.

Each dairy ingredient serves up to three independent roles (structure, hydration, acid), and substituting “1 cup buttermilk for 1 cup yogurt” is dimensionally wrong. The calculator solves for each role separately: ricotta and cottage cheese are fixed by structural need (pre-denatured whey proteins), acidic dairy (kefir, buttermilk, yogurt, sour cream) is computed from the acid target, and milk fills any remaining hydration deficit.

Ingredient	Structure	Water (%)	Acid (mmol H+/100g)	Fat (%)
Ricotta	High (whey protein matrix)	74	2.2	10
Cottage cheese	High (whey protein)	79	5.6	4
Sour cream	Medium (fat coats gluten)	72	6.7	18
Greek yogurt	Medium (protein)	80	11.7	5
Kefir	Low	90	11.4	2
Buttermilk	Low	90	10.3	2
Milk	None	87	0	3.3

Dairy acid sources are preferable on every axis except acid concentration. They provide lactic acid (which produces the characteristic “tangy pancake” flavor that citric acid does not), lactose (a reducing sugar for Maillard browning), and protein (including lysine, the most Maillard-reactive amino acid). Citric acid in a cooked pancake does not produce perceivable tang; without strong citrus aroma to contextualize it, residual citric acid reads as vaguely sour or goes unnoticed. Lemon zest provides distinctive citrus flavor via aromatic terpenes (limonene, citral), but the juice’s only role is as a concentrated acid for CO2 production.

Lemon juice appears in the calculator only when dairy acid sources alone do not provide enough H+ for the desired tang and CO2 balance. With ricotta only (5.6 mmol H+), supplemental citric acid is necessary at moderate to high tang settings. With ricotta plus buttermilk (15.9 mmol), or ricotta plus sour cream and yogurt (16.3 mmol), dairy acid is sufficient and lemon juice is omitted. When citrus is selected and juice is not needed, only the zest is included for flavor.

Citric acid is triprotic (three dissociable protons), but the effective ratio is approximately 2.5 rather than 3. The reason involves pKa values: the third dissociation constant (pKa3 = 6.40) is nearly identical to the pKa of carbonic acid (H2CO3, pKa = 6.35). At batter pH (~6.4), by the Henderson-Hasselbalch equation, only approximately 50% of citrate molecules have surrendered their third proton. The effective H+ contribution is therefore 2 + 0.5 = 2.5 moles per mole of citric acid (Nozawa et al., 2002).

The neutralization calculation:

n_{\text{soda}} = n_{\text{acid}} \times f_{\text{neutralize}}

where f_{\text{neutralize}} is the fraction of acid to consume (0.30 for maximum tang, 0.80 for mild). The remaining acid provides residual acidity:

\text{Residual acidity (\%)} = \frac{(n_{\text{acid}} - n_{\text{soda}}) \times M_{\text{lactic}}}{m_{\text{batter}}} \times 100

Perception threshold for acidity in batter is approximately 0.05% (lactic acid equivalent). Above 0.2%, the pancake reads as distinctly tangy. For reference, wheat sourdough breads contain 0.45–0.73% lactic acid (Clement et al., 2020), and bread pH (which correlates with sour taste at R² = 0.97) ranges from 4.07 to 4.40. The calculator’s tang slider spans from 0.03% (below perception) to 0.51% (solidly in the sourdough range).

Most recipes get this wrong. A typical “lemon ricotta pancake” recipe calls for 1.5 teaspoons of baking soda (~6.9g, 0.082 mol) with 57 mL of lemon juice (0.037 mol H+) and 227g ricotta (0.005 mol H+). The soda exceeds the total acid by a factor of two. Every molecule of lemon acid is neutralized. Despite the recipe’s name, the lemon juice contributes zero perceivable tang to the finished pancake; all lemon flavor comes from the zest. Worse, the ~0.04 mol of unreacted NaHCO3 thermally decomposes during cooking into sodium carbonate (Na2CO3), which is alkaline, bitter, and soapy. This is the familiar metallic off-flavor of “too much baking soda.” The calculator prevents this by computing the exact stoichiometry: it adds only enough soda to neutralize the desired fraction of acid, never more.

The sponge after its overnight cool-room ferment, pocked with CO2 from the yeast and the kefir’s cultures. They spent the night on flavor, not lift.

The overnight path: ferment for flavor, soda for rise. At maximum tang the calculator switches to an overnight ferment, but not because the yeast does the leavening. The rise still comes from baking soda and baking powder; the long rest is there to deepen flavor and to let the cultures push tang past what the stoichiometry sets. This is how yeasted and sourdough pancake recipes actually behave: a slow ferment for character, chemical leavening for lift (King Arthur Baking).

Why the leavener goes in last. Gas and time do not mix in a loose batter. A monocalcium-phosphate baking powder releases its CO2 the instant it is wetted. Fold it in the night before and that gas escapes the thin, pourable batter long before morning, leaving nothing to lift the pancake, exactly why an overnight sourdough pancake adds its leavener fresh in the morning rather than the night before. So in overnight mode the baking powder is held back, folded in just before cooking, and cooked immediately, so its gas goes into the pancake instead of escaping the bowl overnight.

Keeping the soda does not cost the tang. The intuitive worry is that soda neutralizes the acid you want for sourness, but it does not bite here, because a cultured-dairy batter carries far more acid than the soda can consume. The soda only ever neutralizes the excess above the residual target (the same calculation the quick batter runs); with several hundred grams of kefir in the bowl, what remains sits solidly in the sourdough range. Reliable rise and aggressive tang at the same time, no fermentation gas required.

The yeast is a flavor dose, and the sugar it eats is added back. The yeast in overnight mode is small, a fraction of a percent of the flour: enough to ferment and aerate over the long rest alongside the kefir’s own cultures, not enough to be the leavener. It still eats sugar as it works, and here a chemical-versus-biological asymmetry matters. Baking soda consumes acid, not sugar, so all added sugar survives into a quick batter; fermentation removes sugar. Crucially the yeast cannot touch the dairy sugar, because S. cerevisiae lacks the enzyme to split lactose, so it lives on the added sucrose, inverting it and fermenting four moles of CO2 per mole. How much it eats tracks the yeast’s gassing rate, which is Arrhenius in temperature (Chiotellis & Campbell, 2003; rate near optimum per Cauvain & Young, 2007), so a cool-room ferment eats more than a cold one. The calculator adds that amount back on top of the intended sugar, leaving the same finished sweetness and crust browning a same-day batter would have.

Cool room versus fridge. With the rise handed to the morning soda, the ferment temperature becomes purely a flavor and convenience choice. A cool room (about 20°C) keeps the kefir cultures and yeast active, so they generate extra lactic and acetic acid overnight and push tang past the stoichiometric target; the cost is a tighter window, since past about 12 hours or in a warm kitchen the batter turns sour and solvent-like. A fridge (about 4°C) nearly stalls the cultures, so the tang stays close to what you mixed in, but the timing is forgiving: 8 or 14 hours look alike. Because maximizing tang is the whole point of the overnight mode, the calculator defaults to the cool room and offers the fridge to cooks who would rather have a wide timing window than the last increment of sourness. The rise is identical either way, because it comes from the morning leaveners, not the ferment.

The overnight ferment also develops moderate gluten structure via hydration, producing a slight chew that is absent in the quick-mixed chemical leavening version. This is a feature for pancakes where some structural pull is desirable (as opposed to the pure souffle texture of whipped-egg-only leavening). The acid concentration at tang level 5 (~0.5% lactic equivalent, comparable to the lower end of sourdough bread) is far too low to denature gluten proteins overnight, so the chew develops without degradation. At higher acid concentrations (0.8–1.2%, typical of sourdough starters), lactic acid protonates glutenin disulfide bonds and weakens the network within 4–6 hours at room temperature (Thiele et al., 2002), but this threshold is never approached in the calculator’s acid range.

The morning after: a yolk goes into the sponge. The rise still comes from the soda and powder added now; the night was for tang.

Kefir’s live cultures during overnight ferment. Kefir is not a sterile acid source. It contains live Lactobacillus bacteria and wild yeast strains that stay metabolically active in the batter. In an overnight ferment, these organisms produce additional lactic acid beyond what was present when the batter was mixed, making the finished pancake tangier than the stoichiometry alone predicts. Like the yeast, their rate is temperature-dependent: at a cool room (~20°C) the self-souring is meaningful, while at fridge temperature (bacterial metabolism slows roughly 2–4x at 4°C compared to 25°C) it is small. This is the biological half of why the calculator defaults to a cool-room ferment when tang is maximized: the cultures finish the job the stoichiometry starts. Buttermilk cultures behave similarly but are less diverse; kefir’s symbiotic colony (the “kefir grain”) contains dozens of bacterial and yeast species compared to buttermilk’s 2–3.

The two modes leaven differently. The quick batter uses baking soda plus baking powder, mixed in at the start: there is excess acid above the (low) tang target, and the soda turns it into free CO2. The overnight batter, at maximum tang, uses baking powder alone, folded in the morning, because soda would consume the very acid the long ferment is building into tang; the baking powder carries the rise from its own acid without touching the batter’s. Whipped egg whites add mechanical lift in both, but the dependable rise is chemical.

III. Gluten inhibition: why less flour works

Wheat flour contains two storage proteins, glutenin and gliadin, which together comprise 80–85% of total flour protein. When hydrated and mechanically worked, they bond into gluten: a viscoelastic network of cross-linked protein sheets joined by disulfide bridges, hydrogen bonds, and hydrophobic interactions (McGee, 2004).

Gluten is desirable in bread (where elasticity traps yeast-produced CO2 over long fermentation) and undesirable in pancakes (where it makes the interior tough and chewy). Three strategies minimize gluten development:

Minimal mixing. Mechanical action aligns glutenin strands into organized sheets. Organized gluten resists CO2 expansion. The standard instruction (“fold 10–12 strokes until just combined; lumps are desirable”) is not a suggestion about aesthetics; it is a structural prescription. Overmixed batter can lose 30% or more of its potential volume (McGee, 2004).

Fat as physical barrier. Fat molecules bond to hydrophobic amino acids along gluten protein chains, physically preventing those chains from bonding to each other (McGee, 2004). This is the literal meaning of “shortening”: fat creates a shorter, weaker gluten network. In a ricotta pancake, both the ricotta fat (10–13%) and the melted butter serve this function. The calculator targets roughly 9% fat by batter weight, which lands squarely among acclaimed rich pancakes: working from the published quantities, a buttermilk-and-sour-cream batter runs about 10% (López-Alt, 2015), a sourdough-sponge batter about 8% (Roman, 2020), and a sour-cream batter as high as 13% (Perelman, 2009). The role matters more than the source: the last batter reaches the top of that range on sour cream alone, with no added butter at all, which is why the calculator sizes butter only to fill whatever fat the chosen dairy leaves short of the target.

Protein substitution. By replacing much of the flour (and its gluten-forming proteins) with ricotta (which provides structure via pre-denatured whey proteins that do not form gluten), the total available glutenin and gliadin is reduced. The recipe drops from 165g flour (standard) to 125g flour (with ricotta): a 24% reduction in potential gluten.

IV. Ricotta: pre-denatured whey proteins

“Ricotta” is Italian for “recooked” (Latin recoquere: re- “again” + coquere “to cook”). The name describes the production method: whey left over from primary cheesemaking is heated a second time to 80–93°C, denaturing and aggregating the whey proteins (primarily beta-lactoglobulin and alpha-lactalbumin) that casein-based cheeses leave behind (Wikipedia; Journal of Dairy Science, 1988).

This pre-denaturation is the key insight. Beta-lactoglobulin undergoes irreversible unfolding and aggregation above 78°C (ScienceDirect, 2015). Because ricotta has already been heated to 80–93°C during production, its proteins are fully denatured before they enter the pancake batter. When the batter is cooked again (internal temperature reaching approximately 100°C), the ricotta proteins do not undergo further structural change. They provide a soft, custard-like matrix without the tightening that occurs when raw proteins (like egg white) are denatured for the first time.

Additionally, ricotta’s high moisture content (70–80% water per USDA specification) serves as a steam reservoir during cooking, contributing to the characteristic lightness of the final pancake.

V. The Maillard reaction and exterior browning

Maillard browning from a milk-solid-free pan fat: even color, lacy edge. The interior never exceeded 100°C; this side did.

The golden-brown exterior of a pancake is produced by the Maillard reaction: a non-enzymatic browning reaction between reducing sugars and amino acids that produces melanoidins (brown pigments) and hundreds of volatile flavor compounds. It was first described by Louis-Camille Maillard in 1912 (Maillard, 1912), largely ignored until 1941, and formally systematized by John Hodge in the most-cited paper in food science history (Hodge, 1953).

The requirements for Maillard browning on a pancake surface:

Surface temperature above 140°C. The interior of a pancake never exceeds 100°C (limited by water’s boiling point), but the surface in contact with buttered pan reaches 175–200°C. This temperature differential is why pancakes are brown outside and pale inside.
Reducing sugars. Sucrose (table sugar) in the batter provides glucose and fructose upon inversion. Lactose from milk and ricotta is also a reducing sugar. Fructose begins caramelizing at 110°C (vs. 160°C for sucrose), so replacing some white sugar with honey (38% fructose, 31% glucose) provides more reactive Maillard fuel.
Amino acids. Provided by egg proteins, milk casein, and whey proteins.
Low water activity at the surface. A wet surface cannot exceed 100°C. Surface dehydration is the rate-limiting step for crisp formation. Clarified butter (smoke point 230°C vs. whole butter at 177°C) enables higher pan temperatures, and its pure fat creates more effective micro-frying zones that dehydrate the surface faster (Modernist Cuisine).

Cornstarch produces crispier surfaces than wheat flour because its higher amylose content (25–28% vs. wheat’s 20–22%) forms a rigid, porous, brittle network after dehydration. The amylose molecules cross-link during heating, creating a structure that fractures cleanly rather than bending, and resists moisture re-absorption (America’s Test Kitchen). Mohamed et al. confirmed this directly: in model batter systems, crispness correlated positively with amylose content and inversely with oil absorption (Mohamed et al., 1998). Altunakar et al. tested corn starch, amylomaize (70% amylose), waxy maize (0% amylose), and pregelatinized tapioca in chicken nugget batters: corn starch produced the highest porosity, and all high-amylose starches significantly outperformed waxy maize for crispness (Altunakar et al., 2004).

The calculator adds no cornstarch, but it remains available as a manual experiment. Frying batters lean on it heavily: Korean fried chicken batters routinely use 50% cornstarch, ATK’s fried chicken recipe uses 1:1, and commercial batter patents specify 50–80% high-amylose flour in the dry mix. Shih and Daigle found that high-amylose rice flour batters reduced oil uptake by up to 62%, though pure-starch coatings became more brittle (Shih & Daigle, 1999). Primo-Martín et al. showed that cross-linked starch (resistant to gelatinization) further improved crispness measured by acoustic emission, reducing oil content from 28% to 20–23% (Primo-Martín et al., 2012). Two things argue against it in a pancake. First, structure: those batters are coatings clinging to a substrate, while a free-standing pancake needs gluten integrity to flip without tearing, which is why a home experiment should stay under about 30% of the flour by weight. Second, flavor and texture: amylose crisp is brittle and flavorless, and past a small fraction it reads as an artificial, fried-coating crunch rather than a pancake crust. So the dependable, flavorful crisp is left to the Maillard crust and the lacy ghee-fried edges (a dry, open-pan finish on a generous fat), which carry both texture and taste.

However, cornstarch also reduces Maillard browning: it contains 0.26% protein compared to flour’s 10.3%, removing roughly 40x the available amino acids per gram replaced. A crispy but pale pancake is a half-solved problem. The calculator compensates on both sides of the Maillard equation: the sugar side and the amino acid side.

Not all sugars participate equally in the Maillard reaction. Reducing sugars (those with a free aldehyde or ketone group) react directly with amino acids; sucrose, a non-reducing disaccharide, must first hydrolyze into glucose and fructose before it can participate. The browning rate at pH 6 varies dramatically by sugar type (Buera et al., 1987):

Sugar	Type	Reducing?	Relative browning rate	Pancake batter source
Xylose	Pentose (aldose)	Yes	Fastest	Uncommon in cooking
Glucose	Hexose (aldose)	Yes	High	Honey (31%), corn syrup
Fructose	Hexose (ketose)	Yes	High	Honey (38%), fruit
Lactose	Disaccharide	Yes	Moderate	Milk, kefir, buttermilk, ricotta, milk powder
Maltose	Disaccharide	Yes	Moderate	Malted barley, flour (via amylase)
Sucrose	Disaccharide	No	Slowest	White sugar, brown sugar, maple syrup (97%)

Common sweetener substitutes vary enormously in their Maillard potential. Honey (81% reducing sugars by weight) is the clear winner. Molasses (24.7% reducing sugars plus catalytic iron and copper) has genuine browning benefit but its strong flavor limits it to small doses. Brown sugar (2.5% reducing sugars from its ~3.5% molasses coating) and maple syrup (2.1% reducing sugars, 97% of its sugar is sucrose) are nearly identical to white sugar for browning purposes; their appeal is flavor, not chemistry (USDA FoodData Central).

Honey (approximately 38% fructose, 31% glucose, 17% water) delivers 69% immediately available reducing sugars by weight, compared to 0% from white sugar until heat and acid cleave the glycosidic bond. This makes honey a substantially more effective Maillard fuel per gram of sweetener. However, this same reactivity is the reason the calculator does not use it: honey browns too aggressively at the pan temperatures needed for proper interior cooking, narrowing the forgiveness window between golden and burnt to the point where consistent results require a PID-controlled cooktop. The calculator uses white sugar and compensates for reduced browning via milk powder (concentrated lysine and lactose) on the amino acid side of the Maillard equation.

The other Maillard reactant, amino acids, also varies dramatically across batter ingredients. Lysine is the most reactive amino acid in the Maillard reaction because its side chain provides an epsilon-amino group in addition to the alpha-amino group present in all amino acids (Hemmler et al., 2018). Wheat flour contains only 285 mg lysine per 100g (lysine is wheat’s first limiting amino acid), while nonfat dry milk powder contains 2,720 mg per 100g. Even 10–15g of milk powder (about one tablespoon) adds 270–400 mg of lysine to the batter, plus concentrated lactose as an additional reducing sugar. At high crisp settings where cornstarch displaces flour protein (and its already-limited amino acids), milk powder compensates on the amino acid side of the Maillard equation.

This has an interesting implication for acid source selection. Dairy acid sources (buttermilk, sour cream, Greek yogurt, ricotta) are dual-purpose: they provide lactic acid for tang and CO2 production, but the carrier also brings lactose (a reducing sugar) and protein (including lysine) that participate directly in Maillard browning. Citrus juice provides acid and nothing else for browning. Fifty-five grams of sour cream contributes roughly 2g of protein (~110 mg lysine) alongside its lactic acid; 30 mL of lemon juice contributes ~0.1g protein and no reducing sugars. For maximum browning, at least one dairy acid source should be present. Citrus is not wasted in this configuration: lemon zest provides aromatic terpenes (limonene, citral) that dairy cannot replicate, while the juice provides additional acid for tang. The ideal combination for both browning and flavor complexity is dairy acids plus citrus, not one or the other.

Salt (NaCl) has a biphasic relationship with the Maillard reaction that is often misunderstood. At moderate concentrations (around 0.5% Na+, or roughly 1.25% NaCl), sodium ions actually promote browning: Luo et al. measured 8.2x higher browning intensity at 140°C compared to unsalted controls (Luo et al., 2019). The proposed mechanism is that Na+ ions stabilize the transition state of the condensation reaction between carbonyl and amino groups (Zhang et al., 2022). Only at very high concentrations (above ~6% NaCl) does the inhibitory effect dominate (Kwak & Lim, 2004). Typical seasoning concentrations in batters and on meat surfaces (1–2% NaCl) fall in the promoting range. Yamaguchi et al. further showed that NaCl does not significantly affect the browning rate of glucose with peptides and proteins, only with free amino acids (Yamaguchi et al., 2009). Since the amino groups in a pancake batter are mostly bound in intact proteins (flour gluten, egg albumin, whey), the direct chemical effect of salt on browning at normal seasoning levels is likely negligible.

Alkaline conditions accelerate the Maillard reaction because amino groups (RNH3+ at low pH become RNH2 at high pH) have increased nucleophilicity, making them more reactive with carbonyl groups. This is why excess baking soda causes rapid browning. J. Kenji López-Alt demonstrated this directly by photographing identical batters with increasing amounts of baking soda: each increment produced visibly more browning, up to the point where excess un-neutralized soda produced a soapy off-flavor (López-Alt, 2015).

This creates a genuine tradeoff between tang and crisp that cannot be engineered away. Baking soda and acid are in the same liquid; they react spontaneously on contact. You cannot add soda “just for browning” without it also neutralizing some of the residual acid that provides tang. The browning acceleration requires raising batter pH, which means consuming hydrogen ions, which means less sourness. The two goals are in direct chemical conflict.

The calculator resolves this by keeping browning entirely non-alkaline at all crisp levels: cornstarch (whose amylose network crisps independently of pH), milk powder (concentrated lysine and lactose for the amino acid side of the Maillard reaction), and clarified butter or ghee (whose higher smoke point enables faster surface dehydration). These pathways do not touch the acid balance. You get maximum crisp and maximum tang simultaneously, no tradeoff required.

The pan temperature is computed from a thermal model that balances two competing timescales: the time for the center of the risen pancake to reach 95°C (egg protein full coagulation), and the time for the surface to reach target browning. The center time comes from the 1D slab heat equation with measured batter thermal diffusivity (Baik et al., 1999; α = 1.3 × 10−7 m2/s). The surface browning rate follows Arrhenius kinetics with Ea = 64 kJ/mol, measured directly on bread crust at 140–250°C (Zanoni et al., 1995). Honey multiplies the effective browning rate by approximately 1.7× (derived from the baking guideline of reducing oven temperature by 25°F for honey-sweetened goods, combined with the Zanoni activation energy). Milk powder adds a further increment via concentrated lysine (27.2 mg/g vs. 2.85 mg/g in flour), the most Maillard-reactive amino acid. The calculator solves for the pan temperature at which the surface reaches target browning exactly when the center is done, ensuring even cooking without burning.

V-A. What “crispy” actually means: acoustic fracture mechanics

The word “crispy” is used loosely in cooking, but food science has a precise, measurable definition. Crispiness is fundamentally an acoustic phenomenon: the sensation of crispness is produced by a rapid series of brittle fracture events in a thin, glassy cellular structure, each of which emits a small burst of sound. Vickers and Bourne established this in 1976 with two papers that founded the field of food texture acoustics, proposing that crispness is perceived primarily through the sounds produced when cell walls rupture during biting (Vickers & Bourne, 1976a; Vickers & Bourne, 1976b).

The gold standard for measuring crispness is simultaneous acoustic and mechanical recording: a texture analyzer compresses or punctures the food while a microphone captures the sound. Each structural fracture event produces both a force drop on the mechanical curve and a sound burst on the acoustic trace. Chen, Karlsson, and Povey formalized this as the Acoustic Envelope Detector method (Chen et al., 2005). A crispy food produces a jagged force-displacement curve with many sharp drops, each corresponding to a discrete acoustic emission. A soggy food produces a smooth curve with no sound events.

Three acoustic properties correlate with perceived crispness:

High-frequency energy (above 5 kHz). Dacremont’s spectral analysis of eating sounds showed that crispy foods produce substantial energy above 5 kHz, while crunchy foods concentrate their energy at 1.25–2 kHz (Dacremont, 1995). This is the clearest acoustic signature of crispiness.
Overall loudness. Higher sound pressure level correlates with higher crispness ratings. Chauvin et al. found correlations of r = 0.83–0.96 between RMS amplitude and sensory crispness across multiple food types (Chauvin et al., 2008).
Number of acoustic events. More numerous, irregularly spaced sound bursts indicate a more extensively fractured microstructure. Each burst corresponds to the rupture of individual cell walls in the crispy matrix.

The most striking demonstration that crispness is an acoustic perception comes from Zampini and Spence’s 2004 experiment. Participants bit into Pringles while wearing headphones that played back the biting sound in real time. When the researchers selectively amplified high-frequency components (2–20 kHz), participants rated the same chips as significantly crispier and fresher. When high frequencies were attenuated, the chips seemed stale. The participants were unaware that the sound had been modified (Zampini & Spence, 2004).

“Crispy” is not “crunchy.” Dacremont’s spectral analysis established the distinction: crispy foods (chips, crackers, tempura) produce high-pitched sounds from many small, rapid fracture events at low force in thin, brittle structures. Crunchy foods (raw carrots, nuts, hard candy) produce lower-pitched sounds from fewer, more powerful fracture events requiring greater force in dense, hard structures (Dacremont, 1995). A pancake surface should be crispy, not crunchy: a sub-millimeter glassy shell that shatters into many tiny fractures when bitten, producing a brief, high-pitched acoustic signature before yielding to the soft interior.

The mechanism by which crispiness is lost is well characterized. A crispy surface is a glassy cellular solid: the cell walls are rigid and brittle below their glass transition temperature. When moisture migrates from the high-humidity interior (the pancake crumb is approximately 60% water) into the thin surface layer, water acts as a plasticizer, lowering the glass transition temperature. The cell walls transition from glassy (brittle, sound-producing) to rubbery (deformable, silent). Roudaut, Dacremont, and Le Meste showed that in cereal-based foods, crispness characteristics decrease slowly up to about 9% water content in the surface layer, then drop steeply (Roudaut et al., 1998). This is why a pancake’s crispy surface is ephemeral: the moisture gradient between crumb and crust is extreme, and the crust is too thin to resist plasticization for more than a few minutes.

The practical implication for pancake crispness: any strategy that delays moisture migration from crumb to crust extends the crispy window. Cornstarch’s amylose network resists moisture re-absorption better than a gluten-based surface (America’s Test Kitchen). Clarified butter creates a hydrophobic micro-layer at the surface that slows water transport. Serving immediately (rather than stacking pancakes, which traps steam between them) preserves the moisture gradient. The acoustic research quantifies what every cook already knows: a pancake that sits for three minutes is a different food than one eaten straight from the pan.

I should note that my day job is recording classical music, and I own a pair of Schoeps MK2 omnidirectional capsules and a Grace Design m108 preamp/converter, all calibrated for capturing the spatial acoustics of concert halls and chamber ensembles. This is, objectively, the correct equipment for measuring pancake crispness via acoustic emission analysis. The MK2’s frequency response is flat to 40 kHz, the m108’s noise floor is below the thermal noise of the air itself, and the system would resolve individual cell-wall fracture events with publication-grade fidelity. I have, to date, not done this. The current crispness evaluation methodology consists of feeding the pancakes to friends and observing whether they reach for seconds. Peer review is ongoing.

VI. Egg white foam mechanics and batter timing

Egg white is 90% water and 10% protein. When whipped, mechanical energy unfolds ovalbumin molecules, which migrate to air-water interfaces and form stable films around air bubbles. Adding acid (lemon juice, cream of tartar) lowers pH toward ovalbumin’s isoelectric point (pH 4.5), reducing electrostatic repulsion between protein molecules and allowing them to pack more densely at the interface (Zhang et al., 2025).

Critically, whipped egg white foam drainage follows a hyperbolic saturation curve: v = V × t / (B + t), where V is the maximum drained volume and B is the drainage half-life (Lomakina & Mikova, 2006). The drainage is steepest in the first 5 minutes, then decelerates smoothly. There is no sudden cliff, but the curve is front-loaded: most of the volume you will lose is lost in the first 10 minutes. This is why the calculator instructs you to rest the base batter first (for starch hydration), then whip the whites during the rest, fold them in, and cook immediately. The base benefits from rest; the folded batter does not. For multi-batch cooking, using multiple pans simultaneously is the only way to maintain consistent fluffiness; later batches from a single pan will be progressively less tall. Covering the pan with a lid during cooking accelerates interior coagulation via steam condensation (2,260 kJ/kg latent heat), setting the foam structure faster at the cost of slightly less browning on the top surface.

The folding technique matters. The first addition of whites is sacrificial: stirring (not folding) lightens the dense batter base, reducing its density. The second addition is then folded gently, preserving the foam structure because the base is now light enough to accept it without deflation (Corriher, 2008).

VII. Batter rest: starch hydration

A 5–10 minute rest after mixing the base batter (before folding in whites) allows starch granules to fully hydrate, increasing batter viscosity by approximately 38% (University of Wisconsin Food Science). Higher viscosity batter traps CO2 more effectively, resulting in taller pancakes. Gluten also relaxes during rest, reducing elastic “memory” that causes batter to spring back.

The baking soda reacts with the batter’s acids during this rest period, and some of its CO2 escapes, as does some of the baking powder’s (a monocalcium-phosphate powder releases its gas on wetting). This is acceptable: keep the rest brief, and the freshly folded egg whites provide mechanical leavening that survives it regardless. The remaining gas expands in the pan as the bubbles heat.

The rest applies only to the base batter, before egg whites are folded in. Once whipped whites enter the mixture, a completely different clock starts. Chemical leavening is governed by reaction kinetics (concentration-dependent, temperature-dependent, relatively forgiving over 5–10 minutes), but egg white foam is governed by gravity-driven drainage: liquid drains from the thin protein films between bubbles at a rate that depends on film thickness, viscosity, and surface tension, not on any chemical reaction (McGee, 2004). This drainage is irreversible and begins immediately. The base batter benefits from rest; the folded batter must be cooked as fast as possible.

Which is more fragile decides the order: whisk the powder in last, not the whites. Two perishable lifts compete for the cook’s attention at the end, and the recipe whips the whites first, then sifts the baking powder in last and cooks at once. The asymmetry is in how fast each decays. A fast-acting monocalcium-phosphate powder dumps the majority of its CO2 within the first few minutes of being wetted, roughly 60–70% of the available gas before the batter ever reaches the pan, by the dough-rate-of-reaction measure that characterizes leavening acids (Heidolph, 1996). In a loose, uncovered batter that early gas largely vents at the surface rather than getting locked in by cooking, so any minute the powdered batter sits is gas lost outright. Egg-white foam, by contrast, bleeds slowly: the hyperbolic drainage curve is front-loaded but plays out over 10–15 minutes, costing only a modest fraction of volume in the one minute it takes to fold (Lomakina & Mikova, 2006). So whichever lift has to wait, it should be the foam. Whipping first (while the pan finishes heating) keeps the foam fresh enough and leaves the single-acting powder for the very last fold, so its fleeting gas goes into the pancake instead of the room.

VIII. Cooking surfaces: thermal mass vs. thermal responsiveness

A pancake and a crepe make opposite demands of a cooking surface. A crepe needs responsiveness: the cook pours batter, swirls, and needs the pan to cool slightly so the batter sets before the bottom burns. A pancake needs stability: cold batter hits a hot surface and the surface must maintain Maillard temperatures (above 140°C) without flinching. This distinction is determined by thermal mass, not thermal conductivity.

Cast iron and carbon steel have nearly identical thermal conductivity (~52 W/m·K), which surprises most people. The meaningful difference is mass. A 30cm cast iron skillet at 4–5mm thickness weighs approximately 2.5–3 kg; a carbon steel pan of the same diameter at 2–3mm weighs roughly 1.2–1.5 kg. The thermal energy stored is proportional to mass:

Q = m \cdot c_p \cdot \Delta T

A cast iron pan at 200°C above ambient stores approximately 258 kJ (2.8 kg × 460 J/kg·K × 200 K). A comparable carbon steel pan stores roughly 127 kJ. That extra thermal reservoir means the cast iron pan resists cooling when cold batter is added, maintaining browning temperature across a batch of 8–12 pancakes without the cook needing to wait for recovery between pours.

The trade-off is preheat time. Cast iron requires 8–10 minutes over medium-low heat to equalize. Cranking the heat and starting too soon produces a pan with a scorching center and cold edges. But patience during preheat only fixes the transient. The center-to-edge gradient also has a steady-state component that no amount of preheating removes, and that component, not impatience, is the usual reason a pancake browns in the middle while its edge stays pale.

VIII-A. The radial gradient: why edges undercook on every hob

Heat enters a pan near its center regardless of hob type. An induction coil deposits power only within the footprint of its windings: about 6 inches in diameter on typical portable burners (America’s Test Kitchen), and roughly 8–10 inches on the Breville Control Freak, the largest coil in its class (Sizzle and Sear; Breville claims a “10-inch induction field” while independent estimates from its own placement graphics put the coil nearer 8 inches). A gas flame contacts the pan in a ring, and although hot combustion gases pool under the base and wrap up the sidewalls, spreading the input wider than induction flux does, the delivery is still center-weighted (Century Life). From wherever the heat lands, it must travel laterally to the rim, and the rim is simultaneously losing heat to the air by convection and radiation. The steady-state rim temperature is set by that balance: conduction in versus losses out. Cast iron’s modest lateral conductivity loses this race no matter how long you wait.

The deficit has been measured on both hob types. On a Control Freak holding 177°C (350°F) at the pan center for five minutes, a Lodge cast iron skillet reads 41°C (74°F) cooler at 11.5 cm (4.5 in) from center. On the same test, a fully clad Demeyere Proline (4.8 mm aluminum core) reads only 13°C (23°F) cooler, a thick disc-base Fissler 6°C (11°F), All-Clad D3 17°C (31°F), and All-Clad D5 26°C (46°F) (Sizzle and Sear). On a 12,000 BTU gas burner, by the time the hottest point of the same Lodge skillet reaches 177°C, the spread between hottest and coldest points within a 20 cm circle is 96°C (173°F), versus 38°C (69°F) for the Proline (Century Life). Flour-dusting tests show the same thing qualitatively: distinct scorch where the flame touches cast iron, pale rim beyond (Arnold, 2010). Gas softens the gradient relative to induction; it does not close it. Switching a cast iron pan from induction to flame does not rescue the edges.

Three practical conclusions for pancakes. First, on cast iron, pour pancakes that fit inside the heated footprint: a 13 cm (5 in) pancake centered over the coil or flame cooks evenly, while a pan-spanning one bakes its rim at a measurably lower temperature, which reads as pale, underset edges. Second, if you want pan-spanning pancakes, evenness is a property you buy in the pan, not the hob: the thick fully clad and disc-base pans above hold the rim within 6–13°C of center versus cast iron’s 41°C. Third, an oven preheat (pan brought to target temperature in the oven, then moved to the hob) starts the whole pan uniform and the iron’s thermal reservoir keeps the rim usable for the first pours, but the steady-state gradient re-establishes as the burner replaces only the center’s losses.

Nonstick (PTFE-coated aluminum) distributes heat well thanks to aluminum’s high conductivity (~205 W/m·K), but the PTFE coating itself (0.25 W/m·K) acts as a thin thermal insulator, slightly reducing surface contact temperature. Nonstick makes flipping trivial and requires less fat, but limits maximum Maillard development. PTFE also degrades above 260°C, releasing fluorocarbon gases (EPA, 2024), so high-crisp configurations should avoid nonstick pans.

For cooks who want precision rather than mass, induction cooktops with PID (Proportional-Integral-Derivative) temperature control eliminate the guesswork. The Breville Control Freak, which we investigated extensively in our deep-frying article, measures pan surface temperature 20 times per second and adjusts power output to hold any setpoint within ±1°C. This closed-loop feedback means a lighter carbon steel pan can match cast iron’s consistency: the cooktop compensates for the pan’s lower thermal mass by modulating power in real time. It is the most expensive solution to a problem that cast iron solves for forty dollars, but it is also the most precise. One caveat: the through-glass sensor reads the pan directly over the center of the coil, so the control loop guarantees the setpoint only there. The rim floats at whatever the pan’s lateral conduction can sustain, which is why even on this cooktop a cast iron skillet measures 41°C cooler at 11.5 cm from center while a thick clad pan stays within 13°C (Sizzle and Sear). Precision control and radial evenness are separate problems; the Control Freak solves the first, the pan must solve the second.

IX. Cooking fats: browning patterns and flavor

Unrendered back fat, sliced thin and melting directly in the pan. Not a common recommendation, but an excellent one.

The choice of cooking fat affects both the browning pattern on the pancake surface and the flavor of the finished product. The mechanism is straightforward: fats that contain non-fat solids (proteins, sugars) undergo their own Maillard reactions independently of the batter, creating localized browning where those solids contact the pan. Pure fats do not.

Whole butter (smoke point 177°C / 350°F) contains approximately 2% milk solids (casein, lactose, whey proteins) and 15–17% water. The milk solids sink to the pan surface, brown via Maillard reaction starting around 150°C, and transfer as dark spots onto the pancake bottom. This produces the familiar splotchy, irregular browning pattern that most people associate with homemade pancakes. It is technically imprecise but contributes significant flavor. The limitation: milk solid residue accumulates and burns between batches, requiring a paper-towel wipe between pours.

Clarified butter and ghee (smoke point 252°C / 485°F) are pure butterfat with milk solids and water removed. Ghee takes this a step further: the solids are intentionally browned before straining, capturing nutty Maillard and caramelization flavors in the fat itself. Because there are no residual solids to scorch on the pan surface, browning depends entirely on the batter’s own sugars and proteins, producing more even, uniform color. Ghee reaches higher temperatures without burning, creating more effective micro-frying zones at the pancake edge that produce the lacy, crisp perimeter associated with restaurant pancakes.

Pork fat and lard (smoke point 188°C / 370°F for rendered; higher for leaf lard) is the historical default for American griddle cooking. Cast iron and pork fat is a canonical pairing that predates the 20th-century cultural shift to butter. The fat seasons the pan while you cook. Like ghee, rendered lard contains no milk solids and produces even browning, but it adds a subtle savory depth that butter cannot replicate.

Heritage breed pork fat is a genuinely different product from commodity lard. A 2016 study in the Korean Journal for Food Science of Animal Resources measured Berkshire (kurobuta) intramuscular fat at 43.7% oleic acid and 46.8% total monounsaturated fatty acids, compared to 38.1% oleic acid and 38.7% total MUFA in commercial crossbreeds (Cho et al., 2016). That is roughly 15% more oleic acid and 21% more total MUFA. The higher monounsaturated fat content gives Berkshire fat a lower melting point, softer texture, and richer mouthfeel. Pastured heritage pigs accumulate more complex flavor compounds from varied diet and longer growth periods.

Unrendered back fat takes this a step further. This is fatback, the raw, uncured slab of fat from the pig’s back, sold by butchers and heritage-pork producers; it is not bacon grease (rendered and smoked) and not salt pork (cured). Commercial lard is made by holding that fat at rendering temperatures for an extended time, which drives off part of the volatile fraction that carries its fresh, faintly sweet aroma. Slicing the raw fat thin and melting it directly in the pan performs the render at the moment of cooking, so those volatiles end up in the pancake instead of the rendering pot. Rendered lard remains a perfectly good substitute; the difference is aroma, not function. This is not a common recommendation, but it is an excellent one.

Neutral oils (refined canola, avocado; smoke points ~232°C / 450°F) contribute no flavor and no browning compounds. Browning depends entirely on the batter chemistry. They produce the most predictable, even color but are functionally unremarkable.

For maximum lacy edges at any crisp level, the key is generous fat. The batter perimeter must sit in a shallow pool of hot fat, essentially micro-frying the edge. Oil goes further than whole butter per tablespoon because butter loses volume as its water evaporates. Clarified butter, ghee, and pork fat maintain coverage for consistent lacy edges throughout a batch.

Batter fat and pan fat serve different purposes and should be chosen independently. The fat melted into the batter provides gluten inhibition (the shortening effect) and flavor from within. Butter’s milk solids (casein and lactose) are themselves Maillard reactants: lactose is a reducing sugar that browns without requiring hydrolysis, and casein provides amino groups for the reaction. These contribute to internal browning and flavor development during cooking. Ghee in the batter provides 22% more fat per gram (99% vs. 82%) for better gluten inhibition, but its milk solids were already browned and removed during clarification, so it contributes no additional Maillard reactants from within. For the pan, the priorities are reversed: smoke point, even browning, and edge crispiness. Here ghee wins outright. Its 252°C smoke point and absence of burning solids let it reach Maillard temperatures and brown the surface evenly, frying the edges into lace, so the recipe calls for ghee on the pan and butter in the batter. The two alternatives are worth knowing: butter on the pan browns in attractive splotches from its milk solids but smokes at 177°C and must be wiped between batches, while rendered pork fat or lard (188°C) browns as cleanly as ghee with a faint savory note and seasons a cast-iron surface as it cooks. Pork fat is in fact the historical griddle-cake fat, the American default before the 20th-century shift to butter.

X. The flip: spatula physics

A pancake must be flipped exactly once, at the correct moment, without tearing or deflating. The implement used to flip it is, structurally, a cantilever beam with a thin leading edge that must slide between a semi-solid disc and a hot lubricated surface. The relevant parameter is the coefficient of static friction between the spatula material and the cooking surface.

Nylon spatulæ on nonstick coatings (PTFE) have a coefficient of approximately 0.04–0.10, essentially frictionless. Stainless steel on seasoned cast iron: 0.20–0.35. Silicone on any surface: 0.40–0.80, which is actively hostile to the sliding motion required for pancake insertion.

Friction matters in both directions. The spatula must slide under the pancake with minimal resistance (spatula-on-pan friction), but it must also release the pancake after the flip (pancake-on-spatula friction). A spatula that slides under beautifully but then grips the batter on top is a half-solved problem. Silicone fails on both counts. Nylon succeeds on both: low friction against PTFE pans and low adhesion against wet batter. Stainless steel slides well against seasoned surfaces and releases batter cleanly due to its smooth, non-porous surface. The optimal pancake spatula is thin, rigid, and made of a low-friction material against both the pan surface and the batter.

Rigidity matters because a flexible spatula buckles under the weight of a 5” ricotta pancake, causing the leading edge to dig into the cooking surface rather than glide beneath the batter. A proper analysis of spatula flex modulus, edge geometry, and surface tribology is beyond the scope of this article but will receive the treatment it deserves in a forthcoming review of rigid spatulæ.

8. Too Absurd Even for Absurdly Optimized

Too Absurd Even for Absurdly Optimized

The Titrated Sourdough Pancake Program

Free, if you do not count the seven days of feeding a colony of microorganisms before breakfast is possible

The calculator’s tang tops out where cultured dairy and a splash of lemon can take it. There is a way past that ceiling, and it is exactly as unreasonable as it sounds. The cultured dairy supplies a fixed amount of pre-formed lactic acid; a sourdough starter is a live engine that makes its own, because the lactic acid bacteria in it convert the flour’s sugars into both lactic acid (the mellow, yogurt-like tang the dairy already provides) and acetic acid (sharp, vinegary), the second of which the dairy route cannot reach at all (Gänzle, 2015). Mature sourdough carries 0.45–0.73% lactic acid plus that acetic edge (Clement et al., 2020), comfortably past the calculator’s dairy maximum. The result is genuinely more tangy, and tangy in a way no amount of kefir achieves.

The catch is that a starter’s acid is not a fixed number you can read off a label. It grows with every hour of fermentation and depends on the starter’s maturity, its hydration, and the room temperature, which is the whole problem. The acetic-to-lactic balance is itself a dial: a stiffer, cooler ferment pushes the culture toward acetic (sharper); a wetter, warmer one toward lactic (rounder). So to actually optimize this rather than guess, you would maintain a starter (the seed-culture-then-feed-every-five-days commitment that this implies), ferment to a fixed time and temperature, and then measure the result, with pH strips at the cheap end or a calibrated pH meter and an acid-base titration at the end this site naturally drifts toward. You would dial the morning baking soda to neutralize whatever your strip says is in excess of the target residual, converting the overshoot into rise rather than letting it bully the batter into the territory the comment sections call “too sour.” It works. It is also a laboratory protocol for a Sunday breakfast, executed before coffee, on the one morning a week you have time to make pancakes at all. We did not build it into the calculator. The calculator assumes you would like to eat this decade.

9. Conclusion

The last of the batter, poured as one large pancake. The browning is Sections V and IX, as advertised.

The default configuration (ricotta + kefir + sour cream + separated eggs at tang level 5, overnight mode) leaves residual acidity in the sourdough range, around 0.5% lactic equivalent, with the cool-room ferment driving it higher still as the kefir cultures keep working. The rise comes from baking soda and baking powder folded in the morning, helped by whipped egg whites and steam from the dairy’s moisture; the overnight ferment itself is for flavor and tang, not lift.

The calculator above adapts all of this live. Change what you have, change what you want, and the stoichiometry follows.

10. References

Revedin, A. et al. “Thirty thousand-year-old evidence of plant food processing.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 107(44): 18815–18819, 2010.
Maixner, F. et al. “The Iceman’s Last Meal Consisted of Fat, Wild Meat, and Cereals.” Current Biology 28(14): 2348–2355, 2018.
Albala, K. Pancake: A Global History. London: Reaktion Books, 2008.
Apicius. De Re Coquinaria. Book VII, Ch. 13. (Compiled 4th–5th century CE; translation: Vehling, 1936.)
Austin, T. (ed.). Two Fifteenth-Century Cookery-Books. Early English Text Society, Oxford University Press, 1888.
Simmons, A. American Cookery. Hartford: Hudson & Goodwin, 1796.
Bird, A. Baking powder formulation, Birmingham, 1843. Royal Society of Chemistry historical records.
Horsford, E.N. US Patent for monocalcium phosphate baking powder, April 26, 1856. American Chemical Society, “Development of Baking Powder” National Historic Chemical Landmark.
Pearl Milling Company. Self-Rising Pancake Flour. St. Joseph, Missouri, 1889.
Granger, B. bills Sydney Food. Sydney: Murdoch Books, 2000.
The Moscow Times. “The Long Lost History of Russian Blinis.” February 2023.
Mezber and Ona Adi archaeological sites, Tigray region. Teff grain findings dated to c. 1600 BCE. Published 2021.
Honolulu Magazine. “How a Hawaii Restaurant Launched the Souffle Pancake Craze.”
Ideal gas law: PV = nRT. At T = 373K (100°C), P = 101.3 kPa: V = nRT/P = 1 mol × 8.314 × 373 / 101300 = 0.0306 m3 = 30.6 L.
BAKERpedia. “Baking Powder.” bakerpedia.com.
McGee, H. On Food and Cooking: The Science and Lore of the Kitchen. Revised ed. New York: Scribner, 2004.
Weijers, M. et al. “Heat-induced denaturation and aggregation of ovalbumin at neutral pH described by irreversible first-order kinetics.” Protein Science 12(12): 2693–2703, 2003.
Nozawa, S. et al. “Mind the buffering capacity of citric acid.” Fungal Genetics Newsletter 42, 2002.
Journal of Dairy Science. “Development of a Continuous Process for the Production of Ricotta Cheese.” 1988.
ScienceDirect. “Thermal denaturation kinetics of whey proteins at high protein concentrations.” 2015.
Maillard, L.C. “Action des acides amines sur les sucres: formation des melanoidines par voie methodique.” Comptes Rendus 154: 66–68, 1912.
Hodge, J.E. “Chemistry of Browning Reactions in Model Systems.” J. Agric. Food Chem. 1(15): 928–943, 1953.
Modernist Cuisine. Maillard reaction surface temperature mechanics.
Zhang, H. et al. “Citric Acid Improves Egg White Protein Foaming Characteristics and Meringue 3D Printing Performance.” Foods 14(2): 198, 2025.
Corriher, S.O. BakeWise: The Hows and Whys of Successful Baking. New York: Scribner, 2008.
University of Wisconsin Food Science. Pancake batter viscosity and gas retention studies.
Hodge scheme for Maillard reaction. Finot, P.A. “Historical Perspective of the Maillard Reaction in Food Science.” Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 1043: 1–8, 2005.
Cho, I.K. et al. “Influence of physicochemical characteristics of flour on pancake quality attributes.” J. Food Sci. Technol. 56(5): 2373–2381, 2019.
USDA Specifications for Ricotta Cheeses. ams.usda.gov.
Corriher, S.O. CookWise: The Hows and Whys of Successful Cooking. New York: William Morrow, 1997.
America’s Test Kitchen. “Why Starch Gets Crispy When Fried.” americastestkitchen.com.
López-Alt, J.K. The Food Lab: Better Home Cooking Through Science. New York: W.W. Norton, 2015. Pancake browning experiment also published as “Light and Fluffy Buttermilk Pancakes,” seriouseats.com.
Cho, S.H. et al. “Meat Quality and Physicochemical Trait Assessments of Berkshire and Commercial 3-way Crossbred Pigs.” Korean Journal for Food Science of Animal Resources 36(6): 769–777, 2016.
EPA. “Risk Management for Per- and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances (PFAS).” epa.gov, 2024. PTFE thermal decomposition products above 260°C.
Century Life. “Thermal Properties of Metals Used in Cookware.” centurylife.org.
ThermoWorks. “How to Griddle Better.” blog.thermoworks.com.
Buera, P. et al. “Nonenzymatic Browning in Liquid Model Systems of High Water Activity: Kinetics of Color Changes Due to Maillard Reaction Between Different Single Sugars and Glycine.” J. Food Science 52: 1059–1062, 1987.
Hemmler, D. et al. “Insights into the Chemistry of Non-Enzymatic Browning Reactions in Different Ribose-Amino Acid Model Systems.” Scientific Reports 8: 16879, 2018.
Luo, J. et al. “Pyrraline Formation Modulated by NaCl and Controlled by Encapsulation with Different Coating Materials in the Maillard Reaction.” Biomolecules 9(12): 721, 2019.
Zhang, Y. et al. “Sodium Ions Affect Pyrraline Formation in the Maillard Reaction with Lysine-Containing Dipeptides and Tripeptides.” Frontiers in Nutrition 9: 838364, 2022.
Kwak, E.J. & Lim, S.I. “The Effect of Sugar, Amino Acid, Metal Ion, and NaCl on Model Maillard Reaction Under pH Control.” Amino Acids 27: 85–90, 2004.
Yamaguchi, K. et al. “Effects of Salt Concentration on the Reaction Rate of Glc with Amino Acids, Peptides, and Proteins.” Bioscience, Biotechnology, and Biochemistry 73(11): 2457–2461, 2009.
Lomakina, K. & Mikova, K. “A Study of the Factors Affecting the Foaming Properties of Egg White: A Review.” Czech Journal of Food Sciences 24(3): 110–118, 2006.
Clement, H. et al. “Can instrumental characterization help predicting sour taste perception of wheat sourdough bread?” Food Research International 133: 109159, 2020.
Mohamed, S., Hamid, N.A. & Hamid, M.A. “Food Components Affecting the Oil Absorption and Crispness of Fried Batter.” Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture 78(1): 39–45, 1998.
Altunakar, B., Sahin, S. & Sumnu, G. “Functionality of Batters Containing Different Starch Types for Deep-Fat Frying of Chicken Nuggets.” European Food Research and Technology 218: 318–322, 2004.
Shih, F. & Daigle, K. “Oil Uptake Properties of Fried Batters from Rice Flour.” Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 47(4): 1611–1615, 1999.
Primo-Martín, C. et al. “Cross-linking of Wheat Starch Improves the Crispness of Deep-Fried Battered Food.” Food Hydrocolloids 28(1): 53–58, 2012.
Vickers, Z.M. & Bourne, M.C. “Crispness in Foods: A Review.” Journal of Food Science 41: 1153–1157, 1976.
Vickers, Z.M. & Bourne, M.C. “A Psychoacoustical Theory of Crispness.” Journal of Food Science 41: 1158–1164, 1976.
Chen, J., Karlsson, C. & Povey, M. “Acoustic Envelope Detector for Crispness Assessment of Biscuits.” Journal of Texture Studies 36: 139–156, 2005.
Dacremont, C. “Spectral Composition of Eating Sounds Generated by Crispy, Crunchy and Crackly Foods.” Journal of Texture Studies 26: 27–43, 1995.
Chauvin, M.A. et al. “Standard Scales for Crispness, Crackliness and Crunchiness in Dry and Wet Foods: Relationship with Acoustical Determinations.” Journal of Texture Studies 39: 345–368, 2008.
Zampini, M. & Spence, C. “The Role of Auditory Cues in Modulating the Perceived Crispness and Staleness of Potato Chips.” Journal of Sensory Studies 19: 347–363, 2004.
Roudaut, G., Dacremont, C. & Le Meste, M. “Influence of Water on the Crispness of Cereal-Based Foods: Acoustic, Mechanical, and Sensory Studies.” Journal of Texture Studies 29: 199–213, 1998.
Baik, O.D., Marcotte, M., Sablani, S.S. & Castaigne, F. “Thermal and Physical Properties of Bakery Products.” Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition 41(5): 321–352, 2001.
Zanoni, B., Peri, C. & Bruno, D. “Modelling of Browning Kinetics of Bread Crust During Baking.” LWT — Food Science and Technology 28(6): 604–609, 1995.
Chiotellis, E. & Campbell, G.M. “Proving of Bread Dough I: Modelling the Evolution of the Bubble Size Distribution.” Food and Bioproducts Processing 81(3): 194–206, 2003.
Cauvain, S.P. & Young, L.S. Technology of Breadmaking. 2nd ed. New York: Springer, 2007.
King Arthur Baking Company. “Sourdough Pancakes or Waffles.” Overnight sourdough sponge with baking soda added in the morning; technique reference.
Martins, S.I.F.S. & van Boekel, M.A.J.S. “Kinetics of the glucose/glycine Maillard reaction pathways: influences of pH and reactant initial concentrations.” Food Chemistry 92(3): 437–448, 2005.
Gänzle, M.G. “Lactic metabolism revisited: metabolism of lactic acid bacteria in food fermentations and food spoilage.” Current Opinion in Food Science 2: 106–117, 2015.
Heidolph, B.B. “Designing Chemical Leavening Systems.” Cereal Foods World 41(3): 118–126, 1996.
López-Alt, J.K. “Light and Fluffy Pancakes Recipe.” Serious Eats, 2015. Fat fraction computed from the listed quantities.
Roman, A. “Sourdough Pancakes.” The New York Times, 2020. Fat fraction computed from the listed quantities.
Perelman, D. “Edna Mae’s Sour Cream Pancakes.” Smitten Kitchen, 2010. Fat fraction computed from the listed quantities.
America’s Test Kitchen. “How to Maximize the Performance of Your Portable Induction Burner.” americastestkitchen.com. Typical portable induction coils are ~6 inches in diameter; the Control Freak is the documented exception.
Sizzle and Sear. “Best Cookware for Even Heating: In-Depth Testing & Analysis.” All pans tested on a Breville Commercial Control Freak; center held at 350°F for 5 minutes, surface temperature then measured 4.5 inches from center with a ThermoWorks Pro Surface Thermapen. Coil size and Control Freak Home comparison from the same publication’s “Breville Control Freak Home by ChefSteps.”
Century Life. “Cookware Even Heating Testing Methodologies.” centurylife.org. Gas vs. induction heat-delivery geometry: combustion gases pool under the base and heat the sidewalls, making gas “somewhat less demanding on cookware than induction.”
Century Life. “Cookware Even Heating Rankings (Butane, Propane, Natural Gas, etc.).” centurylife.org. IR-measured hot-to-cold deltas within a 10 cm radius circle at the moment the hottest point reaches 350°F, on a 12,000 Btu/h gas burner.
Arnold, D. “Heavy Metal: the Science of Cast Iron Cooking.” Cooking Issues, 2010. Flour-dusting visualization of hot spots on cast iron over gas.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

9. 90210 – running the show without property tax

Source: https://github.com/Achint08/90210
Site: GitHub
Submitter: starboyy (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-08 02:47 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 9 points · 1 comments
Length: 285 words (~2 min read)
Language: en

Like the show. But you're the showrunner.

All the drama. None of the property tax.

A production-grade local app that turns a screenplay into a finished short film with synchronized video, native audio, dialogue, music, and subtitles. Powered by Google Veo 3.1, Nano Banana, Gemini 2.5 Pro, and ElevenLabs Music.

Every quality decision is mathematically grounded: a composite Quality Oracle (VideoScore, ViCLIP, LAION aesthetic, MUSIQ, ArcFace, LPIPS, Whisper) drives auto re-roll and adaptive tier escalation. A Story Oracle (Reagan-6 arcs, TRIPOD turning points, Average Shot Length, SBERT coherence) keeps the narrative on target.

Quick start

# 0. one-time
python3 -m venv .venv
.venv/bin/pip install -e ./backend          # installs FastAPI + Pydantic + Google + ElevenLabs deps
cp .env.example .env                         # fill in GEMINI_API_KEY and ELEVENLABS_API_KEY

# 1. Backend
./run-backend.sh                             # starts uvicorn at http://localhost:8000
# (the script sets PYTHONPATH because Homebrew Python 3.14 ships its own
#  sitecustomize.py that breaks venv editable installs — PYTHONPATH sidesteps it.)

# 2. Frontend (new shell)
cd frontend
pnpm install                                 # or npm install
pnpm dev                                     # → http://localhost:3000

# 3. iPhone access
#    - same WiFi: http://<laptop-ip>:3000 → Safari Share → Add to Home Screen
#    - off-WiFi: tailscale serve / funnel (see docs)

# 4. Optional Quality Oracle (heavy ML deps; ~3GB)
.venv/bin/pip install -e "./backend[oracles]"

Documentation

Design spec: docs/superpowers/specs/2026-05-09-screenplay-to-movie-design.md
Veo 3.1 reference: docs/superpowers/research/veo-3.1-deep-dive.md
Cost / latency / quality math: docs/superpowers/research/cost_latency_quality_math.py

Required API keys

Service Used for Cost (May 2026)
Gemini API Veo 3.1 (video+audio), Nano Banana (portraits), Gemini 2.5 Pro (Director) $0.10–0.40/sec video
ElevenLabs Music tracks $0.01/sec music

A 2-min movie typically costs ~$20.

Architecture

See spec §4. Local FastAPI backend + Next.js PWA frontend. PWA installs to home screen on iOS Safari for native-app-like experience.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

10. Making peace with your unlived dreams (2023)

Source: https://nik.art/making-peace-with-your-unlived-dreams/
Site: nik.art
Author: Nik
Published: 2023-01-02
HN activity: 173 points · 80 comments
Length: 467 words (~3 min read)
Language: en-US

I will never be a great snowboarder. For various genetic and non-genetic reasons, my knees are barely capable of surviving a three-hour hike, let alone the landing after a 1080.

In fact, I’ll probably never be a snowboarder at all, given my orthopedist told me to stay away from anything that’s heavy on the knees, “like tennis, skiing, or, say, snowboarding,” as long as 15 years ago. It sucks. I’d love to take snowboarding lessons. Alas, all I can do is watch videos of people doing sick stunts, living vicariously through GoPro’s Youtube channel.

When I first found out, for a good while, I was really upset about this. “How dare life take that from me!” I often imagined what would happen if I went big on snowboarding anyway. That there must be a way for me to fix my knees enough to succeed, and, to be fair, there probably is. But at some point, I realized that life is big but also short.

When asked “What’s one experience you hope we’ll share in the future?” ex-Bachelor star Sharleen Joynt tells her husband: “It’s hard. I want to do everything with you. There’s not enough time.”

You know what else I’d like to do besides becoming a great snowboarder? I want to learn kung fu. I’d also love to be a lot better at video games, get my Yu-Gi-Oh! hobby back on, and become at least fluent enough for everyday conversation in oh, I don’t know, eight more languages.

Meanwhile, back down on earth, I’m self-employed. I spend most of my time working, and when I don’t work, I try to be with my girlfriend, or family, or friends. It ebbs and flows, of course, but over the last few weeks, I’ve barely managed to make time to read, let alone pursue other, second-tier hobbies.

Even if I won the lottery tomorrow, however, I doubt there’d be enough time. There’s never enough time. If Death excused me for a few hundred years, I’d definitely take it.

And yet, somehow, the more years go by, the more rarely I watch snowboarding videos. My imagination runs wild less often, and when it does, it comes with smiles more so than bitterness. “It’s okay. Leave the snowboarding to others. You are a writer. You have things to do where you are, and that is enough.”

Use your imagination. Sometimes, dreams can just be dreams. They needn’t all come true to feel satisfying. Watch videos. Read books. Spend time with the heroes you’ll never meet. Whatever you do, don’t get angry at your unlived dreams. Extend a hand. Make peace.

We only get to sample a small taste of everything life has to offer, but in choosing deliberately, we are doing the most important job we were brought here to do.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

11. Texas grid flags risks as data centers, crypto sites fail voltage tests

Source: https://www.reuters.com/business/energy/texas-grid-flags-risks-data-centers-crypto-sites-fail-voltage-tests-2026-06-05/
Site: reuters.com
Submitter: 1vuio0pswjnm7 (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-08 02:05 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 28 points · 6 comments

Scrape failed: http 401

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

12. 1worldflag: A blue dot on a transparent background

Source: https://1worldflag.com/
Site: 1worldflag
Submitter: davidbarker (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-08 01:37 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 8 points · 1 comments
Length: 882 words (~4 min read)
Language: en-US

unity
across
borders

A symbol for our home the blue planet no matter
where we live in. One possible way – One possible
flag design to show that we feel united with the
whole earth and all its inhabitants.

a blue dot,
the symbol For
our home,
the blue planet

In a world characterized by geographical, social and political differences, the One World Flag is a reminder that we all live on the same planet and have a common future. Flags usually symbolize nations, regions or groups, i.e. differences. The One World Flag, on the other hand, has a message for humanity: More unites us than divides us.

The One World Flag does not want to replace the other flags, but to show that beyond the differences there is also unity. The One World Flag shows a blue sphere in the center, symbolizing our common home, the blue planet. The background of the flag is made of transparent material, which means that it always adapts to its surroundings.

A Loop
around
the world

For the seventh issue of the nomad magazine, we have
send handcrafted One World Flags, made in Bavaria, to the
readers as part of an established ambassador program.
The readers can show their place on earth where they feel at
home. After a few weeks they will receive an address from
another reader, where the flag will be sent in an small envelope.

We were invited by the German NGO ARTHELPS in order to give workshops in Ukraine called "Flag Your ID."
Together, we explored the meaning behind flags — and how they can represent identity.
Each participant got to ask: What do I stand for? Who am I? What values shape me? And what would my own flag look like?

It turned into a powerful and personal experience — and into a workshop concept we are really proud of.

Contact us if you want us to give such an workshop in your local group, school, company or other places.

FLAG WORKSHOPS

We are one

To most people on this planet it is common sense that we
need unity. We believe that we have to unite as mankind in
order to tackle the future challenges ahead of us. We are
stronger together. But why do we need a world flag?
We believe that one common symbol can help to create a
sense of unity and belonging to all people. Through a world
flag every citizen on this planet can display a sense of
togetherness. Watch the video from Arthelps with
reflections of unity out of the perspective of the space kid.

Overview of
the exhibitions

In the past years we had the privilege to exhibit the topic of the One World Flag in different countries. School projects, group exhibitions, flag installations or even long term art projects. We have gathered a small collection of our exhibitions.

JOIN US –

Let’s make
friends across
the globe and
create
memories and
stories of unity
together.

unity
across
borders

A symbol for our home the blue planet no matter where we live in. One possible way – One possible flag design to show that we feel united with the whole earth and all its inhabitants.

a blue dot,
the symbol For
our home,
the blue planet

In a world characterized by geographical, social and political differences, the One World Flag is a reminder that we all live on the same planet and have a common future. Flags usually symbolize nations, regions or groups, i.e. differences. The One World Flag, on the other hand, has a message for humanity: More unites us than divides us.

The One World Flag does not want to replace the other flags, but to show that beyond the differences there is also unity. The One World Flag shows a blue sphere in the center, symbolizing our common home, the blue planet. The background of the flag is made of transparent material, which means that it always adapts to its surroundings.

For the seventh issue of the nomad
magazine, we have send handcrafted
One World Flags, made in Bavaria,
to the readers as part of an established
ambassador program. The readers
can show their place on earth where they
feel at home. After a few weeks they
will receive an address from another
reader, where the flag will be sent in an
small envelope.

We were invited by the German NGO ARTHELPS in order to give workshops in Ukraine called "Flag Your ID."
Together, we explored the meaning behind flags — and how they can represent identity.
Each participant got to ask: What do I stand for? Who am I? What values shape me? And what would my own flag look like? It turned into a powerful and personal experience — and into a workshop concept we are really proud of. Contact us if you want us to give such an workshop in your local group, school, company or other places.

In the past years we had the privilege to exhibit the topic of the One World Flag in different countries. School projects, group exhibitions, flag installations or even long term art projects. We have gathered a small collection of our exhibitions.

JOIN US –

LET’S MAKE FRIENDS ACROSS THE GLOBE AND CREATE MEMORIES AND STORIES OF UNITY TOGETHER.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

13. How's Linear so fast? A technical breakdown

Source: https://performance.dev/how-is-linear-so-fast-a-technical-breakdown
Site: performance.dev
Author: Dennis Brotzky
Published: 2026-05-03
HN activity: 326 points · 161 comments
Length: 5.1K words (~23 min read)
Language: en

Dennis BrotzkyMay 3, 2026

A few milliseconds is all it takes to update an issue in Linear. A traditional CRUD app doing the same thing takes about 300ms. How do they do it? There's no secret silver bullet to performance. The reality is that it's built from the ground up on the right foundation, then improved by countless decisions. My goal is to walk through some of the techniques that make Linear feel the way it does and help you implement the same.

What I'll cover

Database in the browser

Making the first load feel instant

The sync engine

Designed for speed

Animations

A quick disclaimer: I've never worked at Linear and have never seen their code. Everything I share comes from my personal experience, studying their app, reading their blog posts, or watching their conference talks. I simply love building web apps and have been using Linear since their beta launch. Also, the article’s hero image comes from a video by Meg Wayne, whose work for Linear is phenomenal.

Database in the browser

Most web apps live inside the same loop. The user clicks. The browser fires an HTTP request. A server queries a database and sends it back. The browser repaints. The end result is a spinner, a skeleton, or a frozen UI for a few hundred milliseconds while the app waits on the network.

Linear inverts the traditional relationship. The actual database the UI reads from is in the browser, in IndexedDB. Mutations apply locally first, then asynchronously push to the server, which broadcasts deltas back to other clients via WebSocket.

In my opinion, this is the most critical piece to Linear's performance. When your goal is to build a fast web app the biggest bottleneck you will fight is the network. Any data sent between the client and server costs hundreds of milliseconds. The best approach is to eliminate the need for a network request entirely: which is exactly what Linear does.

I'll be repeating this a lot, but the secret to building incredible web apps is by hiding all the network requests from the user. The more loading states you can avoid the better.

Here's an example of how simple Linear's requests are:

// A traditional web app updating the server
async function updateIssue({ issue }) {
  showSpinner();
  const response = await fetch(`/api/issues/${issue.id}`, {
    method: "PATCH",
    body: JSON.stringify({ title: issue.title }),
  });
  const updated = await response.json();
  setIssue(updated)
  hideSpinner();
}
 
// vs Linear
issue.title = "Faster app launch";
issue.save();

The first line, issue.title = "Faster app launch", updates an in-memory datastore (MobX observable in Linear's case) . The second line, issue.save();, queues a transaction that their sync engine batches and flushes to the server. The key here is that the UI re-renders synchronously off the local, in-memory, update. There are no spinners because there is nothing to wait for because the data is synced in the backround. This is the magic of treating the browser as the database for each user.

Tuomas, one of Linear's co-founders, said this at a conference in 2024: 'Literally the first lines of code that I wrote was the sync engine, which is very uncommon to what you usually do when you're a startup.' From day one, Linear knew the approach they wanted to take and the tradeoffs it would take.

Linear's issue creation no spinners or delays

I know most people won't build a custom sync engine like Linear just to make their app feel fast and they don't need to. For most use cases, libraries like Tanstack Query and SWR can get surprisingly close with optimistic updates. Most web apps feel slow because the UI waits for each network request to complete before updating state. For most usecases the network request will succeed so you should take advantage of that and optimistically update your state.

// optimistic mutation with SWR
mutate(
  `/api/issues/${issue.id}`,
  { ...issue, title: "Faster app launch" },
  false
);
 
// vs Linear
issue.title = "Faster app launch";
issue.save();

The key idea is simple: UI responsiveness should not depend on network latency. Users perceive speed based on how quickly the interface reacts, not how quickly the server responds.

Optmistic requests is one of the highest leverage improvements you can make:

eliminate unnecessary spinners

update state immediately

validate in the background

rollback only if needed

Linear's foundation is based on this exact principal and it makes the app feel native and fast.

A peek into Linear's stack

Linear is built on the simplest stacks you can find: React, TypeScript, MobX, Postgres, a CDN. There's no edge database, no React Server Components, or no fancy framework.

Frontend
  React + react-dom               (UI runtime)
  MobX                            (observable graph, granular re-renders)
  TypeScript                      (single language end-to-end)
  Rolldown-Vite + plugin-react-oxc(mid-2025; previously Rollup; previously Parcel)
  ProseMirror + y-prosemirror     (rich text editor; Yjs CRDT for live collab)
  Radix UI primitives             (popovers, menus, focus traps)
  Emotion + StyleX                (Emotion runtime + StyleX compiled to atomic CSS)
  Comlink                         (Worker RPC)
  idb                             (IndexedDB wrapper backing the local-first store)
  graphql-request                 (GraphQL transport to the sync server)
  Sentry                          (error monitoring)
  Inter Variable                  (single woff2, font-display: swap)
 
Backend
  Node.js + TypeScript            (single language for all server code)
  PostgreSQL on Cloud SQL         (issues table partitioned 300 ways)
  Memorystore Redis               (event bus + cache + sync cursors)
  turbopuffer                     (similar-issue detection, vector db)
  Kubernetes on GCP               (one workload per concern)
  Cloudflare Workers              (multi-region edge proxy)
 
Other clients
  Desktop: Electron               (same web JS, native chrome)
  Mobile:  Swift (iOS) + Kotlin   (a separate full reimplementation)
 
Marketing
  Next.js                         (static)
  styled-components
  Inline SVG sprite

The biggest standout to me is their decision to stick with client-side rendering. CSR often gets criticized for slow initial loads, but with the right architecture and design it can feel instant.

I'm also a big fan of the simplicity it brings. Keeping the app entirely client-side creates a much cleaner mental model and removes a lot of the complexity that comes with server-rendered apps. You don't have to constantly think if you're on the server or client. If window object is accessible or not. If you're setting the right cache headers or not. There's beauty in simplicity and the constraints you're forced into.

So how does Linear make their client side rendered app feel instant?

Making the first load feel instant

One thing I obsess over is the first load, and Linear clearly does as well. For productivity tools especially, the time it takes before you can actually start working is one of the most important details to consider. No one wants to be waiting for a new tab to load for multiple seconds

First, you have to understand what makes initial loads slow. For a client side app you have to request the index.html, then that requests all the JavaScript and CSS, which then runs some sort of authentication, and finally makes some API requests to show the app.

Linear's bundler arc: Parcel, Rollup, Vite, Rolldown

The first step to making an app feel instant happens long before runtime. It starts at build time. Remember, the network is the bottleneck, so shipping the least amount of JavaScript and CSS is critical to fast load times.

From what I can gather Linear has rewritten their build pipeline four times: Parcel → Rollup → Vite → Rolldown. Each migration was driven by the same goal: reduce the amount of JavaScript and CSS and improve the developer experience.

From their own blog posts they claim:

50% less code shipped.

30% smaller after compression.

Cold-cache page loads got 10 to 30% faster.

Time-to-first-paint of the active-issues view dropped 59% (on Safari).

Memory usage dropped 70 to 80%

Most of that came from a combination of decisions targeting only modern browsers, better dead-code elimination, and aggressive code splitting. Dropping legacy support is the big win (no polyfills, no ES5 transpilation, no nomodule fallback) but the dead-code and chunking work matters just as much.

Even with all of these optimizations, Linear still ships a substantial amount of code: roughly 21 MB of minified JavaScript. The difference is that it's aggressively code split into hundreds of route-level chunks that are fetched on demand.

// vite.config.ts (reconstruction; matches observed chunk graph)
export default defineConfig({
  plugins: [react()],
  build: {
    target: "esnext",            // no legacy syntax, no polyfills
    cssMinify: "lightningcss",
    modulePreload: { polyfill: false },
    rollupOptions: {
      output: {
        // One chunk per npm package > ~3 KB. Cache invalidation
        // becomes per-library instead of per-app-revision.
        manualChunks(id) {
          if (id.includes("node_modules")) {
            const pkg = id.match(/node_modules\/([^/]+)/)?.[1];
            if (pkg) return `vendor-${pkg}`;
          }
        },
      },
    },
  },
});

The lesson isn't which bundler to pick but the importance of dropping legacy browsers, going native ESM, and code splitting like crazy. Each step is small. Stacked, they cut Linear's first-load JavaScript roughly in half and their build time by an order of magnitude.

So, the first secret to instant load times is reducing the amount of JavaScript and CSS needed to render something for the user.

Preloading after initial load

Once you've split your JavaScript into the smallest chunks possible you can start doing work in the background.

But hold on, splitting the bundle into hundreds of chunks creates a new problem. Each chunk imports other chunks, and the browser doesn't know what those are until it parses the entry script. Without help, the load timeline becomes a waterfall: fetch the entry, parse it, fetch its imports, parse those, fetch their imports. Every level adds a network round-trip, which you want to avoid at all costs.

What Linear does is before any JavaScript runs, the browser sees the entire list and fires off the requests in parallel. By the time the entry script reaches its first import, the chunks are already in cache.

Here's what it looks like in the <head /> if their index.html

<script type=module crossorigin
  src="https://static.linear.app/client/assets/html.2_JBQs3Q.js"></script>
<link rel=modulepreload crossorigin
  href="https://static.linear.app/client/assets/vendor-mobx.Crhy2qQc.js">
<link rel=modulepreload crossorigin
  href="https://static.linear.app/client/assets/SyncWebSocket.Djw6l_Op.js">
<link rel=modulepreload crossorigin
  href="https://static.linear.app/client/assets/DatabaseManager.DKssGAN8.js">
<!-- ...around many more -->

The crossorigin attribute on each preload matches the crossorigin on the entry script, so the browser reuses the cached fetch instead of treating preload and import as separate resources. Same trick as the font preload, applied to every chunk on the critical path.

The cold-load timeline collapses from a sequential waterfall into a single parallel batch. The network still does the work. It just does it all at once. The beauty of this technique is you're able to do all this work in the background when the user first hits the login page. In a few seconds the full app is stored in cache and served instantly.

It's extremely important to understand how people will use your app. Once you have this understanding you can start using it to your advantage, such as preloading scripts in the background as Linear does.

The service worker for even more speed and offline capabilities

The rest of the Linear, the route-level chunks for views the user hasn't visited yet, gets cached in the background by a service worker. The worker has a precache manifest baked into its source, around 1,200 hashed assets covering route chunks, icons, and fonts, and pulls them down lazily after the first page load. Within a few seconds of hitting the login screen, the full app is sitting in cache.
Preloading all the chunked javascript files to ensure instant loads from cache

This buys two things. Subsequent navigations skip the network entirely; the service worker answers directly from its cache without even going through HTTP cache. And the app keeps working when the network doesn't. Combined with the local-first sync engine (which already has the user's data in IndexedDB), Linear is usable offline. You can read issues, create new ones, edit titles and descriptions, change statuses. Everything queues in the local transaction store and flushes the next time the connection comes back.

Modulepreload is for what the app needs now, parallel-fetched so the browser never blocks on a serial import chain. The service worker is for what the app needs next.

So, to get load times fast the steps for Linear is to elminate as much code as possible, split it into small pieces, and precache it in the background. Again, the goal of all this work is to make network requests as fast as possible or, even better, eliminate them completely.

Vendor bundle composition

I found it interesting that every package Linear uses gets its own chunk, cached independently. A traditional vendor.js invalidates the entire dependency graph on any bump. Linear's chunking turns vendor caching from a single massive file to fine-grained. Bumping a single dependency invalidates one chunk; the rest stay cached.

Seems like a no-brainer and yet another detail to ensure fast load times.
Each individual package split into its own js file

Loading massive font files

Font loading is one of those details a lot of apps get wrong. The failure modes are visible: invisible text for half a second, layout shifts as the real font swaps in, double-fetched resources because the preload didn't match. Linear's setup avoids all three:

<!-- in <head> of index.html -->
<link rel="preload"
      href="https://static.linear.app/fonts/InterVariable.woff2?v=4.1"
      as="font" type="font/woff2" crossorigin="anonymous">
<link rel="preconnect" href="https://static.linear.app" crossorigin>

@font-face {
  font-family: "Inter Variable";
  font-weight: 100 900;
  font-display: swap;
  src: url(https://static.linear.app/fonts/InterVariable.woff2?v=4.1)
       format("woff2");
}
/* Italic and Berkeley Mono follow the same shape, single woff2 each. */

Variable fonts cover the full 100–900 weight axis in a single woff2, eliminating per-weight requests. font-display: swap renders the fallback stack immediately and swaps to Inter when it loads. The trick that's easy to miss: crossorigin="anonymous" on the preload tag. Without it, the browser preloads the font, then fetches it again when CSS later references it, because the two requests have different CORS modes. crossorigin on the preload makes the browser reuse the cached one.

This all seems simple, but I'm always surprsied at how many apps load fonts incorrectly. Linear is a great example of thinking through the details and ensuring font loading is as fast and accurate as possible.

Inlined app shell

Another key technique to make the first load feel fast: Inlined in <head/> is just enough CSS to paint the loading state with no external stylesheet fetched. Remember, the network is the bottleneck and what you'll always be fighting to make your app feel fast. In this case, Linear elminates a network request by inlining the critical CSS required to show the user an app shell.

<style>
  :root {
    --bg-color: #f5f5f5;
    --bg-base-color: #fcfcfd;
    --bg-border-color: #e0e0e0;
    --sidebar-width: 244px;
  }
  html { background: var(--bg-color); height: 100%; }
  body { font-family: "Inter Variable", Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif; }
 
  #appBorders {
    border: 1px solid var(--bg-border-color);
    background: var(--bg-base-color);
    margin: 8px 8px 8px var(--sidebar-width);
    border-radius: 12px;
  }
 
  #logo { transform: translateZ(0); }
 
  @keyframes logoBackgroundPulse {
    0%   { opacity: 0; transform: scale(0.8); }
    70%  { opacity: 1; }
    100% { opacity: 0; transform: scale(1.0); }
  }
</style>
<script>performance.mark("appStart");</script>

Beyond CSS there is also a bunch of inlined JavaScript that's critical to loading the initial experience.

<script>
// Electron context — lets CSS branch on native chrome.
if (navigator.userAgent.includes("Electron") && navigator.userAgent.includes("Linear")) document.documentElement.classList.add("electron");
 
// No local store → no workspace data → render the auth layout.
if (localStorage.getItem("ApplicationStore") === null) document.documentElement.classList.add("logged-out");
 
// Restore last-known shell tokens (sidebar bg, width, dark mode) before paint.
const c = JSON.parse(localStorage.getItem("splashScreenConfig") || "{}");
if (c.bgSidebarColor) document.documentElement.style.setProperty("--bg-sidebar-color", c.bgSidebarColor);
if (c.sidebarWidth) document.documentElement.style.setProperty("--sidebar-width", c.sidebarWidth + "px");
if (c.darkMode) document.documentElement.classList.add("dark");
 
// Compact sidebar to a sliver when the user opens links in the desktop app.
if (JSON.parse(localStorage.getItem("userSettings") || "{}").openLinksInDesktop) document.documentElement.style.setProperty("--sidebar-width", "8px");
 
</script>

Before any bundle has parsed, the JavaScript from index.html reads localStorage.splashScreenConfig, merges any sessionStorage override on top, and applies the user's remembered shell tokens directly to document.documentElement.style: sidebar background, base color, border color, sidebar width, agent toolbar height. It detects color-scheme preference and Electron context. It checks whether localStorage.ApplicationStore exists, and if not, adds a logged-out class that switches the shell to the auth layout.

By the time the first JavaScript bundle comes from the network the loading screen is already correctly themed, sized, and positioned for whether the user is logged in.

This gives the user the feeling that the app is ready to go as soon as they hit enter in the URL bar. There's no faster way around this than sending down the initial app shell in the initial index.html response.

An example of how fast Linear's initial load is

Render first, authenticate second

Authentication is another step where most apps give up their performance budget. The conventional flow: fetch the HTML, load the bundle, validate the session, fetch the user, fetch the workspace, then render. One to three seconds before the user sees anything.

Linear treats auth the same way it treats mutations. Assume the happy path and verify in the background. This is probably one of my favorite parts of their architecture because it allows them to almost immediately render the full experience on load.

Most CRUD apps keep the real session in an HttpOnly cookie, then add a second JS-readable cookie or /me request so the frontend can tell whether the user is logged in during startup. Linear does something simpler. Instead of maintaining a parallel auth signal, the inline boot script just checks whether localStorage.ApplicationStore exists:

if (localStorage.getItem("ApplicationStore") === null) {
  document.documentElement.classList.add("logged-out");
}

If it's there, the user has used Linear in this browser before, which means their workspace is already sitting in IndexedDB. This goes back to the first section we covered where the database lives in the browser. If it's missing, there's nothing to render anyway, so the shell flips to its logged-out layout and the login flow takes over.

The initial flow for Linear isn't "do you have a valid session." It's "do we have anything to show you." Their actual session token sits in a cookie. The bundle never tries to be smart about it. It just renders what it has and lets the next request (the WebSocket handshake, a sync delta, any HTTP call) be the thing that fails with a 401 if the session has gone stale. When that happens, the client redirects to login.

The whole pattern is consistent with the rest of the architecture: the client trusts what's local, the server is the source of truth for correctness, and the two reconcile asynchronously. Just like a mutation. Just like their sync engine.

Manually deleting the auth session and refreshing the desktop app

This is maybe one of my favorite details about Linear that I wish more apps behaved this way. For authentication, assume happy path, and fallback if not. If there's data to be shown: show it! And leverage your browser's datastores to render immediately.

The sync engine

Most of what makes Linear fast lives downstream of one decision: the server is a sync target, not a source of truth for the UI. The internals of their sync engine been thoroughly reverse-engineered already, and Tuomas has given multiple excellent talks on the architecture. I'm not going to retrace them. What I want to do is name the three pillars that actually produce the speed, because the speed is a property of how they fit together, not of any single one.

1. The data is already there

When the app boots, it doesn't fetch the workspace from the server. It hydrates from IndexedDB into an in-memory MobX object pool, and every query from the UI goes to the pool first. There's no "loading issues" state because the issues are already on the user's machine.

Something I found interesting is as they've scaled they've chunked the data in the sync enginer using the similar fundamentals as their JavaScript bundles. Not everything is fetched at once: the two heaviest tables, Issue and Comment, lazy-hydrate on demand. This is data-level code splitting, and it's what lets the engine scale: startup cost tracks the workspace structure, not the workspace size. A 10,000-issue workspace boots about as fast as a 100-issue one.

Click into a project, the issues are there. Filter by assignee, the index is already built. There's nothing to fetch because there's nothing missing. It's either been immediately loaded from your browser or shortly after in a codesplit lazy chunk.
IndexedDB: the database is in your browser

2. Mutations don't wait for the network

When you change an issue's status, three things happen almost at once: the MobX observable updates so the UI reflects the change, the mutation is written to a durable transaction queue in IndexedDB, and it's queued for the server. The network hasn't been touched yet.

The user never waits to see their own change. The retry, the rollback, the durability across reloads, all background. If the server rejects, the observable reverts and there's a brief flicker, but in practice that almost never happens because most invalid mutations are caught before the transaction is even created.

As I keep saying: the network is the enemy and you must do everything you can to avoid it. Linear's flow starts with the local mutation and treats the server as a confirmation step, not a permission step.

3. One delta, one cell

When the server confirms a mutation (yours or someone else's), the change comes back as a small JSON envelope describing what moved. The client applies it by writing to the corresponding MobX observable.

Because every property on every model in Linear is its own observable, and every component that reads one is wrapped in observer(), MobX knows exactly which components depend on which fields. A change that updates one field of one issue re-renders exactly the components that read that field. Not the parent list, not the sidebar, one cell. A 50-issue update is 50 cell re-renders, not a list re-render. This is what lets a busy workspace stay smooth when ten people are editing things at once: the cost of receiving updates scales with what changed, not with what's on screen.

I've built real-time apps streaming in stock data and fundamentals and having atomic updates of individual components it key to making an app feel performant. You want to avoid cascading updates as much as possible and Linear does exactly that.

Updating an issue in the list and single issue row re-renders

Why the three fit together

Take any one away and the app starts to feel slow. A local database without optimistic writes still spins on save. Optimistic writes without granular observables still jank on every update. Granular observables without a local database still wait on initial load. Linear's speed isn't a property of any single layer. It's a property of the system.

The bundler and loader shell are what make the app feel fast on first paint. The sync engine is what keeps it feeling fast once you start using it.

Designed for speed

Speed isn’t just an engineering problem. It’s a design problem too. A perfectly built sync engine still loses to a slow input model: if the fastest path to an action requires a mouse, three menus, and a click, the user pays for those steps regardless of how fast the underlying engine runs.

Another cornerstrone to Linear's speed is how they've intergarated the keyobard as a priamry tool to navigate and complete your work. Every common action has a shortcut. The command palette is one keystroke away. The right-click menu is custom-built. None of these are accidents but instead thoughtful design decision from day one.

Every action has a shortcut

Single letters edit the focused issue. Two-letter combos navigate. Modifiers act globally.

Listening to the founders talk about Linear’s early days, it’s clear that shortcuts were foundational from the start. The sync engine was designed in part so that any action could be performed at any time. It feels like this combination of design and engineering is continues to be behind every feature.

If you look through their UI you'll notice shortcuts visible everywhere. The most frequent ones are single characters as they're used the most often. Furthermore, every action can be done with a mouse as not to alienate beginners.

The command palette is always one keystroke away

⌘ k opens a command palette that lets users search over almost any action in Linear. Issues, projects, labels, status changes, navigation, issue creation, settings, theme toggles. The command is incredibly fast because it's searching the local MobX object pool, not a server. Remember, avoid the network.

The architectural payoff is that the entire app is accessible from a single pane. Navigation is search. Issue creation is search. Status changes are search scoped to statuses. Moreoever, the command is contextual and adapts to the what you're working on. A great way to teach key actions and shortcuts for any view. One primitive, used everywhere, running on data that's already in memory.

A fast app needs both incredible engineering and design. You can build a perfect sync engine and a flawless rendering pipeline, and still ship something that feels slow if the design is wrong. Engineering speed makes a single interaction fast. Design speed makes the path to each interaction short.

For a tool used all day, the difference between a shortcut and a two-second mouse path compounds over every action. Combine shortcuts with a global commmand palette and you've got yourself an app that's incredibly fast to use.

Animations

All the work up to now can still be undone by bad animations. Teams spend enormous effort making every part of their app fast. Initial load, updates, database queries, all of it. They shave off milliseconds so users never have to wait. Then, at the very last step, someone adds a 500ms height animation to an element.

There are only a handful of properties you should animate

Browsers have three tiers of property changes, and the cost scales with how high each one is on the rendering pipeline. Composited properties (transform, opacity) hand the work to the GPU and run independent of the main thread. Paint-triggering properties (color, background-color, border-color, fill) skip layout but still redraw pixels. Layout-triggering properties (width, height, top, left, margin, padding) force the browser to recompute the position of every subsequent element on the page. Never animate those. I mean never.

/* What Linear does */
.row:hover {
  background-color: var(--color-bg-hover);
  transition: background-color 0.12s;
}
.icon-arrow {
  transform: translateX(0);
  transition: transform 0.15s;
}
 
/* What you'd write if you didn't know better */
.row:hover {
  margin-left: 2px;       /* triggers layout for every row beneath */
  transition: all 0.2s;   /* and now you're animating margin */
}

The margin-left version recomputes the layout of every row beneath the hovered one, on every frame, for the full 200ms of the transition. On a long issue list that's the difference between buttery and jank.

If you go over every single property Linear animates in their app it's reserved to a handful, mostly those composited properties (transform and opacity) and sometimes properties like background-color and border-color.

Know when to hold back

In my opionion, what's almost as important as only animating composite properties is knowing when to not animate at all. It's easy to get carried away with animations. But in a tool used every day, the animations you'd love on a marketing site start to get in the way. Even a small hover delay, in the wrong place, becomes the thing the user notices.

Linear nails most of this. The command palette is the one I'd argue is too slow, but I've become a cranky old man over the years.

There are no transitions on list tiems to keep things snappy

The reason a lot of their animations work is that they reference their origin. The status popover scales out of the status pill. The agent panel slides in from its toggle. The motion is doing spatial work, telling the user where the new element came from, rather than fading in from nowhere as decoration.

Keep durations short and snappy

/* variables form Linear's stylesheet */
 
--speed-highlightFadeIn: 0s;
--speed-highlightFadeOut: .15s;
--speed-quickTransition: .1s;
--speed-regularTransition: .25s;
--speed-slowTransition: .35s;

Most design systems default longer than they should. Material's standard duration is 200ms, iOS's spring closer to 350ms. Defaulting to shorter transitions is one of the easiest ways to make an app feel faster, and Linear's defaults sit well below the industry norm.

Linear takes this one step further with asymmetric timing on enter and exit. Hover highlights, popovers, and the agent panel appear instantly when you summon them, then fade out over 150ms when you dismiss them.
The agent window appears instantly but fades out similar to macOS

As a small side note, one of Linear's Design Engineers, Emil Kowalski, created an incredible course at animations.dev. If you found the last couple of sections interesting, it's worth checking out. He dives deep into animation principles with plenty of examples and practical tutorials.

How Linear is so fast

There are so many more details I could cover that make Linear feel fast. The reality is there's no single thing that makes an app performant. It's the culmination of hundreds of decisions made correctly.

What I love about Linear's approach is how simple most of it is. No Next, no Tanstack, no fancy framework. They decided early on what architecture would serve their users best and have stayed true to it. The result is a client-side rendered app that's faster than server-rendered ones (and without the complexity)!

The shape of it is roughly this. The server is a sync target rather than a source of truth. The database lives in the browser. Mutations apply locally first and reconcile in the background. The first load ships less code in more pieces, with a service worker precaching the rest while the user is still on the login page. Auth is assumed based off state and verified later. The sync engine hydrates from IndexedDB into per-property MobX observables, so a 50-issue update is 50 cell re-renders rather than a list re-render. The input model is keyboard-first. Every common action has a shortcut with a global command palette. Animations stay on the GPU, durations sit below the 100ms cause-and-effect threshold, and layout-triggering properties are never animated.

The hard part isn't the implementation. It's the dedication to the craft over years, as the codebase matures, expands, and pushes up against new constraints.

If you haven't, I'd recommend checking out Linear to see it all in action.

Hope you learned a thing or two! It was fun writing this and diving into the details that make Linear what it is. I just love building the best web apps in the world and see how other people do it. If you have any feedback, suggestions, or want to connect you can find me on X.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

14. 7.8 magnitude earthquake shakes part of southern Philippines. Tsunami possible

Source: https://www.yahoo.com/news/weather-news/articles/as--philippines-earthquake-001322726.html
Site: Yahoo News
Author: JIM GOMEZ
Published: 2026-06-08
HN activity: 49 points · 8 comments
Length: 575 words (~3 min read)
Language: en-US

MANILA, Philippines (AP) — A magnitude 7.8 earthquake centered at sea shook part of the southern Philippines early Monday, causing damage in a key coastal city, knocking down power and setting off 1-meter (3-foot) tsunami waves along nearby coasts, officials said.

President Ferdinand Marcos Jr. asked people to immediately go to higher ground in Philippine areas vulnerable to a tsunami, and Indonesian and Malaysian authorities also issued warnings to their nearby coastal areas.

There were no immediate reports of casualties, and it was not clear if people were trapped or injured in the collapse of at least one small building in General Santos, a tuna-processing city of more than 700,000 people that is also a commercial hub in the south.

The strongest earthquake to hit the Philippines this year was was centered at sea about 13 kilometers (8 miles) southwest of General Santos and was caused by movement in the Cotabato Trench at a depth of 10 kilometers (6.2 miles), according to the Philippine Institute of Volcanology and Seismology. It struck at 7:37 a.m., the institute's director, Teresito Bacolcol said.

"It's a major earthquake and we're expecting damages and we've already some damaged buildings based on videos we've seen," Bacolcol told The Associated Press.

DZRH radio station in Manila reported that the small commercial building where its provincial branch was located partly collapsed and staffers dashed to the ground floor without injuries.

It wasn't clear if other people were trapped in the rubble of the four-story office building due to the quake, which struck before office hours.

Debris also fell from other buildings, hitting tricycle taxis parked below.

The Pacific Tsunami Warning Center said tsunami waves up to 3 meters (10 feet) were possible on some coasts of the Philippines. Waves up to 1 meter (3 feet) were possible on some coasts of Indonesia and Malaysia.

Bacolcol said 1-meter (3-foot) waves were monitored in the provinces of Sultan Kudarat and Sarangani by land-based tsunami watch stations. Smaller waves were monitored in at least one other province, he said.

"Please heed the tsunami warning. Move to higher ground now. Do not wait. Your life is more important than anything left behind," Marcos told people in quake-hit provinces.

"The national government is moving and we will not leave Mindanao behind," Marcos said and added that disaster-response agencies were on standby to respond.

Malaysia's Meteorological Department issued a tsunami warning for Sabah state on Borneo island. Sabah is just a boat ride away from southern Philippines. An 83-centimeter (2.7-feet) tsunami was measured by a gauge off Indonesia's Sulawesi island.

Smaller sea changes were possible in Taiwan, Japan, Papua New Guinea and several island nations and territories in the western Pacific. An advisory for Guam was lifted about two hours after the quake and there was no threat to Hawaii, the PTWC said.

Aftershocks up to 6.5 magnitude followed, the U.S. Geological Survey said. It measured the original quake at 55 kilometers (34 miles) deep. Variations in measurements by different agencies are common in the immediate aftermath of an earthquake.

The Philippines, one of the world's most disaster-prone countries, is often hit by earthquakes and volcanic eruptions due to its location on the Pacific "Ring of Fire," an arc of seismic faults around the ocean. The archipelago is also lashed by about 20 typhoons and tropical storms each year.

___

Associated Press journalists Edna Tarigan in Jakarta, Indonesia, and Eileen Ng in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, contributed to this report.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

15. What is the purpose of the lost+found folder in Linux and Unix? (2014)

Source: https://unix.stackexchange.com/questions/18154/what-is-the-purpose-of-the-lostfound-folder-in-linux-and-unix
Site: Unix & Linux Stack Exchange
Submitter: tosh (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-05 08:08 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 155 points · 51 comments
Length: 311 words (~2 min read)
Language: en

If you run fsck, the filesystem check and repair command, it might find data fragments that are not referenced anywhere in the filesystem. In particular, fsck might find data that looks like a complete file but doesn't have a name on the system — an inode with no corresponding file name. This data is still using up space, but it isn't accessible by any normal means.

If you tell fsck to repair the filesystem, it will turn these almost-deleted files back into files. The thing is, the file had a name and location once, but that information is no longer available. So fsck deposits the file in a specific directory, called lost+found (after lost and found property).

Files that appear in lost+found are typically files that were already unlinked (i.e. their name had been erased) but still opened by some process (so the data wasn't erased yet) when the system halted suddenly (kernel panic or power failure). If that's all that happened, these files were slated for deletion anyway, you don't need to care about them.

Files can also appear in lost+found because the filesystem was in an inconsistent state due to a software or hardware bug. If that's the case, it's a way for you to find files that were lost but that the system repair managed to salvage. The files may or may not contain useful data, and even if they do they may be incomplete or out of date; it all depends how bad the filesystem damage was.

On many filesystems, the lost+found directory is a bit special because it preallocates a bit of space for fsck to deposit files there. (The space isn't for the file data, which fsck leaves in place; it's for the directory entries which fsck has to make up.) If you accidentally delete lost+found, don't re-create it with mkdir, use mklost+found if available.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

16. Do we fear the serializable isolation level more than we fear subtle bugs (2024)

Source: https://blog.ydb.tech/do-we-fear-the-serializable-isolation-level-more-than-we-fear-subtle-bugs-5a025401b609
Redirected to: https://blog.ydb.tech/do-we-fear-the-serializable-isolation-level-more-than-we-fear-subtle-bugs-5a025401b609?gi=bbe53d79b84c
Site: YDB.tech blog
Author: Evgeniy Ivanov
Published: 2024-07-02
HN activity: 61 points · 34 comments
Length: 2.1K words (~10 min read)
Language: en

9 min read

Jul 2, 2024

--

We don’t understand how applications are affected by lower isolation levels.

Maybe READ COMMITTED is good enough or maybe people don’t know how dirty their data actually is…

Andy Pavlo at SIGMOD 2017

Press enter or click to view image in full size

All you need is ACID

Highlights

Database transactions imply ACID properties, where “I” stands for isolation and concurrency control.
The (serializable) isolation property ensures that the result of concurrently executed transactions is the same as if they had been executed in some serial order.
Maintaining the serializable isolation level is not free in terms of performance.
Many DBMSs provide weaker isolation levels for performance reasons, leaving it up to the application developer to choose the proper one. Moreover, a weaker isolation level is often the default in monolithic databases, e.g., “read committed” in PostgreSQL and MySQL. Meanwhile, stronger defaults prevail in distributed databases: “repeatable read” in YugabyteDB and TiDB and “serializable” in CockroachDB and [YDB]YDB.
Weaker isolation levels might cause subtle concurrency bugs. These bugs might introduce security vulnerabilities.
Millions of dollars were stolen, particularly from BTC exchanges, because of concurrency bugs in database-related application logic. We will provide details on multiple cases in the next sections.

In this post, we try to answer two important questions:

Do weaker isolation levels cause concurrency bugs in real applications often enough?
Is the performance penalty of the serializable isolation level reasonable, or is it overrated?

After answering these questions, we concluded that using weaker isolation levels by default is a form of premature optimization and evil. Consider using serializable isolation as the default unless your DBMS is CockroachDB or YDB, where serializable isolation is already the default.

Isolation levels subtleties

Suppose a table with a single column named “color” contains strings “black” or “white”. One user wants to change all “white” colors to “black”, while another user concurrently tries to change “black” to “white”. In other words, there are two concurrent transactions:

--- Transaction 1                            Transaction 2
UPDATE t SET color = 'black'        UPDATE t SET color = 'white'
  WHERE color = 'white';              WHERE color = 'black';

What would be the result of these two transactions? Intuitively, all colors should either become black or white. But in database practice, the proper answer is “it depends on isolation level.”

Usually, when we say “transaction,” we suppose that the transaction meets the ACID safety properties:

Atomicity: either all parts of the transaction are committed or all parts are aborted. Martin Kleppmann suggests calling this property “Abortability” because it reflects the meaning more accurately and avoids confusion between atomic commit/abort and atomic visibility.
Consistency: historically added for a better-sounding acronym and rather application-specific than DBMS-specific.
Isolation: concurrently executed transactions are isolated from each other. The results of transaction execution should look like the transactions have been executed serially, one by one.
Durability: committed data is never lost.

While “Isolation” is supposed to originally mean “serializability”, there are weaker [isolation levels](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Isolation_(database_systems) introduced as a trade-off between performance and safety:

Read uncommitted.
Read committed.
Repeatable read.

Serializable is the default isolation level at least since the SQL:1999 standard, including its recent version SQL:2023 (ISO/IEC 9075:2023). It is also the default isolation level in CockroachDB and YDB. However, many database vendors use weaker isolation levels by default, in particular:

“Read committed” in PostgreSQL and Oracle.
“Repeatable read” in MySQL/InnoDB (there is a subtlety, see below) in YugabyteDB.

Moreover, database vendors provide their own confusing naming conventions. For example, according the documentation “repeatable read” in MySQL/InnoDB provides its guarantees only to read-only transactions. That is why Hermitage notes that “repeatable read” in MySQL/InnoDB is rather “read committed” (“monotonic atomic view”). And Oracle’s “serializable” is actually not serializable, but “repeatable read (snapshot isolation)” (application developers have easy ways to work around this). For details, check this slightly old post or its newer 2022 revision and Hermitage’s page dedicated to Oracle. All this, in some sense, is similar to many Citus-like sharded Postgres solutions, which are not ACID, when it comes to multi-shard transactions.

Get Evgeniy Ivanov’s stories in your inbox

Join Medium for free to get updates from this writer.

Remember me for faster sign in

Now, going back to our initial colorful example, with the “serializable” isolation level, the result is indeed that all values become white or black. However, with “read committed” (the default isolation level in PostgreSQL), some values might change their colors, and some might not. With “repeatable read,” the values are expected to switch: blacks become whites, and whites become blacks. More interesting examples can be found here.

Enough with the arts and artificial examples. Let’s jump into a more realistic case of a possible application bug taken from Martin Kleppmann’s great book “Designing Data-Intensive Applications”. Imagine you’re writing an application to manage on-call doctors. Each shift has multiple doctors on-call, and any doctor can give up their shift if at least one other doctor remains on that shift. We use PostgreSQL 16 as the database:

CREATE TABLE shift (id int, name text, on_call boolean);

INSERT INTO shift VALUES
  (1, 'Alice', true),
  (1, 'Bob', true);
SELECT * FROM shift WHERE id = 1 AND on_call;
 id | name  | on_call
----+-------+---------
  1 | Alice | t
  1 | Bob   | t
(2 rows)

Now, both Alice and Bob want to leave the shift simultaneously:

--- Alice                              --- Bob
BEGIN;                                 BEGIN;

SELECT count(*) FROM shift             SELECT count(*) FROM shift
  WHERE id = 1 AND on_call;              WHERE id = 1 AND on_call;
 count                                  count
-------                                -------
     2                                      2
(1 row)                                (1 row)
UPDATE shift                           UPDATE shift
 SET on_call = false                     SET on_call = false
 WHERE id = 1 AND name = 'Alice';        WHERE id = 1 AND name = 'Bob';
COMMIT;                                COMMIT;

Let’s check the result:

SELECT * FROM shift WHERE id = 1;
 id | name  | on_call
----+-------+---------
  1 | Alice | f
  1 | Bob   | f
(2 rows)

To state it clearly, we executed two transactions in parallel, and as a result, our constraint was broken. This happened because, by default, PostgreSQL uses the “read committed” isolation level. With “serializable,” we wouldn’t end up with an empty hospital.

In this post, we are not introducing any theory because there are many excellent database textbooks available. If you are new to the topic, we strongly advise reading the previously mentioned Martin Kleppmann’s “Designing Data-Intensive Applications” and Alex Petrov’s “Database Internals”. Additionally, the “Isolation Levels in Modern SQL Databases Series” articles written by Franck Pachot are a great source of practical knowledge. Martin Kleppmann did an excellent job testing ACID’s “I” as part of his Hermitage project.

Instead, we will try to understand the pros and cons of not having serializable as the default isolation level.

Premature optimization?

Using a weaker isolation level doesn’t always mean you have an actual trade-off between consistency and performance. It depends on the data and transactions: queries can be simple and might not require serialization. In this case, a weaker isolation level might provide better performance for free. Somehow, there is a widespread belief that weaker isolation works fine for most transactions, and application developers should be skilled enough to detect cases when stronger isolation is required and use it on a case-by-case basis.

To showcase the second school of thought, we quote Martin Kleppmann: “Unfortunately, those weaker isolation levels are quite poorly understood. Even though our industry has been working with this stuff for 20 years or more, there are not many people who can explain off-the-cuff the difference between, say, read committed and repeatable read. This is an issue because if you don’t know what guarantees you can expect from your database, you cannot know whether your code has concurrency bugs and race conditions.”

The problem with both opinions is that they’re theoretical. Performance can be measured, and bugs can be counted. So, we decided to conduct a small secondary research study to check:

Do bugs caused by weaker isolation levels happen often?
Is the performance impact of the serializable level really that significant?

In 2017, Peter Bailis and Todd Warszawski from Stanford University published a brilliant research paper titled “ACIDRain: Concurrency-Related Attacks on Database-Backed Web Applications”. They analyzed “12 popular self-hosted eCommenrce applications written in four languages and deployed on over 2M websites” and identified and verified “22 critical ACIDRain attacks that allow attackers to corrupt store inventory, over-spend gift cards, and steal inventory”. According to the paper, “Of the 22 vulnerabilities, five were level-based, meaning that the default weak isolation level led to the anomalies behind the vulnerabilities. The remaining 17 were scope-based, meaning that the database accesses were not properly encapsulated in transactions and concurrent API requests could trigger the vulnerability independent of the level of isolation provided by the database backend.”

Moreover, the paper cites several interesting cases where concurrency issues (recall that the isolation ACID property is about concurrency) caused security vulnerabilities:

Here is the story of concurrency-related attacks on Flexcoin and Poloniex bitcoin exchanges. As a result, all Flexcoin bitcoins were stolen, and Flexcoin was forced to shut down. Exactly the same thing happened with Poloniex due to exactly the same bug. The post author states a very interesting and important idea: this kind of bug is not a security flaw because neither unauthorized access nor a fault in the authorization scheme happened — the application was just broken by its design.
Another story of a concurrency exploit resulted in stolen digital money.

We were able to easily spot yet another BTC story: an attacker stole 100 BTC by exploiting a concurrency bug (namely a lost update) related to transactions. Also, there are many less dramatic stories, like this one, where bugs are not security issues but are subtle to investigate.

During our secondary research, we found another interesting recent paper. The authors defined database operations coordinated by the application as ad hoc transactions. In other words, ad hoc transaction logic implements concurrency control on the application side. They checked 8 popular open-source web applications and found 91 ad hoc transactions, 71 of which played critical roles. 53 of them had correctness issues. We believe this adheres to the point that concurrency control is sophisticated, and even seasoned developers regularly make concurrency bugs.

There is another important concern related to the weak isolation level set by default. In many DBMSs (PostgreSQL in particular) serializable transactions are serialized only with other serializable transactions. If your application has a bunch of transactions with weak isolation levels and you add a new one where you need serialization, you will have to review existing transactions to find the ones where you must “promote” the isolation level. Since applications usually have tons of transactions, it’s easy to overlook the needed ones.

Now, let’s try to understand the performance impact of serialization. Surprisingly, there are many more stories and publications about bugs caused by weak isolation levels than cases where stronger isolation levels caused impractically low performance.

This paper describes an initial serializable snapshot isolation (SSI, which is another name for “serializable”) implementation in Postgres. The authors concluded that “serializable” performs only slightly below “repeatable read.” In practice, there are situations where serialization failures cause retries and performance degradation, but these cases, unlike concurrency bugs, can be solved relatively easily.

The only reasonable comparison of “repeatable read” vs. “read committed” we have found is this outdated post by Percona. They concluded that there is almost no difference between these two modes under TPC-C load (the industry-standard OLTP benchmark). We believe that the absence of fresh publications on this topic supports this conclusion.

Conclusions

Modern research clearly shows that concurrency bugs caused by weak isolation levels are not rare. They account for about 20% of all bugs related to database transactions. Researchers have identified isolation-related concurrency bugs in many popular open-source web applications. Moreover, these bugs often cause security vulnerabilities, which attackers have already exploited.

On the other hand, we found no evidence that the strongest “serializable” level has significantly worse performance. In particular, CockroachDB and YDB use the serializable isolation level as default and demonstrate decent performance even when compared to PostgreSQL.

There is ongoing research on solid tools to simplify the detection of concurrency bugs. Conversely, performance testing is a well-established engineering area. In practice, this means that if you choose a strong isolation level by default, you can easily use performance tests to determine if optimization is required. But with weak isolation levels, you end up reasoning about correctness, and concurrency bugs in database applications are really hard to find. As noted by C.A.R. Hoare in his ACM Turing Award Lecture: “There are two ways of constructing a software design: One way is to make it so simple that there are obviously no deficiencies and the other way is to make it so complicated that there are no obvious deficiencies.”

Thus, you might really want to consider switching to “serializable” as the default isolation level.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

17. Powering up a module from the IBM 604: an electronic calculator from 1948

Source: https://www.righto.com/2026/06/ibm-604-thyraton-tube-module.html
Site: righto.com
Submitter: elpocko (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-07 17:18 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 80 points · 24 comments
Length: 1.9K words (~9 min read)

1948 was an interesting time for computing. For decades, businesses had used punch card equipment that added and sorted electromechanically. Now these electromechanical relays and counting wheels were being used to build room-filling general-purpose computers such as Harvard Mark I (1944) and IBM's SSEC (1948). But slow electromechanical mechanisms were already becoming obsolete. World War II had fostered the development of electronics and vacuum tubes for radio, radar, and navigation. Electronic technology was being used in massive electronic computers, such as Colossus (1943) and ENIAC (1946). The first stored-program computer, the Manchester Baby, was built in 1948.

The IBM 604 Electronic Calculating Punch behind a Type 521 Card Reader/Punch. Photo from IBM. Note the panels in the side of the 604 and in the front of the 521 to hold plugboards.

In the midst of these technological advances, IBM introduced the Electronic Calculating Punch, type 604.1 This system may seem like a step backward: it wasn't a computer, but a programmable calculator that performed a fixed set of operations.2 However, it was much smaller3 than a computer—about the size of a double refrigerator—and much cheaper: renting for $550 a month, it was affordable by businesses and universities. Since it used vacuum tubes, it was much more powerful than electromechanical equipment; it could do 60 operations in under a second, including multiplication and division. As a result, the IBM 604 became very popular, with over 5600 units produced. Moreover, IBM's experience with electronics in the 604 led to the success of its vacuum-tube computers in the 1950s.

One of the innovations of the 604 was the pluggable module, which combined a tube and its associated circuitry as shown below. The insulated handle was used to remove and install modules in the calculator. The nine pins at the bottom of the module plugged into a socket in the 604, with the sockets connected with backplane wiring. The tube was also socketed, so a bad tube could be quickly replaced. At the right, the resistors and capacitors are mounted on insulating wafers in the module.4

A thyratron tube module from the IBM 604 Electronic Calculating Punch.

The 604 used several different types of modules. This module has a thyratron tube, a special type of tube that acts as a high-current switch. I put this module in a circuit and powered it up. The video below shows the module controlling a light bulb. The first button sends a small signal to the module (center), turning it on and illuminating the bulb. As I'll explain below, a thyratron tube stays on until its power is cut off, which I did with the second button.

Pluggable modules may seem trivial, but they were an important innovation. Previously, vacuum tube equipment was typically built from a metal chassis with tubes mounted on the top and the other components, such as resistors and capacitors, mounted underneath. IBM developed a different approach: pluggable modules, where each module held a vacuum tube along with its associated components. These patented modules were dense, since they packed components in three dimensions. Moreover, by using a small set of standardized modules, the modules could be mass-produced and the computers assembled on a production line. Maintenance and repair were simplified; modules could be swapped to find the bad module, which was replaced with a spare. These modules were so important that IBM featured them in ads for the 604. IBM used tube modules in later vacuum tube computers, using larger eight-tube modules in the high-end 700-series computers.

An ad for the IBM 604, highlighting the pluggable modules. From Time magazine, March 31, 1952, page 65. Click this image (or any other) for a larger version.

Vacuum tubes and the thyratron

The IBM 604 used about 1250 vacuum tubes. While vacuum tubes come in many different types, a typical type is the triode. A triode is analogous to a transistor: a small input signal is amplified to control a much larger current. In a transistor, the control signal is applied to the gate, controlling the current between the source and drain. In a triode tube, the control signal is applied to the grid, controlling the current between the cathode and the plate.

The diagram above shows the construction of a vacuum tube. The heater is a filament, very similar to an incandescent light bulb, that heats up the cathode to roughly 750 ºC. At this high temperature, the cathode emits electrons. When a large positive voltage (say, 100 volts) is put on the plate, the negatively-charged electrons are attracted. The stream of electrons from the cathode to the plate causes a current to flow through the tube. The current is controlled by the grid: if a small negative voltage is placed on the grid, it repels the negative electrons, preventing them from reaching the plate and blocking the current through the tube.

A thyratron tube is similar to a vacuum tube, except it has a tiny bit of xenon gas inside, allowing it to handle higher current.7 Like a triode, the thyratron is controlled by the grid. However, when current starts to flow through the thyratron, the xenon ionizes and the xenon plasma carries current. Unlike a vacuum tube, the grid cannot stop the flow of current. Once the gas is ionized, a thyratron tube stays on until you remove its power5 and the gas deionizes in microseconds.6

You can see this behavior in the video. When I pushed the first button, a small control signal ionized the gas, turning the tube on. The large current through the ionized gas illuminated the light bulb. The light stayed on until I briefly cut the power with the second button; the gas deionized, turning off the tube.

The thyratron tube, type 2D21.

The photo above shows the thyratron tube, type 2D21, a miniature 7-pin tube.8 The plate is visible inside the tube, with the other components hidden by the plate. The dark stain at the top of the tube is the "getter", a reactive substance such as barium that absorbs impurities inside the tube.

In the 604, thyratron tubes drove relay coils and powered the electromagnets that punched holes in cards. Other IBM systems also used these thyratron tubes. For instance, the IBM 83 Card Sorter used thyratron tubes as short-term storage to keep track of which holes had been detected in a card.

Conclusion

The IBM 604 occupies an interesting position between electromechanical accounting machines and electronic computers. Although it has the speed of an electronic computer, it was still a calculator, lacking computer features such as loops, memory, and stored programs. Despite these limitations, the 604 was highly successful and led to other important IBM products.

IBM extended the 604 in 1949 so it could be programmed by punch cards in combination with plugboards; this was called the Card-Programmed Electronic Calculator. This system was still not quite a computer, but was very useful for scientific calculation at places such as Los Alamos National Labs (link). In 1953, IBM announced the successor to the 604, the IBM 650. Unlike the 604, the 650 was a programmable, general-purpose computer; it became the most popular computer of the 1950s.

Eric Schlaepfer (TubeTime) has a box of IBM 650 modules, which we hope to power up soon. For updates, follow me on Bluesky (@righto.com), Mastodon (@[email protected]), or RSS. Thanks to CuriousMarc for extensive milling work to build the socket and colorful breakout box to hold the module.

AI statement: Despite the presence of the em dash, no AI was used in the writing of this article (details).

Notes and references

For information on the IBM 604, see the Operating Manual. The Customer Engineering Manual of Instruction explains the circuitry. See IBM's Early Computers for information on the development of the 604. For a detailed description of an application, see this petroleum engineering article, using the 604 to predict the profitability of an oil property. ↩

The IBM 604 operated by reading numbers from a punch card, performing up to 60 operations, and punching the result onto the punch card. This was repeated for each card, processing 100 cards per minute. The IBM 604 was not a stored-program computer, so it didn't have code. Instead, the IBM 604 was programmed by plugging wires into plugboards. The plugboard below was inserted into the 604, while a second plugboard, twice as large, went in the card punch unit to control which columns of the 80-column punch card were read and punched.

Looking at the plugboard above, the column on the left with the heading "PROGRAM" had a row for each programming step. A wire from that row was connected to the function to be performed on that step. The system supported conditionals: the operation that was performed on a step could be changed or skipped with the calculator selectors ("CALC. SEL.") on the right. (A selector was a relay that could send a signal along one of two paths (Normal or Transfer) based on a Control input.) For more information on the plugboards, see the Operator's Manual. ↩

The IBM 604 weighed 1310 pounds, while the attached 521 Card Reader/Punch weighed 670 pounds. The system used 5.5 KW of power. (Vacuum tubes are power-hungry; the module that I used required 3.75 watts for the heater alone.) ↩

I reverse-engineered the MD7A thyratron module to create the schematic below. Black pin numbers are module pins (1-9), while red pin numbers are tube pins (1-7).

Schematic of the IBM MD7A module, reverse-engineered.

For my experiment, I powered the module with about 100 volts on the plate (pin 5). I used pin 3 of the module for the input, using about 8 volts to trigger the thyratron. Pin 4 is the output, pulled high when the thyratron fires. I connected the light bulb between pin 4 and ground (pin 6). I ignored pins 7, 8, and 9. ↩

One disadvantage of a thyratron is that you need to remove its power to turn it off. In the 604, a mechanical cam in the card reader/punch activated a microswitch to turn off the power (details. Since the card reader/punch used cams on a rotating shaft for its timings, one more cam wasn't an inconvenience. ↩

The behavior of a thyratron is very similar to the silicon-controlled rectifier (SCR). This semiconductor device is also called a thyristor, short for thyratron transistor. ↩

The xenon pressure in the thyratron tube is very small, just .05 Torr, less than 1/10,000 of atmospheric pressure (source). Vacuum tubes, in comparison, have a vacuum that is orders of magnitude higher, around 10-6 Torr.

Some high-power thyratron tubes use mercury vapor, such as the ones inside a 1940s power supply that we examined. These tubes give off a blue glow when active. The xenon tube, in comparison, didn't emit any light that I could see, apart from the orange glow from the filament. ↩

The pinout for the 2D21 thyratron tube is shown below, and the datasheet is here. Thyratrons use the same symbols as vacuum tubes, except the large black dot indicates the presence of gas in the tube.

As the symbol shows, the 2D21 tube has two grids, so it is technically a tetrode (four active elements). The second grid improves performance by screening the control grid from the cathode and the plate, reducing capacitance. (See Thyratrons for modern industry.) For my experiment, I ignored the screen grid. (The 604 also used some pentagrid tubes with a whopping five grids: two control grids, two screen grids, and a suppressor grid.) ↩

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

18. Show HN: Lathe – Use LLMs to learn a new domain, not skip past it

Source: https://github.com/devenjarvis/lathe
Site: GitHub
Submitter: devenjarvis (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-07 11:16 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 262 points · 50 comments
Length: 2.8K words (~13 min read)
Language: en

An experiment in using LLMs to teach you, rather than think for you.

Lathe generates hands-on, multi-part technical tutorials on demand, with skills tuned to make content approachable. Then you work through them yourself, by hand, in a local UI built from the ground up for pleasant learning. (Just like we did it in the stone age 😎)

What is it?

Generate hands-on technical tutorials (single-part or a multi-part series) from any prompt
Work through the tutorial yourself in a purpose-built local UI
Use skills to ask questions, verify the tutorial, and extend it with a new part
Search, filter, and manage tutorials from your library
Every tutorial documents its sources, which model was used, and what prompt drove the "voice" for the tutorial

Quick start

Lathe is a combination of LLM skills and a Golang CLI used to store, manage, and view generated tutorials. After install (below), you can generate a tutorial inside any LLM session (Claude Code, Cursor, and Codex supported) by prompting something like:

/lathe build a 3D Slicer in Erlang


Then open lathe from any terminal:

lathe serve              # starts the web server, opens the browser

Don't worry, we also have dark mode:

Click the tutorial you want to read and start learning!

The CLI has a bunch of other commands, but honestly those were built to give the LLM a deterministic way to manage tutorials. I expect the above to be all you need (it's all I ever use) for day-to-day. If you want to ask a question about a tutorial, have the LLM verify it, or extend it with an additional part, the UI has affordances for each of these which will give you the exact skill/prompt to give your LLM in order to trigger the action.

Install

Lathe is a single self-contained binary. All you need is lathe on your $PATH; the skills run in an interactive Claude Code, Cursor, or Codex session.

Homebrew (macOS, recommended):

brew install devenjarvis/tap/lathe

Distributed as a cask (a pre-built binary), so it's macOS-only — on Linux use the install script or go install below.

Install script (curl | sh):

curl -sSf https://raw.githubusercontent.com/devenjarvis/lathe/main/install.sh | sh

Go (needs Go 1.25+):

go install github.com/devenjarvis/lathe@latest

From source:

git clone https://github.com/devenjarvis/lathe
cd lathe
go build -o lathe

Install the skills

The skills are bundled into the binary. After installing lathe, drop them into a project so Claude Code (or Cursor / Codex) can discover them:

lathe skills install                 # ./.claude/skills/<name>/SKILL.md (this project)
lathe skills install --user          # ~/.claude/skills/<name>/SKILL.md (all projects)
lathe skills install --agent cursor  # ./.cursor/commands/<slug>.md (Cursor slash commands)
lathe skills install --agent codex   # ./.agents/skills/<name>/SKILL.md (Codex Agent Skills)
lathe skills install --agent all     # Claude Code, Cursor, and Codex
lathe skills list                    # show the bundled skills

Codex uses the same SKILL.md format as Claude Code, so its skills ship verbatim (and --user installs to ~/.agents/skills/...). Cursor commands are slash-invoked as /<slug> (e.g. /lathe); the interactive handoff model is documented for Claude Code, so a few runtime details differ on Cursor and Codex.

Why does this exist?

I learned how to program as a teen in the 2000s by building homebrew games for my PSP (PlayStation Portable) in Lua, and then in C++. Lots of what I learned at the time was through the small PSP homebrew community I'm incredibly grateful I got to be a part of, but I also owe much of that formative learning to free online resources and tutorials available on the internet (shoutout to 2007 cplusplus.com - man does that site have a lot more ads now than it used to 😅). Eventually I became a professional software engineer and I spent the next decade "upskilling" (though usually to learn more interesting topics than needed for ) by finding and consuming a wealth of technical blogs, and more importantly for my learning style - hands on tutorials. Resources like the build-your-own-x repo, and Crafting Interpreters, and the 1,000 other one-off tutorials that taught me everything from building a raytracer, to a timeseries database, to a linear algebra matrix library and everything in between (seriously, I couldn't even begin to list all the amazing hands-on tutorials out there that have influenced me).

Hands on learning is how I've always learned best. These tutorials gave me the learning curve I needed to go from zero-to-one in a brand new domain, but even more importantly they gave me footing and confidence to take it from one-to-two-to-ten on my own.

Fast forward to 2026, and now we've got LLMs. I'm not going to go off topic about my complicated relationship with LLMs, but for writing software they are interesting and in many cases they can be really productive! But they do most of the work for you, and with that work gone they also take away the part that helped me learn a new concept or domain. In some cases, that doesn't matter - we've got a product to ship and LLMs help us ship it faster - but for me and my joy in this field and hobby I still crave those "ah ha!" moments where something finally clicks and I have the confidence I need to begin shaping it into my own.

So lathe is an experiment in using LLMs to teach me, rather than think for me. To recreate those moments of hands-on learning that taught me to love this work, and marry it with the potential of a broad "expert" LLM who can, in theory, teach me anything. I use lathe as a catalyst to get me started on projects I wouldn't know how to start in, and can't find any existing human written resources to teach. For example I first came up with lathe because I wanted to write a 3D Slicer Software from scratch (just finding documentation on g-code was a pain, shoutout to reprap). At the time of writing I'm diving into the world of embedded software development with Zig. Both of these cases lathe has been an effective tool in getting me from zero-to-one in obscure or extremely young domains where the human written resources just don't exist yet (and I wonder for how long humans will still bother writing tutorials if only the LLMs read them...).

But what about hallucinations?

Are lathe tutorials as good as ones written by humans? Not in the slightest. But what they lack in heart, personality, and architectural soundness, they make up for by having the tutorial writer ready and waiting to answer all of your questions, always willing to fix or update their tutorial when it isn't exactly what you wanted, and they actually complete writing all 6 parts to that series they started in 2018 (we've ALL been there 😁). Lathe is an LLM, and while I've built and tuned it to be as good as I know how to make it for this particular task, it's still going to fail in the ways LLMs fail. I recommend using the biggest "thinking" model you have access to (Opus, GPT-5 Codex, etc) as these tasks are less about iterative mechanical execution you might optimize for when programming, and more about researching, designing, and explaining a tangible concept from start to finish.

Additionally, the risk for hallucinations in this context is, in my opinion, significantly lower. Lathe is built to help you do the thinking, and is built around the expectation that you're the one typing this code out yourself. By reading through the guide and typing it out, you are actively engaged in the work and should be well positioned to naturally ask "wait, does that make sense?" when you come across something weird. At which point you can /lathe-ask (and sometimes the LLM comes back with good reasoning I didn't have because it's a foreign domain, and I learn something) or just straight tell your LLM to update the tutorial. While I have no pedagogical credentials to back this up, I think I may be actually internalizing concepts better by catching and pushing back on perceived slip-ups of the LLM. YMMV.

All of that said, if you can find a tutorial written by a human, I'd always reach for that first. I hope more often than not you do. But if you learn the same way I do and want to dive into a domain that is light on teaching materials, lathe is a pretty cool tool. Just remember it is an LLM and not a human. To help with this, I try to make it clear at all times what you are and are not getting. The lathe skills to write tutorials will tell you when it isn't sure about something it has written, and while I offer a more "personal" voice, I've defaulted to one that doesn't pretend to be something it isn't.

Be honest, did you vibecode this? Isn't that contradictory to your thesis?

Yep, lathe is "vibecoded". In this case, the scope and risk of lathe is low. It's a living thesis, for personal learning. That said, I've been using it daily lately and it's proven to be a useful and stable tool in my toolbox. I'm learning a lot by using it, and at this point I think it's good enough that others might benefit from it too. I expect the next few point releases to be some intentional code/architecture clean up to ensure it remains stable for others, and of course incorporate any feedback I get.

That said, for the sake of transparency, today I test lathe for my own usecases - Using Claude Code on MacOS. If you are outside of that setup, lathe should work, but I've not verified it. If you're willing to try it on a different setup and it does work, or you end up hitting a bump in the road, I'd love an issue letting me know either way!

Alright then, how does it work?

LLM skills — generate and work with tutorials, all run in your interactive LLM session: /lathe writes part-01.md, /lathe-extend adds the next part, /lathe-verify works through a tutorial to confirm it compiles and runs, /lathe-ask answers questions about a part you're reading, and /lathe-tag adds search tags to existing tutorials.

I moved to running all of these interactively, because I am a Claude Code user and headless claude -p is planned to be metered as of 2026-06-15. Maybe after that change I'll find that the cost is minimal (generating tutorials does not consume a lot of tokens compared to vibecoding) and we can move some of these interactions back into the UI. We'll see!
lathe CLI (Go) — copies tutorials into ~/.lathe/tutorials/, serves the rendered output at http://localhost:4242, and owns all durable state. It never calls an LLM itself: the web buttons and the lathe verify/lathe extend commands just hand you the skill command to paste into your session, and the skills call back into the CLI (lathe store, lathe verify-result, lathe extend-start/extend-commit, lathe voice add) to record results.

What's up with the fancy UI?

I'm glad you asked! The lathe skills and CLI were built in tandem to offer (what I think is) a great reading and learning experience. A few key features that make using lathe worth more than just prompting Claude directly (for me) are:

Full table of contents navigation if you hover on the right side bar

Content is written with side-notes throughout to prompt me to think more deeply

Left-to-the-reader Exercises at the end of each tutorial

Writing voices

Every tutorial is written in a voice. A voice controls how the prose sounds but it doesn't change accuracy, research, citation, verification, or structure, which are fixed. Two voices ship with lathe:

plainspoken (the default) — honest and precise, with no invented persona or fabricated first-person war stories. It's written to avoid anthropomorphizing the LLM that produced it.
companion — an attempt at a warm, wry, first-person "friend at the keyboard".

Pick one per run by naming it in your /lathe invocation ("…in the companion voice"), or change the global default:

lathe voice list                     # see what's available; * marks the default
lathe voice show companion           # print a voice's full spec
lathe voice set-default companion    # change the default for new tutorials

Custom voices. If you don't like the voices that come with lathe that's cool, you do you. You can author your own with /lathe-voice in an LLM session, and it'll interview you about register, person, and humor, draft a spec, and (on your approval) save it via lathe voice add <name> --file - into ~/.lathe/voices/.

Custom voices are instructed to not impersonate a real named person, fabricate credentials, or deny LLM authorship. /lathe-voice refuses those, and every voice is wrapped with a fixed preamble enforcing the same at generation time. The voice a tutorial was written in is recorded on it (so /lathe-extend continues in it) and is disclosed in an authorship byline at the top of every tutorial: Generated by <Model> · voice <name> where the model is the specific LLM used to generate the tutorial (e.g. "Claude Opus 4.8"), and the voice name expands to reveal the full spec.

I fully recognize this is a cat and mouse game, and that any attempts at safety here can be circumvented. Unfortunately, whether I publish lathe or not the bad actors who want to flood the world with AI slop tutorials are already going full steam ahead. I want to do my part though to make it clear that lathe is NOT intended for writing content outside of your personal use for your personal learning.

Finding tutorials

As your library grows, the web list page (lathe serve) has a search box and filters to narrow it down — all client-side, so it stays fast and offline:

Search matches a tutorial's title, topic, tags, repo, and tool versions.
Sort by newest, oldest, or title (A–Z).
Filter by status, by type (single vs. series), by tag, and by version.

Default port is 4242; override with --port.

Storage layout

Tutorials live globally in ~/.lathe/tutorials/, one directory per slug:

~/.lathe/tutorials/
  digital-synth-zig/
    metadata.json
    part-01.md
    part-02.md
    part-03.md
  database-from-scratch-go/
    metadata.json
    index.md


metadata.json:

{
  "slug": "digital-synth-zig",
  "title": "Build a Digital Synth in Zig",
  "topic": "build a digital synth in Zig",
  "created": "2026-05-03T19:00:00Z",
  "status": "unverified",
  "tags": ["zig", "audio", "dsp"],
  "parts": ["part-01.md", "part-02.md", "part-03.md"],
  "tools": [{ "name": "zig", "version": "0.13.0" }],
  "sources": ["https://ziglang.org/documentation/0.13.0/"],
  "voice": "plainspoken",
  "model": "Claude Opus 4.8"
}

Everything beyond the core fields (slug/title/topic/created/status) is optional and omitted when empty: tools (the languages/toolchains the tutorial targets, surfaced as version chips and the Versions filter), sources (the research trail — see below), voice and model (the byline on the reading page), and repo/repo_branch when a tutorial was written against a specific git repository.

Status is one of unverified (the default after lathe store; renders no badge), verifying, verified, failed, skipped, or extending (set while /lathe-extend is writing a new part). On failure, a verify-result.json is written alongside with the failed part, step number, and error output; the web UI renders it as a panel on the tutorial page.

Sources & provenance

Every tutorial keeps the research trail behind it — the URLs the generation skill actually consulted while writing. This is distinct from the inline ## Sources citations inside a part's markdown: it's a durable, tutorial-level record stored in the sources field of metadata.json and surfaced in the UI as provenance, so you can sanity-check where the material came from rather than taking the prose on faith.

/lathe captures them via lathe store --source <url> (repeatable), and /lathe-extend folds any newly-consulted URLs into the same trail (lathe extend-commit --source), de-duped against what's already there.
On the list page, each card shows a · N sources count in its metadata line.
On the reading page, a "Researched against N sources" panel expands to the full list of links.

Verification

Verification is opt-in and runs in your interactive LLM session. Storing a tutorial leaves it unverified and nothing runs until you ask. The lathe verify <slug> command, the --verify flag on lathe store, and the Verify this tutorial button in the web UI all just hand you the same command to paste into your session:

/lathe-verify <slug>


The /lathe-verify skill works through every step in the tutorial, creating files in a fresh mktemp -d scratch dir (never your repo), running commands, executing each ## Checkpoint block and then calls lathe verify-result to record the outcome in the tutorial's metadata.json. It marks the run verifying when it starts and a terminal verified / failed / skipped when it finishes.

Verification only makes sense where the tutorial's toolchain is installed. If a required tool is missing (e.g. no zig binary), the run is reported as skipped (⚠️) rather than failed — "couldn't verify here" is not the same as "broken."

Because verification now runs in your own interactive session, it executes under your normal LLM permission model, so you see and approve the tool calls. The scratch-dir convention keeps build artifacts out of your repo, but treat it as soft isolation at best, not a security boundary.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

19. The 29th International Obfuscated C Code Contest (IOCCC) 2025 Winners

Source: https://www.ioccc.org/2025/
Site: ioccc.org
Submitter: matt_d (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-07 05:47 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 372 points · 88 comments
Length: 1.4K words (~7 min read)
Language: en

Twenty Ninth International Obfuscated C Code Contest

Where to start

See below for links to the 2025 winning IOCCC entries.

Check out the index.html web pages for each winning entry. They have most of the information you need to compile and run the winning program. Take a look at the winning source code and try to figure out how it works. You might also want to check out the author’s remarks for even more details.

You may download all winning entries in the form of a compressed tarball for this year’s contest.

For IOCCC29, the volume and quality of submissions were at near-historic heights.

IOCCC28 was speculated to have attracted a record number of submissions due to the 4-year absence, allowing authors to refine their submissions, resulting in a higher-than-usual submission quality.

IOCCC29 was the second consecutive contest after the 2020-2024 hiatus. And yet, the number of submissions for IOCCC29 was similar to last year’s contest, and the overall submission quality remained high for this contest. So perhaps the increased submission volume, combined with a higher-than-usual submission quality, is due to factors such as improved website design, increased social media presence, authors building on the ideas of past winning entries, and other factors?

Starting with the close of IOCCC28, the procedures used for closing the contest to new submissions, the judging process, selecting the winning entries, preparing the update to the website, and the process to create the live show on the Our Favorite Universe were carefully documented. And while this documentation required additional time as well as more effort, the documentation process resulted in overall improvements to how the IOCCC is run.

A few days after the presentation of the winning entries for IOCCC29 has been made on the Our Favorite Universe YouTube channel. The recording of the main show will be divided up into individual segments. Then, each winning entry will be updated to include a link to a YouTube segment under a new Award presentation near the top of the winning entry’s index.html page.

Fun challenge info

We have added fun challenges to this year’s winning entries competition, under the “Judges’ remarks” section. After you figure out what a given winning entry does, we encourage you to attempt the fun challenge.

Some of these challenges are easier than others. In some cases, you’re asked to create an alternative version of prog.c or a related file. In some cases you are asked to produce an explanation about something.

If the fun challenge is still open (check the “A fun challenge” section for the given winning entry), consider submitting a GitHub pull request as a contribution.

If the fun challenge is closed, but you think you have a better solution, consider submitting a GitHub pull request as a contribution. If the IOCCC Judges agree that you solution is better, we will consider it.

If you believe you have an even better (or improvement) to winning entry’s fun challenge, please consider submitting a GitHub pull request, for the IOCCC judges to consider.

Rules and Guidelines for this contest

The final versions of the IOCCC rules and guidelines that were in effect for this contest were:

2025 rules version 29.15 2025-12-02
2025 guidelines version 29.08 2025-12-02

The IOCCC rules and guidelines for IOCCC29 represented a substantial rewrite over previous contests, thanks in part to a number of volunteers: giving the IOCCC judges useful edits, text rewrites, consolidation, as well as overall improved organization.

Looking forward to the next contest

We plan to open IOCCC30 towards the end of 2026 and have the contest run for a similar amount of time, closing sometime towards the end of Q1 2027.

As we perform the actions needed to open IOCCC30, we plan to internally document the process as we did during the closing of IOCCC29.

About two or three weeks after the IOCCC29 winning entries have been posted, and we process some of the early pull requests against the 2025 directory tree, the IOCCC Judges plan to go on an IOCCC vacation.

We had intended to go on an IOCCC vacation after releasing the winners of IOCCC28, but then the efforts to process bug fixes and enhancements to the mkiocccentry repo took so much time that by the time that repo was stable, it was time to open IOCCC29. Therefore, this time, we plan to wait until after the end of our post-IOCCC29 IOCCC vacation before working on any mkiocccentry repo PRs.

While working on creating potential write-ups for submissions that entered the final round of the set of judging rounds:

A few submissions were set aside in the final round of the final set of rounds.
We gained an additional level of appreciation for a number of the remaining entries.

While the winning entry authors came from locations of previous winning authors, this IOCCC29 had an author - jingp49 from a new location: Taiwan.

This contest saw a Hat trick of Hat-tricks by:

Yusuke Endoh: 2025/endoh1, 2025/endoh2, and 2025/endoh3
Nick Craig-Wood: 2025/ncw1, 2025/ncw2, and 2025/ncw3
Don Yang: 2025/yang1, 2025/yang2, and 2025/yang3

Notable and remarkable winning entries of IOCCC29 include, but are not limited to:

2025/cable - Subleq computer
2025/cesmoak - Black hole punchcard Fortran
2025/endoh3 - patch/diff quine
2025/jhshrvdp - Quasi-rogue-like game
2025/jingp49 - Dr. WHO sequence
2025/ncw1 - GameBoy emulator
2025/tompng - Ocean sound generator
2025/uellenberg - Quine pong
2025/yang2 - Zoltraak encoding

Those are just a few of the many amazing winners of the IOCCC29, so be sure to check out the rest!

As we discussed above, there were quite a few excellent submissions that didn’t quite make the final cut. We truly appreciate the hard work each author put into their entries, but we’re sorry that we can’t award based solely on effort.

We received many great submissions that didn’t quite make the cut as winners. If you submitted something for IOCCC29 that didn’t win, think about polishing your code and giving it another shot for IOCCC30. Interestingly, more than one winner of IOCCC29 was actually an improved version of code that didn’t win in a previous contest.

Encouragement for those who did not win this year

We know many of you that submitted to the IOCCC put in a ton of effort into your submissions for this year’s IOCCC. We can’t just give out awards to everyone. That would mean taking away from the submissions that we think are the best and deserve to win.

Sometimes, a final round submission might be good enough to be a winning IOCCC entry, only to be beaten by a similar, but slightly better submission. If you think this happened with your submission, consider submitting an enhanced version to the next IOCCC.

PLEASE DO NOT give up hope! There are some submissions that have been submitted with revisions, multiple times before rising to the level of a winning IOCCC entry. You might also want to try with a different type of submission altogether for the next IOCCC.

If you’re not planning to improve and resubmit your non-winning entry for the next IOCCC, you’re welcome to publish it.

On compiling and running winning entries

Some C compilers aren’t as great as they could be. If yours isn’t working well, you might want to try compiling with an updated version of clang and/or gcc instead.

If you encounter problems in compiling and/or running the winning entries, see the FAQ on:

Compiling IOCCC entries
IOCCC entry dependencies
Problems compiling entries
Running IOCCC entries

For additional information on how to submit fixes, see the FAQ on:

How to submit a fix - how to submit a fix to an entry
Update author information - how to correct or update an IOCCC author’s information

For even more information

Reporting an IOCCC website problem
Submitting a fix to the IOCCC website
How to contact the IOCCC - up-to-date contact details
IOCCC FAQ - additional information on the IOCCC
www.ioccc.org - the primary IOCCC website

Winning Entries of 2025 - The 29th IOCCC

Download all winning entries from 2025

2025/ayu - IMO award
2025/cable - Best imaginary emulator
2025/cesmoak - Retro space award
2025/diels-grabsch - Best one liner
2025/dogon - Consistently constant award
2025/endoh1 - Most likely to dazzle
2025/endoh2 - Most likely to shock
2025/endoh3 - Most resilient
2025/ferguson - Opposite award
2025/howe - Most likely to invade
2025/jhshrvdp - Most likely to teleport
2025/jingp49 - Who won award
2025/kurdyukov - Most likely to count
2025/mattpep - Most obfuscated options
2025/ncw1 - Best real emulator
2025/ncw2 - Best fractional emulator
2025/ncw3 - Best use of Unicode
2025/tompng - Most soothing
2025/uellenberg - Ping pong prize
2025/yang1 - Compound prize
2025/yang2 - Most magical word
2025/yang3 - INABIAF award

Jump to: top

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

20. LLMs are eroding my software engineering career and I don't know what to do

Source: https://human-in-the-loop.bearblog.dev/llms-are-eroding-my-software-engineering-career-and-i-dont-know-what-to-do/
Site: the human in the loop
Submitter: poisonfountain (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-07 12:49 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 831 points · 821 comments
Length: 1.8K words (~8 min read)
Language: en

06 Jun, 2026

I'm a software engineer, completing 10 years of professional experience this year. I started my career as a web frontend engineer (it was easier for me to debug frontend code back then, so I chose that path), but shortly transitioned to (web) backend and never looked back.

Through a series of coincidences, once I stepped into backend development, I ended up working in software development roles in the domains of finance, bookkeeping and payment processing, where I had great autonomy and a close and candid relationship with Product Managers and stakeholders.

I learnt a lot about the domain and how to effectively write programs for it: PCI compliance, double-entry ledgers, escrows, reconciliation, payment lifecycles, bank transfer idempotency, etc.

It was, then, obvious that I should focus my career on becoming an expert on that domain to stand out as a professional and differentiate myself in a field that showed signs of an increasing need for domain specialists.

The first pillar to erode: domain-specific knowledge

Last year, I got hired by a company in the finance workspace. So far, I had worked on companies that do have a strong payment and finance component to their operations/offerings, but that were not solely finance-focused companies.

That company also embraced AI wholeheartedly, so I got ChatGPT and Claude Enterprise accounts from day one and was encouraged to use them for my research, exploration, and even coding, albeit with a warning that I should still review and own every single line that made it into production.

One of my first projects involved reworking the legacy online payment system, which was a mess. They hired me for (among other things) my previous experience in building that and trusted me with the task.

Different from the other companies I had worked for so far, they wanted the "Design Docs" I write before coding to be readable by both engineers and product managers - so they shouldn't be a technical deep dive and more of an architectural view. I wrote my first one with minimal AI assistance - I even called LLMs "stochastic parrots" at the time, a view I no longer hold - and delivered it.

I valued my knowledge and thought no LLMs could replace it.

Then my manager reached out to me: even though you're delivering code at a good pace, you're taking too long to deliver those Design Docs. Are you using AI? You should use more AI.

"No way this will work", I thought in my head, but agreed. The models at that time were not as good as the ones we have now, but they did provide a good speed-up on my writing and even the decision-making.

And then I started realizing: all the knowledge I have accumulated over the years: the trade-offs between implementations, how acquiring works, how to structure idempotency to prevent double-charges, everything, was becoming useless. Even though the models still needed some steering, they could connect the dots on how to structure such systems, which was the hardest part that only develops in your brain after years of hands-on experience. That was my first shock.

But sure, I thought, they can do that because there's plenty of articles on the web on how that shit works along with all the technical documentation, and we have blog posts explaining how to apply the technical tools to the domain. For humans, it may take a long time to learn all that, but that's training data so the models can pick it up.

What the models will never be good at, and that's where humans will shine, is debugging! I had accumulated a good experience debugging race conditions and distributed systems in production. That was my ticket to long-term employability.

The second pillar to erode: debugging and distributed systems

So, after LLMs started getting good at writing docs and helping plan the actual implementations, they became good at coding. It started in the second half of 2025 with the Claude Code hype, then Codex came and so on. Although I was using LLMs for writing unit tests every day before that, I wasn't trusting them to write the full implementation yet.

The natural next step was to introduce more AI into writing code. And honestly, I liked it. I like shipping things to production and seeing users happy as much as I like coding, so I was trading one thing that I like for another one that I also like, it was fair.

LLMs were becoming good at coding, but it still couldn't debug the mess left behind (by then or by the humans), so I still had a role that was bigger than steering the robot - a ticket to employability.

Everything seemed fine.

Then came the MCPs, the agentic workflows and Claude 4.5 and the sky started to fall.

Claude 4.5, to be honest, wasn't that good. It solved like 60% of the bugs given a stack trace and some context (a Sentry link with Sentry MCP enabled was all it took in most cases). Sometimes it gave a solution that sounded plausible but was totally wrong.

This time, however, I stopped doubting the machines. I saw bugs that in the past would easily take 1 day of full-time debugging being one-shotted by Claude Code. Of course, not all of them yet, but the pattern was clear.

Then came 4.6, 4.7, GPT 5.5, Opus 4.8 and the DataDog MCP... Now I have CLIs that one-shots bugs across distributed systems for me. Bugs that I couldn't solve in the past. Bugs that would take 2 days of full-time debugging. Bugs across distributed systems that lack distributed observability. 90% of the bugs are one-shotted now, including bizarre race conditions, unexpected corner-cases, third-party integration issues, undocumented API edge cases, everything. I hardly have to intervene.

Of course, I'm still employable because someone has to review the code and steer the robot. But I'm just another off-the-shelf engineer now. I have no domain expertise that another Sr. engineer steering an LLM cannot match. All my finance and payment domain expertise, all the debugging intuition and distributed system knowledge earned through hours of sweat and tears, is now promptable.

We were taught that generalists and specialists will always have their roles. But now the market is shaping everyone into becoming a generalist. That's not a bad thing per se, until you look under the economics of supply and demand: if everyone is a generalist, the price of a generalist falls if there's no demand to match. And we all know the demand is drying up.

The third pillar, the one that hasn't eroded yet: code quality and architecture

I still have one pillar standing, though: code quality and software architecture - what's now being reduced to being called "taste" 1.

Along the course of my career, I always liked to refactor, always prized good code, and negotiated time in the sprint for it. DDD, Hexagonal, Clean Architecture, you know all the buzzwords. I like this topic, I like to discuss the trade-offs and different ideas on how to shape codebases. I really like it.

This is the last pillar standing. Except that nobody cares anymore.

Agents do a really bad job at keeping codebases organized. If you don't steer them, they'll hit a circular dependency issue sooner than you think. Will duplicate code. Add unnecessary comments. Mix up pure functions and side-effects. Disregard the principles of SOLID.

That should keep humans employed, except that this skill is now being reduced to the word "taste". But it's not just a renaming, the industry is moving to a world where code organization is less important.

Sure, humans should steer the agent to prevent spaghetti codebases with circular dependency graphs. We don't want F-rated codebases that are impossible to touch without breaking something. But a C or D? It's now fine. Nobody needs A or B-grade codebases anymore because they're being made for LLMs, not for humans to read.

I don't want to argue if this is inherently good or bad. If the source code is now written for machines to read and not humans, it may be actually ok to target them.

But that's another pillar of my expertise that's eroding. A good chunk of the knowledge I accumulated on that topic is not that valuable anymore. All the time I spent on it - reading books, doing real-world exercises, discussing with other engineers, writing ADRs - is becoming useless.

What now?

I'm still employed and I see myself employed (at least in that company) for a foreseeable future. But I don't know what to think about the long-term.

I spent 10 years (even more when you account for non-profession experience) getting good at things that are becoming less and less valuable. My last pillar of expertise is now reduced to a "taste" and will probably won't last long.

And I know that's not just me. About 8 months ago there was a layoff at my current company (not related to AI, according to them). Some brilliant ex-coworkers were laid off and are still looking for jobs. Most of them suffer from the same problem I outlined here: their domain expertise is not enough to stand out anymore.

The company is now hiring again for a few roles and domain familiarity is not a strong differentiator anymore. We used to list "Software Engineer - Area". Now it's just "Software Engineer" and the team assignment comes after the offer is accepted.

Of course, this is good for brilliant engineers that never had the chance to get deep into the domain and now have better chances at getting a job, but it's also sad to think that other brilliant engineers that spent their lives collecting domain knowledge are now competing on the same lane.

The only way out for keeping my employability in the long-term now seems to be shifting my domain expertise to something LLMs will not get good at so easily. But what's left?

I thought about going back to college, learning Math, Statistics, advanced Machine Learning and applying for research role at a frontier lab. Except that there are no frontier labs in my country, the few ones that exist are flooding with applications and I have family matters that makes moving to another country difficult. By the time I can afford to make that jump, RSI may have made researchers obsolete.

Maybe I should consider transforming my woodworking hobby into a profession...

Update (Jun 7): this post went viral. I wrote another post replying to some comments from social media and expanding some of my arguments. You can read it here.

See this, this and this for reference. Don't take this as an endorsement of the content inside any of these posts.↩

#ai #llm #software engineering

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

21. Cloning a Sennheiser BA2015 battery pack

Source: https://blog.brixit.nl/cloning-a-sennheiser-ba2015-accu-pack/
Site: BrixIT Blog
Author: Martijn Braam
Published: 2026-06-05
HN activity: 116 points · 17 comments
Length: 1.5K words (~7 min read)
Language: en

One of the annoying things about electronics is that so many companies must make their own incompatible battery packs. For many products these are expensive but at some level still reasonable, the battery pack contains the protection circuitry and some guaranteed high quality Li-ion cells.

This is not one of those devices. A significant portions of all wireless microphones by Sennheiser use the same BA2015 battery pack. These devices can also take two regular AA batteries but when using those it won't charge them in the dock. So how much would you pay for a bit of plastic around two standard Ni-mh AA batteries?
This is one of the cheaper legit ones. The smaller changes ask $80-$100 for them

I think this is a top contender for most expensive package of AA batteries you can get, and I have several microphones that need to have these replaced.

From the official Sennheiser page for these batteries:

It contains two rechargeable NiMH cells and is inserted into the battery compartment instead of two standard AA cells. The battery pack features an integrated sensor which indicates the battery status, monitors temperature during recharging and avoids the charging of non-rechargeable batteries.

The integrated sensor that gives this battery pack all these features is in fact a $0.02 NTC temperature sensor, most of the functionality they list here is actually the battery management chip that's in the microphone, not in the battery pack.

The only real reason for these things to exist is to avoid the charging of non-rechargeable batteries since you can put Alkaline AA batteries in this microphone and run it for a few hours, so this avoids that edge case of someone both owning the super expensive charging docks but removing the original battery and putting cheap non-rechargable batteries in there.

I get that might be a problem and I can't think of a better solution either, but that doesn't mean you have to ask this much money for this. It seems like third party battery manufacturers agree. This is why it's possible to get way cheaper replacement parts for it.
Third party replacement battery pack from the home brand of a dutch webshop

This is a lot better already! And a reasonable person would these in the microphones and be happy. But I'm not a reasonable person.

These packs just contain two cells made by Panasonic that you can just buy. If you go really cheap they can be $.95 per cell, for matching the specs of the original Sennheiser pack it's around $2.50 per cell. The NTC temperature sensor can be as cheap as $0.02 for the SMT part, but to be easier to construct and match the original a more expensive through hole part can be used for $0.20 instead. So for making 5 of these battery packs:
Prices from Mouser, it can be a lot cheaper if you use a ship that doesn't have as much markup.

Building a battery pack

The batteries in my microphones have already been replaced by the third party ones, so that means I have some old legit Sennheiser batteries to tear down to make a proper copy.

The first thing I did before breaking open the battery pack was make a rough model of the battery in OpenSCAD while the original still had accurate dimensions.
3D printed test for outer dimensions and the original

This is a pretty simple design but it's not very solid because the walls have to be quite thin to make it fit both the batteries and fit the original case size.

After this I opened it up, this had to be done destructively because it seems like the plastic parts are friction welded closed. The cells themselves are also glued in the plastic case.

This is the rear of the original battery pack, nicely showing which cells I should order to replace the ones inside. Both cells are in the same direction and the markings here show which contact is positive and negative.

The negative terminal is just a hole in the case that directly exposes the negative terminal of one of the cells

The positive terminal is the button top of the other cell in the pack. To make this work these are actually two different cells, one is flat top so the cell doesn't poke out and the other is a button top. In my design I'm using two flat-top cells instead and the button contact is actually a tiny magnet.

Now for the magic part that makes the battery pack work:

There is a third contact on the top of the pack. This is used to detect if you have a battery pack inserted or two seperate AA batteries that might not be chargeable. If this contact is blocked by a piece of tape the microphone will act exactly like two regular batteries are inserted and the charging dock will do the whole blinking red led thing to indicate it cannot charge.

With a bit of work I managed to destroy the plastic case enough to take it apart and break the glue layer.

The two cells are welded together with a metal strip to connect the positive and negatives and the third contact just connects to a NTC with the other terminal soldered to the side of one of the cells by removing a chunk of the plastic outer layer of that cell.

The NTC also seems to be a tiny SMT NTC in a plastic blob that has wires hanging off it instead of being one of the more regular through-hole NTC resistors. I have not managed to find a part that looks exactly like this. But after measuring it it looks like this is a 10kΩ NTC with a beta value of around 3200k.

Case design

Compared to the initial draft I made of the case before tearing down the original I have decided to rotate the print by 90 degrees to print it on its side. This means the very thin tabs that hold the ends of the battery won't break off as easily because there aren't layers aligned with that stress line anymore to break off. It also makes it possible to print more of the features without any supports.

A few small details have changed here like the tab on the positive terminal now has a 45 degree chamfer on it to print it while it hangs mid air. The only supported part of the case is now the tab that sits on the top of the pack that has the temperature sensor contact. This prints very nicely though with a tree support.

Another important part is the electrical connection. I made a hole through the case that gives enough room to fit a bent paperclip through the length of the case which connects the two cells together. With this all together this produces a reasonably solid battery pack that together with the microphone case makes a solid connection. I have included the OpenSCAD code for the case at the bottom of this post.

Conclusion

It is absolutely possible to do this, but the resulting battery pack won't be nearly as solid as even the third party packs that are available. With the amount of time required to fiddle with the connection paperclip and winding the temperature sensor leads around a tiny plastic tab it is probably not worth it to print your batteries.

It is very annoying though that the official packs are so ridiculously expensive. Sennheiser is not a printer company, the microphones are not subsidized by the massive cost of a battery and if it cost Sennheiser really anywhere near this to produce them they should have a word with their vendor...

Clearly the third part cells prove it can be economical to not rip off your customer base.

Code

outer_x=51;
outer_y=28;
outer_z=15;
channel=0.5;

module cell(terminal=0, terminal_r=2.5) {
    color("orange")
        cylinder(h=49.5, r=14/2, $fn=90);
    
    color("orange")
        translate([0, 0.3, 0])
        cylinder(h=49.5, r=14/2, $fn=90);

    
    if(terminal>0) {
        translate([0, 0, -terminal+0.01])
        cylinder(h=terminal, r=terminal_r, $fn=90);
        translate([0, 0.4, -terminal+0.01])
            cylinder(h=terminal, r=terminal_r, $fn=90);
    }
}

module triangle(short_edge, long_edge, length) {
    linear_extrude(length) {
        polygon([
            [0, 0],
            [long_edge, 0],
            [0, short_edge]
        ]);
    }
}

difference() {
    union() {
        cube([outer_x, outer_y, outer_z]);
        
        // Positive terminal tab
        translate([-2, outer_y-4-6, 0])
        cube([2, 6, 1]);
    }
    
    // Make positive terminal printable from side
    translate([-2, outer_y-4-6, 0])
    rotate([0, 0, 0])
        triangle(2,2, outer_x+2);

    
    // Main cutout for space in the front
    difference() {
        translate([1, -0.5, 6])
            cube([outer_x-2, outer_y+1, 10]);
        
        // Connection tab for temperature sensor
        translate([outer_x-5, outer_y/2-1.5, outer_z-2])
            cube([5, 3, 2]);
        translate([outer_x-5-2, outer_y/2-2, outer_z-2])
            cube([2, 4, 2]);
    }
        
    // Bottom chamfer 1
    translate([-1, outer_y, 0])
    rotate([-90, 270, -90])
        triangle(2,3, outer_x+2);
    
    // Bottom chamfer 2
    translate([-1, 0, 0])
    rotate([90, 0, 90])
        triangle(3,8, outer_x+2);

    // Cell 1 (negative terminal)
    translate([-0.75+outer_x, 7, 8])
    rotate([180, 90, 0])
        cell(terminal=10, terminal_r=4);
    
    // Cell 2 (positive terminal)
    translate([0.75, 7+14, 8])
    rotate([0, 90, 0])
        cell(terminal=10);

    // Channel for the cell cross-connection wire
    translate([0.75,outer_y/2+3,1.5])
        cube([outer_x-1.5, channel+0.2, 10]);
    translate([1.4+(channel/2), outer_y/2+3, 1.8])
    rotate([75, 0, 0])
        cylinder(h=12, r=channel/2+0.6, $fn=90);
    translate([1.8+(channel/2), outer_y/2+3, 1.5])
        cylinder(h=12, r=channel/2+1, $fn=90);

}

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

22. Man-Computer Symbiosis J. C. R. Licklider (1960)

Source: https://groups.csail.mit.edu/medg/people/psz/Licklider.html
Site: groups.csail.mit.edu
Submitter: rballpug (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-04 23:07 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 7 points · 0 comments
Length: 6.4K words (~28 min read)

Man-Computer Symbiosis

J. C. R. Licklider
IRE Transactions on Human Factors in Electronics,
volume HFE-1, pages 4-11, March 1960

Summary

Man-computer symbiosis is an expected development in cooperative interaction between men and electronic computers. It will involve very close coupling between the human and the electronic members of the partnership. The main aims are 1) to let computers facilitate formulative thinking as they now facilitate the solution of formulated problems, and 2) to enable men and computers to cooperate in making decisions and controlling complex situations without inflexible dependence on predetermined programs. In the anticipated symbiotic partnership, men will set the goals, formulate the hypotheses, determine the criteria, and perform the evaluations. Computing machines will do the routinizable work that must be done to prepare the way for insights and decisions in technical and scientific thinking. Preliminary analyses indicate that the symbiotic partnership will perform intellectual operations much more effectively than man alone can perform them. Prerequisites for the achievement of the effective, cooperative association include developments in computer time sharing, in memory components, in memory organization, in programming languages, and in input and output equipment.

1 Introduction

The fig tree is pollinated only by the insect Blastophaga grossorun. The larva of the insect lives in the ovary of the fig tree, and there it gets its food. The tree and the insect are thus heavily interdependent: the tree cannot reproduce without the insect; the insect cannot eat without the tree; together, they constitute not only a viable but a productive and thriving partnership. This cooperative "living together in intimate association, or even close union, of two dissimilar organisms" is called symbiosis [27].

"Man-computer symbiosis is a subclass of man-machine systems. There are many man-machine systems. At present, however, there are no man-computer symbioses. The purposes of this paper are to present the concept and, hopefully, to foster the development of man-computer symbiosis by analyzing some problems of interaction between men and computing machines, calling attention to applicable principles of man-machine engineering, and pointing out a few questions to which research answers are needed. The hope is that, in not too many years, human brains and computing machines will be coupled together very tightly, and that the resulting partnership will think as no human brain has ever thought and process data in a way not approached by the information-handling machines we know today.

1.2 Between "Mechanically Extended Man" and "Artificial Intelligence"

As a concept, man-computer symbiosis is different in an important way from what North [21] has called "mechanically extended man." In the man-machine systems of the past, the human operator supplied the initiative, the direction, the integration, and the criterion. The mechanical parts of the systems were mere extensions, first of the human arm, then of the human eye. These systems certainly did not consist of "dissimilar organisms living together..." There was only one kind of organism-man-and the rest was there only to help him.

In one sense of course, any man-made system is intended to help man, to help a man or men outside the system. If we focus upon the human operator within the system, however, we see that, in some areas of technology, a fantastic change has taken place during the last few years. "Mechanical extension" has given way to replacement of men, to automation, and the men who remain are there more to help than to be helped. In some instances, particularly in large computer-centered information and control systems, the human operators are responsible mainly for functions that it proved infeasible to automate. Such systems ("humanly extended machines," North might call them) are not symbiotic systems. They are "semi-automatic" systems, systems that started out to be fully automatic but fell short of the goal.

Man-computer symbiosis is probably not the ultimate paradigm for complex technological systems. It seems entirely possible that, in due course, electronic or chemical "machines" will outdo the human brain in most of the functions we now consider exclusively within its province. Even now, Gelernter's IBM-704 program for proving theorems in plane geometry proceeds at about the same pace as Brooklyn high school students, and makes similar errors.[12] There are, in fact, several theorem-proving, problem-solving, chess-playing, and pattern-recognizing programs (too many for complete reference [1, 2, 5, 8, 11, 13, 17, 18, 19, 22, 23, 25]) capable of rivaling human intellectual performance in restricted areas; and Newell, Simon, and Shaw's [20] "general problem solver" may remove some of the restrictions. In short, it seems worthwhile to avoid argument with (other) enthusiasts for artificial intelligence by conceding dominance in the distant future of cerebration to machines alone. There will nevertheless be a fairly long interim during which the main intellectual advances will be made by men and computers working together in intimate association. A multidisciplinary study group, examining future research and development problems of the Air Force, estimated that it would be 1980 before developments in artificial intelligence make it possible for machines alone to do much thinking or problem solving of military significance. That would leave, say, five years to develop man-computer symbiosis and 15 years to use it. The 15 may be 10 or 500, but those years should be intellectually the most creative and exciting in the history of mankind.

2 Aims of Man-Computer Symbiosis

Present-day computers are designed primarily to solve preformulated problems or to process data according to predetermined procedures. The course of the computation may be conditional upon results obtained during the computation, but all the alternatives must be foreseen in advance. (If an unforeseen alternative arises, the whole process comes to a halt and awaits the necessary extension of the program.) The requirement for preformulation or predetermination is sometimes no great disadvantage. It is often said that programming for a computing machine forces one to think clearly, that it disciplines the thought process. If the user can think his problem through in advance, symbiotic association with a computing machine is not necessary.

However, many problems that can be thought through in advance are very difficult to think through in advance. They would be easier to solve, and they could be solved faster, through an intuitively guided trial-and-error procedure in which the computer cooperated, turning up flaws in the reasoning or revealing unexpected turns in the solution. Other problems simply cannot be formulated without computing-machine aid. Poincare anticipated the frustration of an important group of would-be computer users when he said, "The question is not, 'What is the answer?' The question is, 'What is the question?'" One of the main aims of man-computer symbiosis is to bring the computing machine effectively into the formulative parts of technical problems.

The other main aim is closely related. It is to bring computing machines effectively into processes of thinking that must go on in "real time," time that moves too fast to permit using computers in conventional ways. Imagine trying, for example, to direct a battle with the aid of a computer on such a schedule as this. You formulate your problem today. Tomorrow you spend with a programmer. Next week the computer devotes 5 minutes to assembling your program and 47 seconds to calculating the answer to your problem. You get a sheet of paper 20 feet long, full of numbers that, instead of providing a final solution, only suggest a tactic that should be explored by simulation. Obviously, the battle would be over before the second step in its planning was begun. To think in interaction with a computer in the same way that you think with a colleague whose competence supplements your own will require much tighter coupling between man and machine than is suggested by the example and than is possible today.

3 Need for Computer Participation in Formulative and Real-Time Thinking

The preceding paragraphs tacitly made the assumption that, if they could be introduced effectively into the thought process, the functions that can be performed by data-processing machines would improve or facilitate thinking and problem solving in an important way. That assumption may require justification.

3.1 A Preliminary and Informal Time-and-Motion Analysis of Technical Thinking

Despite the fact that there is a voluminous literature on thinking and problem solving, including intensive case-history studies of the process of invention, I could find nothing comparable to a time-and-motion-study analysis of the mental work of a person engaged in a scientific or technical enterprise. In the spring and summer of 1957, therefore, I tried to keep track of what one moderately technical person actually did during the hours he regarded as devoted to work. Although I was aware of the inadequacy of the sampling, I served as my own subject.

It soon became apparent that the main thing I did was to keep records, and the project would have become an infinite regress if the keeping of records had been carried through in the detail envisaged in the initial plan. It was not. Nevertheless, I obtained a picture of my activities that gave me pause. Perhaps my spectrum is not typical--I hope it is not, but I fear it is.

About 85 per cent of my "thinking" time was spent getting into a position to think, to make a decision, to learn something I needed to know. Much more time went into finding or obtaining information than into digesting it. Hours went into the plotting of graphs, and other hours into instructing an assistant how to plot. When the graphs were finished, the relations were obvious at once, but the plotting had to be done in order to make them so. At one point, it was necessary to compare six experimental determinations of a function relating speech-intelligibility to speech-to-noise ratio. No two experimenters had used the same definition or measure of speech-to-noise ratio. Several hours of calculating were required to get the data into comparable form. When they were in comparable form, it took only a few seconds to determine what I needed to know.

Throughout the period I examined, in short, my "thinking" time was devoted mainly to activities that were essentially clerical or mechanical: searching, calculating, plotting, transforming, determining the logical or dynamic consequences of a set of assumptions or hypotheses, preparing the way for a decision or an insight. Moreover, my choices of what to attempt and what not to attempt were determined to an embarrassingly great extent by considerations of clerical feasibility, not intellectual capability.

The main suggestion conveyed by the findings just described is that the operations that fill most of the time allegedly devoted to technical thinking are operations that can be performed more effectively by machines than by men. Severe problems are posed by the fact that these operations have to be performed upon diverse variables and in unforeseen and continually changing sequences. If those problems can be solved in such a way as to create a symbiotic relation between a man and a fast information-retrieval and data-processing machine, however, it seems evident that the cooperative interaction would greatly improve the thinking process.

It may be appropriate to acknowledge, at this point, that we are using the term "computer" to cover a wide class of calculating, data-processing, and information-storage-and-retrieval machines. The capabilities of machines in this class are increasing almost daily. It is therefore hazardous to make general statements about capabilities of the class. Perhaps it is equally hazardous to make general statements about the capabilities of men. Nevertheless, certain genotypic differences in capability between men and computers do stand out, and they have a bearing on the nature of possible man-computer symbiosis and the potential value of achieving it.

As has been said in various ways, men are noisy, narrow-band devices, but their nervous systems have very many parallel and simultaneously active channels. Relative to men, computing machines are very fast and very accurate, but they are constrained to perform only one or a few elementary operations at a time. Men are flexible, capable of "programming themselves contingently" on the basis of newly received information. Computing machines are single-minded, constrained by their " pre-programming." Men naturally speak redundant languages organized around unitary objects and coherent actions and employing 20 to 60 elementary symbols. Computers "naturally" speak nonredundant languages, usually with only two elementary symbols and no inherent appreciation either of unitary objects or of coherent actions.

To be rigorously correct, those characterizations would have to include many qualifiers. Nevertheless, the picture of dissimilarity (and therefore potential supplementation) that they present is essentially valid. Computing machines can do readily, well, and rapidly many things that are difficult or impossible for man, and men can do readily and well, though not rapidly, many things that are difficult or impossible for computers. That suggests that a symbiotic cooperation, if successful in integrating the positive characteristics of men and computers, would be of great value. The differences in speed and in language, of course, pose difficulties that must be overcome.

4 Separable Functions of Men and Computers in the Anticipated Symbiotic Association

It seems likely that the contributions of human operators and equipment will blend together so completely in many operations that it will be difficult to separate them neatly in analysis. That would be the case it; in gathering data on which to base a decision, for example, both the man and the computer came up with relevant precedents from experience and if the computer then suggested a course of action that agreed with the man's intuitive judgment. (In theorem-proving programs, computers find precedents in experience, and in the SAGE System, they suggest courses of action. The foregoing is not a far-fetched example. ) In other operations, however, the contributions of men and equipment will be to some extent separable.

Men will set the goals and supply the motivations, of course, at least in the early years. They will formulate hypotheses. They will ask questions. They will think of mechanisms, procedures, and models. They will remember that such-and-such a person did some possibly relevant work on a topic of interest back in 1947, or at any rate shortly after World War II, and they will have an idea in what journals it might have been published. In general, they will make approximate and fallible, but leading, contributions, and they will define criteria and serve as evaluators, judging the contributions of the equipment and guiding the general line of thought.

In addition, men will handle the very-low-probability situations when such situations do actually arise. (In current man-machine systems, that is one of the human operator's most important functions. The sum of the probabilities of very-low-probability alternatives is often much too large to neglect. ) Men will fill in the gaps, either in the problem solution or in the computer program, when the computer has no mode or routine that is applicable in a particular circumstance.

The information-processing equipment, for its part, will convert hypotheses into testable models and then test the models against data (which the human operator may designate roughly and identify as relevant when the computer presents them for his approval). The equipment will answer questions. It will simulate the mechanisms and models, carry out the procedures, and display the results to the operator. It will transform data, plot graphs ("cutting the cake" in whatever way the human operator specifies, or in several alternative ways if the human operator is not sure what he wants). The equipment will interpolate, extrapolate, and transform. It will convert static equations or logical statements into dynamic models so the human operator can examine their behavior. In general, it will carry out the routinizable, clerical operations that fill the intervals between decisions.

In addition, the computer will serve as a statistical-inference, decision-theory, or game-theory machine to make elementary evaluations of suggested courses of action whenever there is enough basis to support a formal statistical analysis. Finally, it will do as much diagnosis, pattern-matching, and relevance-recognizing as it profitably can, but it will accept a clearly secondary status in those areas.

5 Prerequisites for Realization of Man-Computer Symbiosis

The data-processing equipment tacitly postulated in the preceding section is not available. The computer programs have not been written. There are in fact several hurdles that stand between the nonsymbiotic present and the anticipated symbiotic future. Let us examine some of them to see more clearly what is needed and what the chances are of achieving it.

5.1 Speed Mismatch Between Men and Computers

Any present-day large-scale computer is too fast and too costly for real-time cooperative thinking with one man. Clearly, for the sake of efficiency and economy, the computer must divide its time among many users. Timesharing systems are currently under active development. There are even arrangements to keep users from "clobbering" anything but their own personal programs.

It seems reasonable to envision, for a time 10 or 15 years hence, a "thinking center" that will incorporate the functions of present-day libraries together with anticipated advances in information storage and retrieval and the symbiotic functions suggested earlier in this paper. The picture readily enlarges itself into a network of such centers, connected to one another by wide-band communication lines and to individual users by leased-wire services. In such a system, the speed of the computers would be balanced, and the cost of the gigantic memories and the sophisticated programs would be divided by the number of users.

5.2 Memory Hardware Requirements

When we start to think of storing any appreciable fraction of a technical literature in computer memory, we run into billions of bits and, unless things change markedly, billions of dollars.

The first thing to face is that we shall not store all the technical and scientific papers in computer memory. We may store the parts that can be summarized most succinctly-the quantitative parts and the reference citations-but not the whole. Books are among the most beautifully engineered, and human-engineered, components in existence, and they will continue to be functionally important within the context of man-computer symbiosis. (Hopefully, the computer will expedite the finding, delivering, and returning of books.)

The second point is that a very important section of memory will be permanent: part indelible memory and part published memory. The computer will be able to write once into indelible memory, and then read back indefinitely, but the computer will not be able to erase indelible memory. (It may also over-write, turning all the 0's into l's, as though marking over what was written earlier.) Published memory will be "read-only" memory. It will be introduced into the computer already structured. The computer will be able to refer to it repeatedly, but not to change it. These types of memory will become more and more important as computers grow larger. They can be made more compact than core, thin-film, or even tape memory, and they will be much less expensive. The main engineering problems will concern selection circuitry.

In so far as other aspects of memory requirement are concerned, we may count upon the continuing development of ordinary scientific and business computing machines There is some prospect that memory elements will become as fast as processing (logic) elements. That development would have a revolutionary effect upon the design of computers.

5.3 Memory Organization Requirements

Implicit in the idea of man-computer symbiosis are the requirements that information be retrievable both by name and by pattern and that it be accessible through procedure much faster than serial search. At least half of the problem of memory organization appears to reside in the storage procedure. Most of the remainder seems to be wrapped up in the problem of pattern recognition within the storage mechanism or medium. Detailed discussion of these problems is beyond the present scope. However, a brief outline of one promising idea, "trie memory," may serve to indicate the general nature of anticipated developments.

Trie memory is so called by its originator, Fredkin [10], because it is designed to facilitate retrieval of information and because the branching storage structure, when developed, resembles a tree. Most common memory systems store functions of arguments at locations designated by the arguments. (In one sense, they do not store the arguments at all. In another and more realistic sense, they store all the possible arguments in the framework structure of the memory.) The trie memory system, on the other hand, stores both the functions and the arguments. The argument is introduced into the memory first, one character at a time, starting at a standard initial register. Each argument register has one cell for each character of the ensemble (e.g., two for information encoded in binary form) and each character cell has within it storage space for the address of the next register. The argument is stored by writing a series of addresses, each one of which tells where to find the next. At the end of the argument is a special "end-of-argument" marker. Then follow directions to the function, which is stored in one or another of several ways, either further trie structure or "list structure" often being most effective.

The trie memory scheme is inefficient for small memories, but it becomes increasingly efficient in using available storage space as memory size increases. The attractive features of the scheme are these: 1) The retrieval process is extremely simple. Given the argument, enter the standard initial register with the first character, and pick up the address of the second. Then go to the second register, and pick up the address of the third, etc. 2) If two arguments have initial characters in common, they use the same storage space for those characters. 3) The lengths of the arguments need not be the same, and need not be specified in advance. 4) No room in storage is reserved for or used by any argument until it is actually stored. The trie structure is created as the items are introduced into the memory. 5) A function can be used as an argument for another function, and that function as an argument for the next. Thus, for example, by entering with the argument, "matrix multiplication," one might retrieve the entire program for performing a matrix multiplication on the computer. 6) By examining the storage at a given level, one can determine what thus-far similar items have been stored. For example, if there is no citation for Egan, J. P., it is but a step or two backward to pick up the trail of Egan, James ... .

The properties just described do not include all the desired ones, but they bring computer storage into resonance with human operators and their predilection to designate things by naming or pointing.

5.4 The Language Problem

The basic dissimilarity between human languages and computer languages may be the most serious obstacle to true symbiosis. It is reassuring, however, to note what great strides have already been made, through interpretive programs and particularly through assembly or compiling programs such as FORTRAN, to adapt computers to human language forms. The "Information Processing Language" of Shaw, Newell, Simon, and Ellis [24] represents another line of rapprochement. And, in ALGOL and related systems, men are proving their flexibility by adopting standard formulas of representation and expression that are readily translatable into machine language.

For the purposes of real-time cooperation between men and computers, it will be necessary, however, to make use of an additional and rather different principle of communication and control. The idea may be highlighted by comparing instructions ordinarily addressed to intelligent human beings with instructions ordinarily used with computers. The latter specify precisely the individual steps to take and the sequence in which to take them. The former present or imply something about incentive or motivation, and they supply a criterion by which the human executor of the instructions will know when he has accomplished his task. In short: instructions directed to computers specify courses; instructions-directed to human beings specify goals.

Men appear to think more naturally and easily in terms of goals than in terms of courses. True, they usually know something about directions in which to travel or lines along which to work, but few start out with precisely formulated itineraries. Who, for example, would depart from Boston for Los Angeles with a detailed specification of the route? Instead, to paraphrase Wiener, men bound for Los Angeles try continually to decrease the amount by which they are not yet in the smog.

Computer instruction through specification of goals is being approached along two paths. The first involves problem-solving, hill-climbing, self-organizing programs. The second involves real-time concatenation of preprogrammed segments and closed subroutines which the human operator can designate and call into action simply by name.

Along the first of these paths, there has been promising exploratory work. It is clear that, working within the loose constraints of predetermined strategies, computers will in due course be able to devise and simplify their own procedures for achieving stated goals. Thus far, the achievements have not been substantively important; they have constituted only "demonstration in principle." Nevertheless, the implications are far-reaching.

Although the second path is simpler and apparently capable of earlier realization, it has been relatively neglected. Fredkin's trie memory provides a promising paradigm. We may in due course see a serious effort to develop computer programs that can be connected together like the words and phrases of speech to do whatever computation or control is required at the moment. The consideration that holds back such an effort, apparently, is that the effort would produce nothing that would be of great value in the context of existing computers. It would be unrewarding to develop the language before there are any computing machines capable of responding meaningfully to it.

5.5 Input and Output Equipment

The department of data processing that seems least advanced, in so far as the requirements of man-computer symbiosis are concerned, is the one that deals with input and output equipment or, as it is seen from the human operator's point of view, displays and controls. Immediately after saying that, it is essential to make qualifying comments, because the engineering of equipment for high-speed introduction and extraction of information has been excellent, and because some very sophisticated display and control techniques have been developed in such research laboratories as the Lincoln Laboratory. By and large, in generally available computers, however, there is almost no provision for any more effective, immediate man-machine communication than can be achieved with an electric typewriter.

Displays seem to be in a somewhat better state than controls. Many computers plot graphs on oscilloscope screens, and a few take advantage of the remarkable capabilities, graphical and symbolic, of the charactron display tube. Nowhere, to my knowledge, however, is there anything approaching the flexibility and convenience of the pencil and doodle pad or the chalk and blackboard used by men in technical discussion.

1) Desk-Surface Display and Control: Certainly, for effective man-computer interaction, it will be necessary for the man and the computer to draw graphs and pictures and to write notes and equations to each other on the same display surface. The man should be able to present a function to the computer, in a rough but rapid fashion, by drawing a graph. The computer should read the man's writing, perhaps on the condition that it be in clear block capitals, and it should immediately post, at the location of each hand-drawn symbol, the corresponding character as interpreted and put into precise type-face. With such an input-output device, the operator would quickly learn to write or print in a manner legible to the machine. He could compose instructions and subroutines, set them into proper format, and check them over before introducing them finally into the computer's main memory. He could even define new symbols, as Gilmore and Savell [14] have done at the Lincoln Laboratory, and present them directly to the computer. He could sketch out the format of a table roughly and let the computer shape it up with precision. He could correct the computer's data, instruct the machine via flow diagrams, and in general interact with it very much as he would with another engineer, except that the "other engineer" would be a precise draftsman, a lightning calculator, a mnemonic wizard, and many other valuable partners all in one.

2) Computer-Posted Wall Display: In some technological systems, several men share responsibility for controlling vehicles whose behaviors interact. Some information must be presented simultaneously to all the men, preferably on a common grid, to coordinate their actions. Other information is of relevance only to one or two operators. There would be only a confusion of uninterpretable clutter if all the information were presented on one display to all of them. The information must be posted by a computer, since manual plotting is too slow to keep it up to date.

The problem just outlined is even now a critical one, and it seems certain to become more and more critical as time goes by. Several designers are convinced that displays with the desired characteristics can be constructed with the aid of flashing lights and time-sharing viewing screens based on the light-valve principle.

The large display should be supplemented, according to most of those who have thought about the problem, by individual display-control units. The latter would permit the operators to modify the wall display without leaving their locations. For some purposes, it would be desirable for the operators to be able to communicate with the computer through the supplementary displays and perhaps even through the wall display. At least one scheme for providing such communication seems feasible.

The large wall display and its associated system are relevant, of course, to symbiotic cooperation between a computer and a team of men. Laboratory experiments have indicated repeatedly that informal, parallel arrangements of operators, coordinating their activities through reference to a large situation display, have important advantages over the arrangement, more widely used, that locates the operators at individual consoles and attempts to correlate their actions through the agency of a computer. This is one of several operator-team problems in need of careful study.

3) Automatic Speech Production and Recognition: How desirable and how feasible is speech communication between human operators and computing machines? That compound question is asked whenever sophisticated data-processing systems are discussed. Engineers who work and live with computers take a conservative attitude toward the desirability. Engineers who have had experience in the field of automatic speech recognition take a conservative attitude toward the feasibility. Yet there is continuing interest in the idea of talking with computing machines. In large part, the interest stems from realization that one can hardly take a military commander or a corporation president away from his work to teach him to type. If computing machines are ever to be used directly by top-level decision makers, it may be worthwhile to provide communication via the most natural means, even at considerable cost.

Preliminary analysis of his problems and time scales suggests that a corporation president would be interested in a symbiotic association with a computer only as an avocation. Business situations usually move slowly enough that there is time for briefings and conferences. It seems reasonable, therefore, for computer specialists to be the ones who interact directly with computers in business offices.

The military commander, on the other hand, faces a greater probability of having to make critical decisions in short intervals of time. It is easy to overdramatize the notion of the ten-minute war, but it would be dangerous to count on having more than ten minutes in which to make a critical decision. As military system ground environments and control centers grow in capability and complexity, therefore, a real requirement for automatic speech production and recognition in computers seems likely to develop. Certainly, if the equipment were already developed, reliable, and available, it would be used.

In so far as feasibility is concerned, speech production poses less severe problems of a technical nature than does automatic recognition of speech sounds. A commercial electronic digital voltmeter now reads aloud its indications, digit by digit. For eight or ten years, at the Bell Telephone Laboratories, the Royal Institute of Technology (Stockholm), the Signals Research and Development Establishment (Christchurch), the Haskins Laboratory, and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Dunn [6], Fant [7], Lawrence [15], Cooper [3], Stevens [26], and their co-workers, have demonstrated successive generations of intelligible automatic talkers. Recent work at the Haskins Laboratory has led to the development of a digital code, suitable for use by computing machines, that makes an automatic voice utter intelligible connected discourse [16].

The feasibility of automatic speech recognition depends heavily upon the size of the vocabulary of words to be recognized and upon the diversity of talkers and accents with which it must work. Ninety-eight per cent correct recognition of naturally spoken decimal digits was demonstrated several years ago at the Bell Telephone Laboratories and at the Lincoln Laboratory [4], [9]. To go a step up the scale of vocabulary size, we may say that an automatic recognizer of clearly spoken alpha-numerical characters can almost surely be developed now on the basis of existing knowledge. Since untrained operators can read at least as rapidly as trained ones can type, such a device would be a convenient tool in almost any computer installation.

For real-time interaction on a truly symbiotic level, however, a vocabulary of about 2000 words, e.g., 1000 words of something like basic English and 1000 technical terms, would probably be required. That constitutes a challenging problem. In the consensus of acousticians and linguists, construction of a recognizer of 2000 words cannot be accomplished now. However, there are several organizations that would happily undertake to develop an automatic recognize for such a vocabulary on a five-year basis. They would stipulate that the speech be clear speech, dictation style, without unusual accent.

Although detailed discussion of techniques of automatic speech recognition is beyond the present scope, it is fitting to note that computing machines are playing a dominant role in the development of automatic speech recognizers. They have contributed the impetus that accounts for the present optimism, or rather for the optimism presently found in some quarters. Two or three years ago, it appeared that automatic recognition of sizeable vocabularies would not be achieved for ten or fifteen years; that it would have to await much further, gradual accumulation of knowledge of acoustic, phonetic, linguistic, and psychological processes in speech communication. Now, however, many see a prospect of accelerating the acquisition of that knowledge with the aid of computer processing of speech signals, and not a few workers have the feeling that sophisticated computer programs will be able to perform well as speech-pattern recognizes even without the aid of much substantive knowledge of speech signals and processes. Putting those two considerations together brings the estimate of the time required to achieve practically significant speech recognition down to perhaps five years, the five years just mentioned.

References

[1] A. Bernstein and M. deV. Roberts, "Computer versus chess-player," Scientific American, vol. 198, pp. 96-98; June, 1958.

[2] W. W. Bledsoe and I. Browning, "Pattern Recognition and Reading by Machine," presented at the Eastern Joint Computer Conf, Boston, Mass., December, 1959.

[3] F. S. Cooper, et al., "Some experiments on the perception of synthetic speech sounds," J. Acoust Soc. Amer., vol.24, pp.597-606; November, 1952.

[4] K. H. Davis, R. Biddulph, and S. Balashek, "Automatic recognition of spoken digits," in W. Jackson, Communication Theory, Butterworths Scientific Publications, London, Eng., pp. 433-441; 1953.

[5] G. P. Dinneen, "Programming pattern recognition," Proc. WJCC, pp. 94-100; March, 1955.

[6] H. K. Dunn, "The calculation of vowel resonances, and an electrical vocal tract," J. Acoust Soc. Amer., vol. 22, pp.740-753; November, 1950.

[7] G. Fant, "On the Acoustics of Speech," paper presented at the Third Internatl. Congress on Acoustics, Stuttgart, Ger.; September, 1959.

[8] B. G. Farley and W. A. Clark, "Simulation of self-organizing systems by digital computers." IRE Trans. on Information Theory, vol. IT-4, pp.76-84; September, 1954

[9] J. W. Forgie and C. D. Forgie, "Results obtained from a vowel recognition computer program," J. Acoust Soc. Amer., vol. 31, pp. 1480-1489; November, 1959

[10] E. Fredkin, "Trie memory," Communications of the ACM, Sept. 1960, pp. 490-499

[11] R. M. Friedberg, "A learning machine: Part I," IBM J. Res. & Dev., vol.2, pp.2-13; January, 1958.

[12] H. Gelernter, "Realization of a Geometry Theorem Proving Machine." Unesco, NS, ICIP, 1.6.6, Internatl. Conf. on Information Processing, Paris, France; June, 1959.

[13] P. C. Gilmore, "A Program for the Production of Proofs for Theorems Derivable Within the First Order Predicate Calculus from Axioms," Unesco, NS, ICIP, 1.6.14, Internatl. Conf. on Information Processing, Paris, France; June, 1959.

[14] J. T. Gilmore and R. E. Savell, "The Lincoln Writer," Lincoln Laboratory, M. I. T., Lexington, Mass., Rept. 51-8; October, 1959.

[15] W. Lawrence, et al., "Methods and Purposes of Speech Synthesis," Signals Res. and Dev. Estab., Ministry of Supply, Christchurch, Hants, England, Rept. 56/1457; March, 1956.

[16] A. M. Liberman, F. Ingemann, L. Lisker, P. Delattre, and F. S. Cooper, "Minimal rules for synthesizing speech," J. Acoust Soc. Amer., vol. 31, pp. 1490-1499; November, 1959.

[17] A. Newell, "The chess machine: an example of dealing with a complex task by adaptation," Proc. WJCC, pp. 101-108; March, 1955.

[18] A. Newell and J. C. Shaw, "Programming the logic theory machine." Proc. WJCC, pp. 230-240; March, 1957.

[19] A. Newell, J. C. Shaw, and H. A. Simon, "Chess-playing programs and the problem of complexity," IBM J. Res & Dev., vol.2, pp. 320-33.5; October, 1958.

[20] A. Newell, H. A. Simon, and J. C. Shaw, "Report on a general problem-solving program," Unesco, NS, ICIP, 1.6.8, Internatl. Conf. on Information Processing, Paris, France; June, 1959.

[21] J. D. North, "The rational behavior of mechanically extended man", Boulton Paul Aircraft Ltd., Wolverhampton, Eng.; September, 1954.

[22] 0. G. Selfridge, "Pandemonium, a paradigm for learning," Proc. Symp. Mechanisation of Thought Processes, Natl. Physical Lab., Teddington, Eng.; November, 1958.

[23] C. E. Shannon, "Programming a computer for playing chess," Phil. Mag., vol.41, pp.256-75; March, 1950.

[24] J. C. Shaw, A. Newell, H. A. Simon, and T. O. Ellis, "A command structure for complex information processing," Proc. WJCC, pp. 119-128; May, 1958.

[25] H. Sherman, "A Quasi-Topological Method for Recognition of Line Patterns," Unesco, NS, ICIP, H.L.5, Internatl. Conf. on Information Processing, Paris, France; June, 1959

[26] K. N. Stevens, S. Kasowski, and C. G. Fant, "Electric analog of the vocal tract," J. Acoust. Soc. Amer., vol. 25, pp. 734-742; July, 1953.

[27] Webster's New International Dictionary, 2nd e., G. and C. Merriam Co., Springfield, Mass., p. 2555; 1958.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

23. My automated doubt development process

Source: https://www.alexself.dev/blog/automated-doubt
Site: alexself.dev
Submitter: aself101 (Hacker News)
Published: 2026-05-22
HN activity: 62 points · 18 comments
Length: 1.5K words (~7 min read)
Language: en

This process originated out of a lack of trust. I lost trust early in my AI-assisted development due to allowing our LLM partners to do too much, too quickly and without the standard engineering practices I had come to internalize. Trust was regained by automating as much doubt as I could muster. What does performing doubt look like? Critiquing the implementation of an artifact and doing so, repeatedly. If you are using AI to write code, specs, docs or any artifact, you may find this piece useful.

I use subagents, quite a bit. They inhabit the fulcrum of the entire process. They are specialized in ways that audit perspectival surfaces a standard instantiation of Claude wouldn't necessarily cover. The core idea in all of this is automated doubt from multiple perspectives and the front-loading of scrutiny. The more parallax coverage in AI development, the better; where different vantage points catch different defects, the way two eyes give you depth. The development process goes something like this:

Phase 1 — Design

It starts with an idea or a feature I'd like to build and a specification. Like any good development practice, it's usually wise to start with a spec, PRD, plan, or whatever flavor of design preferred. I ask Claude to write the spec and I spend 2–5 minutes skimming the file to verify the core implementation aspects of the idea are captured. This is where the iteration process begins.

I start with a Pre-implementation workflow (slash command in Claude Code), which consists of three agents performing the first round of doubt: Pre-Implementation Architect, Documentation Validator and Assumption Excavator. These agents do several things: verify design quality, scope assessment, completeness, documentation gaps and all the hidden assumptions that exist in the spec. All relevant findings discovered are folded into the spec by the main terminal agent — usually 10–25 depending on the scope of the idea.

Example findings:

Assumption Excavator: "executionStatsSchema in registry-sdk returns {totalCount, recentCount, windowMinutes}. Spec assumes {avgScore, medianDurationMs, passRate, lastRunDate, lastRunScore}. Entire history section unbuildable without new API endpoint"

Pre-Implementation Architect: "HarnessProfile embeds mcp.read/merge/remove/write methods alongside path config. Consider extracting McpConfigStrategy to separate concerns. Each harness file will grow to 80–120 lines otherwise."

The scope determines the amount of iterations I make. If the scope calls for it, the iteration continues with the next set of agents: Gap Analyzer, Implied Completeness Detector, Ambiguity Mapper. These agents in particular are excellent at finding all the omitted aspects of the system that will be missed if left unaddressed. When the gaps are discovered, they are added to the spec.

Example findings:

Gap Analyst: "McpConfigStrategy defines read/merge/write but does not specify behavior for malformed input, permission denied, partial write failure, or file locking. Destructive operation on user config files across 4 harnesses in 3 formats."

Implied Completeness Detector: "Manifest records version at root but installation state per-harness. When v0.3.0 user (Claude Code) runs v0.4.0 with --harness opencode, behavior undefined. Per-harness versioning or upgrade reconciliation not addressed."

For practical use:

Small scope: Pre-implementation only
Medium scope: Pre-implementation with Gap, Implied, Ambiguity
Large scope: Full sweep with multiple runs with each, occasionally dipping into other specialized agents

Now I pause and spend some time to read the spec, ~15–60 min. If everything checks out and the spec is ready for development, I ask Claude to generate a companion checklist that we can update and follow along. The checklist is created as a separate file and helps if you need to step away and close out a session mid-dev.

Phase 2 — Development

Claude pulls up the spec and checklist and begins development. If I'm picking the spec up with the development partly complete in a new session, I usually ask Claude to explore, or send a Chain Tracer or Deep Explore subagent for the complete picture prior to restarting.

One aspect of my development process that might stand out and that I would like to highlight: I don't use subagents for writes. This comes back to the trust angle. My experiences of spawning subagents for writes gone awry, often causing more harm than good, led to a temporary line drawn in the sand. I also say temporary, because this will undoubtedly change. As I understand it, there are methods for proper swarm orchestration, worktrees, agent-to-spec driven dev, but that's a bit beyond my trust level now. Sometimes the Claude terminal agent will spawn them for bulk updates, but I prefer a single Claude Code terminal instance building out the project.

I tackle all phases of the specification until complete. Verify the build works, and then comes the post-implementation development process. I mentioned automated doubt and this is where it shines. The next several iterations of the development process involve running a Post-Implementation workflow consisting of the following subagents: Code Validator, Type Safety Validator, Test Architect, Code Optimizer, Public Interface Validator and Security Analyst. These agents audit the codebase and provide findings: code & testing quality, security posture, duplication, performance considerations, semantic or structural integrity, documentation, the public interface, etc. The first run usually generates (depending on the scope) 15–35 findings, usually with the first 15–20 findings flagged as critical or high severity. These findings are addressed and I re-run the Post-implementation workflow. Then tackle the next set of issues, then the next and so on until I've reached my idea of what quality ought to look like.

Example findings:

Code Validator: "Every other execution method calls trackIfEnabled() after completion. startPipeline() returns PipelineHandle directly without tracking. Async pipeline users get no tracking data."

Security Analyst: "PreflightError includes shellQuote-expanded target path verbatim. Error messages containing resolved filesystem paths may propagate to tracking API and dashboard."

Phase 3 — Wrap-up and Ship

Once I've satisfied my preference for what I'm ready to release and everything checks out both in a practical and quality manner, I then run the final workflow: Ship. This workflow consists of the following agents: Code Validator, Type Safety Validator, Test Architect, Code Auditor, Public Interface Validator, Security Analyst, Anxiety Reader, API Contract Validator (if API), Release Readiness Validator. This workflow finalizes the iterative process tackled in the previous phase. 5/9 agents were all in the post-implementation workflow, so they should be finding very little or entering preference territory, the others are checking the API contract (if relevant), runtime consistency, what could break and the release posture of the system. When this runs, the question is: is this ready for release? Depending on the complexity, this may require 2+ iterations of Ship.

Example findings:

Anxiety Reader: "Promise.allSettled fires all agents simultaneously with no concurrency limit, risking resource exhaustion and API rate limits."

Code Auditor: "File I/O errors in writeReportFiles caught by handleCoreError which gives SDK-specific hints instead of filesystem-specific messaging."

Conclusion

On the philosophical end, this is the negotiation between the artifacts, the agents and the operator and where the idea of quality converges. We all have an idea of what quality means to us, even the agents themselves have ideas of what both quantifies and qualifies as quality. This is the agreement we make with ourselves and the agents: what constitutes readiness. The foundation of it all is the idea that we are aiming for some form of consistency, usability, readability, maintainability — and underneath those, something we can be more confident in. Quality can be a subjective state, with objective goals. I iterate until those ideas converge. How do you know when to terminate the loop? I'd like to think it's intuitive: the combination of patience, practice, judgement and your expertise in asking the right questions. Is the juice worth the squeeze for this next fix or feature? It comes back to the personal thresholds for whatever state of the project you are ready to release. The artist is never finished, is the engineer? It ultimately comes down to the operator. The good thing about versioning, is that you can always add, subtract or modify in some manner and how that quality manifests is derived from preference and the artifact's trajectory.

One consideration of the method, and one I can state with confidence: this process is not necessarily cheap on the tokens. For those of us who have spent countless hours burning through tokens and hitting usage limits, this can play a major role in how we develop with AI. For some projects, this process is absolutely overkill, and for others, it's simply not enough and requires appending an entirely different set of agents to audit. My personal inclination is to run this process and run it repeatedly. I'd like to ensure the code I am developing with Claude or any other AI system can be verified, validated and ideally, meet a higher standard. Some projects may require nothing more than a Code Validator and Test Architect for review, others involve 40+ agents from multiple perspectives. If there is at least one agent that should be tried out on any artifact — codebase, spec, docs, etc — it's the Assumption Excavator, as it is near universally applicable.

This process originated out of a lack of trust and has developed into a trust signal.

The agents, commands, and pipelines referenced in this post are available at github.com/aself101/agents-and-pipelines.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

24. Tech sell-off widens as South Korea index plunges

Source: https://www.ft.com/content/2f0f727b-5315-445c-b8f1-6aa65bd7474c
Site: Financial Times
Author: Song Jung-a, Leo Lewis
Published: 2026-06-08
HN activity: 13 points · 4 comments
Length: 145 words (~1 min read)
Language: en-GB

Subscribe to unlock this article

Try unlimited access

Only R$10 for 4 weeks

Then R$375 per month. Complete digital access to quality FT journalism on any device. Cancel anytime during your trial.

Explore more offers.

FT Digital Edition

R$75 per month

Our digitised version of the FT newspaper, for easy reading on any device.

Standard Digital

R$249 per month

Essential digital access to quality FT journalism on any device. Pay a year upfront and save 20%.

Premium Digital

Complete coverage

R$375 per month

Complete digital access to quality FT journalism with expert analysis from industry leaders. Pay a year upfront and save 20%.

Explore our full range of subscriptions.

Discover all the plans currently available in your country

Digital access for organisations. Includes exclusive features and content.

Why the FT?

See why over a million readers pay to read the Financial Times.

Find out why

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

25. Proliferate (YC S25) is hiring to building open source Codex

Source: https://www.ycombinator.com/companies/proliferate/jobs/L3copvK-founding-engineer
Site: Y Combinator
Submitter: pablo24602 (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-07 17:01 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 1 points · 0 comments
Length: 419 words (~2 min read)
Language: en

About Proliferate

Proliferate is building the operating system for modern engineering.

We are building the company in person in SoMa, San Francisco. We care a lot about intensity, craft, and working with people who want to do the best work of their careers. We work hard, and we also take health seriously: company-expensed Whoop, meaningful health and wellness budget, and top-tier insurance.

About the Founder

I (Pablo) finished my master's in AI at 19 and joined Onyx (YC W24) as engineer #1, where I spent a year building enterprise AI search before starting Proliferate. You can see what I shipped there here. We’ll be working closely together.

About the Role

You’d be one of our first engineering hires and build the core product. This is a high-ownership role across product, systems, and user experience.

Example work:

Build a new core workflow end to end across agent runtime, product UI, and cloud infrastructure.
Design and ship a new interface for human-agent collaboration made possible by a model capability that landed last week.
Turn a rough customer pain point into a polished product surface in days.
Re-think how engineering teams review, redirect, and trust agent work before merge.

Who We’re Looking For

We have an extremely small, flat, talent-dense team. We value urgency, taste, truth-seeking, and people who care deeply about the quality and impact of their work.

You might be a great fit if:

You've shipped products from 0 to 1
You want a role that is unusually dense in learning, ownership, and pace
You want to work with teammates who have very high standards
You care deeply about what you build and who you build it with
You want to do your life's work and enable other people to do theirs

Stack

TypeScript, React, Next.js, Python, Postgres, Redis, AWS, Rust

Comp & Benefits

Top-of-market salary plus meaningful equity, full health/dental/vision, all meals covered, equipment budget, and a monthly health and wellness stipend.

Interview Process

1. Initial questions (3 minutes)

4 short questions through Work at a Startup. Emphasis on short! Should be around 3 sentences max per answer

2. Phone call with Pablo (15 minutes)

A quick call to get to know each other

3. Technical round (30 minutes)

We’ll talk through a technical problem together with a codebase open on your end

4. Work trial (1-3 days, $1-3K)

Come to our office by Salesforce Park in SF and we'll try working together. If this isn't possible due to extenuating circumstances, we can make accommodations

5. References + Offer

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

26. Firefox Merges Support for Vulkan Video Decoding

Source: https://www.phoronix.com/news/Firefox-Vulkan-Video-Merged
Site: phoronix.com
Author: Written by Michael Larabel in Mozilla on 7 June 2026 at 10:55 AM EDT. 23 Comments
Submitted: 2026-06-07 22:41 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 82 points · 11 comments
Length: 181 words (~1 min read)
Language: en

As an exciting development for GPU-accelerated video decoding within the Mozilla Firefox web browser, initial support for Vulkan Video has landed in the web browser!

Firefox on Linux has long been focused on the Video Acceleration API (VA-API) that isn't universally supported by Linux graphics drivers. This has left to efforts like NVIDIA-VAAPI-Driver to layer VA-API atop NVIDIA NVDEC interfaces to enjoy GPU-accelerated video playback in Firefox. Smaller Arm/embedded graphics drivers also have been largely left out of the game in the VA-API space. But with Vulkan Video we are beginning to see more adoption and in a cross-platform manner.

Following recent activity in Firefox development, this bug report opened three months ago over the lack of Vulkan Video support in Firefox was closed.

The Firefox 153 release due out in July will have Vulkan Video decoding support available. The Vulkan Video activity in Firefox Git culminated this week with the work of NVIDIA engineer Tymur Boiko and Red Hat's Martin Stransky.

Firefox 153.0 is expected for release on 21 July with this Vulkan Video support assuming no last minute issues.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

27. KNN early termination in Manticore Search

Source: https://manticoresearch.com/blog/knn-early-termination/
Site: Ilya Kuznetsov
Author: Ilya Kuznetsov
Published: 2026-05-29
HN activity: 8 points · 0 comments
Length: 1.9K words (~9 min read)
Language: en-us

Modern search engines do more than match keywords. When you search for "cozy mystery set in Paris" and get results for "atmospheric detective novel in France" that's vector search at work: documents and queries are converted into lists of numbers, called embeddings, and the search engine finds the documents whose numbers are closest to the query's.

Manticore Search supports this natively. Under the hood, it uses a data structure called HNSW: a graph that connects nearby vectors, so it can find nearest neighbors quickly without scanning every document. That makes vector search fast enough to run on millions of documents in milliseconds.

But HNSW has an inefficiency. Early in the traversal, almost every distance computation finds a better candidate than the ones already in the result set.

As the search goes on, those improvements become rarer, but the algorithm keeps traversing the graph until it exhausts its exploration budget. By that point, the result set has often already converged, and the remaining work does little or nothing to improve it. Early termination fixes this by detecting that point and stopping early.

The effect becomes more noticeable as k grows, where k is the number of nearest neighbors the query asks Manticore to return. Returning more neighbors requires more graph exploration, and much of that extra work happens after the result set has already stabilized. That also makes early termination more valuable, because it has more unnecessary work to cut.

This gets more pronounced with vector quantization . Quantization compresses stored vectors to save memory, which slightly lowers search precision. To recover it, Manticore uses oversampling : it fetches 3x more candidates than requested, then rescores them using the original full-precision vectors. With the default 3x oversampling, HNSW explores many more candidates per query. Large k values often come from this kind of candidate expansion: an application may ask the vector index for hundreds or thousands of candidates, then rescore, rerank, or filter them down to a much smaller final result set to improve recall and precision. That raises latency, and early termination helps win some of it back.

The waste is measurable. Benchmarks on a 1M-vector dataset show that with k=60, which is the default result limit with default 3x oversampling, early termination reduces distance computations to about 65% of the full search. At k=1000, computations drop to 30%. At k=10000, just 20%. The search converges long before the exploration budget runs out, and the savings grow with k.

Early termination lets Manticore detect this convergence and stop. The algorithm was designed with a specific precision target: lose no more than 2-4% of result set precision compared to a full HNSW search.

How it works

The algorithm tracks a simple signal: discovery rate - the fraction of distance computations that actually improve the result set.

Each time a new node's distance is computed, one of two things happens: either it's good enough to enter the heap - the priority queue that holds the current best candidate neighbors - or it's worse than everything already there and gets discarded. Entering the heap counts as a "discovery." Early in the search, discoveries are frequent - the heap is filling up and most candidates are useful. As the search progresses and the heap saturates with good results, discoveries become rare. Most new distance computations just confirm that the algorithm has already found the best candidates.

Manticore monitors this transition. After each round of neighbor expansion, it computes the discovery rate:

discovery_rate = new_candidates_collected / distances_computed


If this rate stays below a threshold for several rounds in a row, the search stops.

The idea is simple: if the algorithm keeps computing distances but nothing improves the result, the search has converged.

The threshold: quantile-based adaptation

That raises the obvious next question: what threshold should count as "low"? A fixed threshold wouldn't work well - different datasets and different regions of the same dataset have wildly different discovery rate distributions. What counts as "low" depends on context.

Manticore uses a quantile-based adaptive threshold. Instead of comparing the discovery rate against a fixed number, it continuously estimates a low percentile of recent rounds (20th percentile, or 14th percentile for L2 distance) and uses that as the baseline. This keeps the method lightweight while letting it adapt to different datasets and different regions of the graph.

In other words, the threshold adapts to the local search pattern. If the algorithm enters a sparse region of the graph, the threshold drops and avoids stopping too early. If it enters a richer region, the threshold rises.

Patience: how many bad rounds before stopping

The threshold alone is not enough, though. A single round with a low discovery rate isn't enough to declare convergence. It could just be a temporary dip before the search finds a better path. Manticore uses a "patience counter" that requires multiple consecutive bad rounds before terminating.

The patience value scales inversely with ef, the HNSW exploration factor that controls how many candidates the search keeps exploring. For example, patience ranges from 9 at low ef values down to 6 at very high ef. Larger ef values mean more total rounds, so even with lower patience the algorithm has seen more evidence before deciding to stop. The counter resets to zero whenever a round has a healthy discovery rate, so a single good round restarts the patience window. This prevents the algorithm from stopping during a temporary plateau that leads to a productive region of the graph.

Warm-up phase

The algorithm ignores the termination signal while the heap is still filling up, meaning fewer than ef candidates have been collected. During this phase, discovery rates are artificially high because almost everything enters the heap, so the signal is not useful. Early termination only starts once the heap is full and new candidates must replace existing ones.

Benchmark results

The quantile thresholds were tuned to keep precision loss within 2–4%. They were tuned separately for L2 and cosine/IP distance metrics, and validated across both quantized and non-quantized data.

The following benchmarks were run on the dbpedia-entities dataset (1M vectors, 768 dimensions) on a machine with 8 physical cores / 16 logical cores.

"Precision" here means the fraction of true k-nearest neighbors that appear in the result set (with fixed k, this is the same as recall@k).
"Precision ratio" is the precision of HNSW with early termination ("ET") divided by precision without it (1.0 means no precision loss).
"Visit ratio" is the fraction of distance computations performed compared to full HNSW search (lower is better).

Oversampling and rescoring were disabled to isolate the effect of early termination on raw HNSW traversal.

The green line on the chart (precision) stays almost flat across all k values, with precision ratio remaining above 0.97 throughout the benchmark. Meanwhile the orange line (visit ratio) drops steeply. At k=100, it cuts distance computations nearly in half. At k=1000, it saves 70%. At k=10000, 80%.

At k <= 10, early termination is disabled because the search is already cheap and the savings are too small to justify any precision loss. The savings grow with k, because larger result sets lead to more rounds of neighbor expansion and more chances to detect convergence early.

Performance under concurrent load

The benchmarks above show that early termination cuts distance computations a lot while preserving precision. But what does that mean for actual query latency, especially under concurrent load? The chart below shows latency ratios (ET / no ET) at 1, 8, and 16 concurrent threads on the same dbpedia dataset:

At k=1000, early termination reduces distance computations by 71% (ratio 0.29). The latency improvement depends on how many threads are running at the same time:

1 thread: 24% faster (ratio 0.76)
8 threads: 45% faster (ratio 0.55)
16 threads: 48% faster (ratio 0.52)

The distance computation savings stay the same regardless of thread count, but the latency benefit nearly doubles from 1 to 16 threads.

The main reason is lower pressure on the CPU memory system. Each distance computation pulls vector data and graph links into cache. When several threads run HNSW traversal at the same time, they compete for shared cache and memory bandwidth. Doing fewer distance computations per query reduces memory traffic, keeps each thread’s working set smaller, and lowers cache churn between queries. As a result, each thread finishes faster and interferes less with the others.

Single-thread benchmarks understate the benefit of early termination. Under production-like concurrent load, the percentage latency reduction is roughly twice as large.

When early termination kicks in (and when it doesn't)

Early termination is enabled by default and works on both quantized and non-quantized vector data. It is automatically disabled when k <= 10.

The benefit grows with the effective exploration budget, which is max(ef, k). Since hnswlib uses this internally as the number of candidates it keeps in play, larger k means more candidates, more rounds, and more chances to detect convergence.

Quantized vectors are typically used with rescoring and oversampling (both enabled by default) to recover precision lost from quantization. Oversampling (default 3x) multiplies the effective k passed to HNSW. For example, a query with k=100 uses 300 candidates internally when oversampling is 3x. That larger search budget gives early termination more room to detect convergence and stop early. Since the performance benefit of early termination grows with k, oversampling pushes queries into the range where the savings are largest.

Syntax

Early termination is on by default. To disable it:

SQL:

-- default: early termination enabled
SELECT id, knn_dist()
FROM products
WHERE knn(embedding, (0.12, 0.45, 0.78, 0.33));

-- explicitly disable early termination
SELECT id, knn_dist()
FROM products
WHERE knn(embedding, (0.12, 0.45, 0.78, 0.33), { early_termination=0 });

-- combine with other KNN options
SELECT id, knn_dist()
FROM products
WHERE knn(embedding, (0.12, 0.45, 0.78, 0.33), { ef=200, early_termination=0 });


JSON:

POST /search
{
    "table": "products",
    "knn": {
        "field": "embedding",
        "query": [0.12, 0.45, 0.78, 0.33],
        "early_termination": false
    }
}


When to disable it

There are a few scenarios where you might want to turn early termination off:

Maximum precision is critical. Early termination trades a small amount of recall for speed. If your application requires the absolute best recall that HNSW can provide at a given ef, disable it.
Small k values (<= 30). The algorithm auto-disables for k <= 10, but even for k between 11 and 30, the performance benefit is modest. If you notice any recall difference in this range, disabling early termination costs little in latency.
Benchmarking HNSW recall. If you are measuring HNSW recall, you probably want deterministic behavior without adaptive shortcuts. Disable early termination to get a clean baseline.

How it relates to other KNN optimizations

Early termination is one of several optimizations that Manticore applies to KNN search. It works independently of and stacks with the others:

Prefiltering reduces wasted work by skipping filtered-out documents during HNSW traversal. Early termination reduces wasted work by stopping the traversal once the result set has converged. They solve different problems and work well together.
Oversampling retrieves more candidates than k to improve recall after rescoring. Early termination can reduce the cost of that expanded search by stopping once enough good candidates have been found.
Rescoring recalculates distances using full-precision vectors after the initial search with quantized vectors. Early termination operates during the initial quantized search phase, reducing the number of candidates evaluated before rescoring kicks in.
Automatic brute-force fallback skips HNSW entirely when a linear scan is cheaper. Early termination only applies when HNSW is actually used.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

28. Splash Is a Colour Format

Source: https://www.todepond.com/lab/splash/
Site: todepond.com
Submitter: tobr (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-03 21:22 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 55 points · 69 comments
Length: 2.1K words (~9 min read)

Splash

Splash is a colour format.

Every splash colour is a 3-digit number. Each digit represents a different colour channel: red, green, and then blue.

For example, 900 has a full red channel (9) and nothing in green (0) or blue (0).

000 is black, 999 is white, 555 is grey, 079 is a light blue, and so on.

Splash colours can help you avoid decision paralysis when picking colours. It's an emotional tool that stops you fussing around— trying to pick the "perfect" colour.

There aren't too many ways to make the most popular colours.

090 green
099 cyan
009 blue
409 purple
909 pink
900 red
940 orange
990 yellow

But it still gives you some wiggle room with choosing your own style. Here's how I made my personal colour theme.

093 green
289 cyan
059 blue
529 purple
947 pink
922 red
942 orange
991 yellow

Or something like that roughly... It doesn't matter if it's not perfect. The restriction has made me more open to errors and it's totally fine. It's liberating.

There are only 1000 splash colours, so you can realistically list them all out. Okay let's do it. (see you at the bottom)

000001002003004005006007008009010011012013014015016017018019020021022023024025026027028029030031032033034035036037038039040041042043044045046047048049050051052053054055056057058059060061062063064065066067068069070071072073074075076077078079080081082083084085086087088089090091092093094095096097098099100101102103104105106107108109110111112113114115116117118119120121122123124125126127128129130131132133134135136137138139140141142143144145146147148149150151152153154155156157158159160161162163164165166167168169170171172173174175176177178179180181182183184185186187188189190191192193194195196197198199200201202203204205206207208209210211212213214215216217218219220221222223224225226227228229230231232233234235236237238239240241242243244245246247248249250251252253254255256257258259260261262263264265266267268269270271272273274275276277278279280281282283284285286287288289290291292293294295296297298299300301302303304305306307308309310311312313314315316317318319320321322323324325326327328329330331332333334335336337338339340341342343344345346347348349350351352353354355356357358359360361362363364365366367368369370371372373374375376377378379380381382383384385386387388389390391392393394395396397398399400401402403404405406407408409410411412413414415416417418419420421422423424425426427428429430431432433434435436437438439440441442443444445446447448449450451452453454455456457458459460461462463464465466467468469470471472473474475476477478479480481482483484485486487488489490491492493494495496497498499500501502503504505506507508509510511512513514515516517518519520521522523524525526527528529530531532533534535536537538539540541542543544545546547548549550551552553554555556557558559560561562563564565566567568569570571572573574575576577578579580581582583584585586587588589590591592593594595596597598599600601602603604605606607608609610611612613614615616617618619620621622623624625626627628629630631632633634635636637638639640641642643644645646647648649650651652653654655656657658659660661662663664665666667668669670671672673674675676677678679680681682683684685686687688689690691692693694695696697698699700701702703704705706707708709710711712713714715716717718719720721722723724725726727728729730731732733734735736737738739740741742743744745746747748749750751752753754755756757758759760761762763764765766767768769770771772773774775776777778779780781782783784785786787788789790791792793794795796797798799800801802803804805806807808809810811812813814815816817818819820821822823824825826827828829830831832833834835836837838839840841842843844845846847848849850851852853854855856857858859860861862863864865866867868869870871872873874875876877878879880881882883884885886887888889890891892893894895896897898899900901902903904905906907908909910911912913914915916917918919920921922923924925926927928929930931932933934935936937938939940941942943944945946947948949950951952953954955956957958959960961962963964965966967968969970971972973974975976977978979980981982983984985986987988989990991992993994995996997998999

The above grid isn't generated by your web browser. It's static. I've generated it beforehand and it's small enough that I can include it all here. It doesn't take up too much space.

This is a strategy I developed / used for Cellpond. It's part of why it runs so fast. It also means the user can deal with discrete / individual colour values in the drag-and-drop user interface. They don't have to deal with large numbers at all. Only one to nine.

Implementing splash is easy. There's no library or framework or anything because it's slippy enough to build from scratch yourself.

For example, you could make a function like this. It converts from splash to hex.

function getHexFromSplash(splash) {
  // Pull out the channels into an array
  const splashChannels = splash.toString().padStart(3, "0").split("")

  // Remap from "0 to 9" to "0 to 255"
  const rgbChannels = splashChannels.map((v) => Math.floor((v / 9) * 255))

  // Convert to hexadecimal
  const hexChannels = rgbChannels.map((v) => v.toString(16).padStart(2, "0"))
  return "#" + hexChannels.join("")
}


It remaps each channel from being between 0 and 9 to being between 0 and 255. Then it converts each one to hexadecimal. Then it smacks it all together.

But wait! Hold up. You can implement it any way you want :)

It can even be another way to customise your theme. In Cellpond, I handpicked hexadecimal values for each channel so that the resultant colours would better fit my app's theme and needs.

For example, I needed the darkest colour to be visible in front of the black background. So in my theme, 000 is a little bit off-black.

And I like my colours to have a bit more blue and green in them, so I skewed everything that direction. Colours like 222 look a tiny bit bluer / greener than you'd expect. It might be hard to see but trust me, it's true babe

Here's a selection of colours from Cellpond.

093 green
289 cyan
059 blue
529 purple
947 pink
922 red
942 orange
991 yellow

You'll notice they're more pastel than the same colours in raw splash.

093 green
289 cyan
059 blue
529 purple
947 pink
922 red
942 orange
991 yellow

To implement this, I handwrite a lookup table for each channel. Then I map the splash number onto it.

const CHANNEL_VALUES = [
  ['17', '37', '46', '62', '80', '9f', 'ae', 'cc', 'f2', 'ff'],
  ['1d', '43', '62', '80', '9f', 'ae', 'cc', 'de', 'f5', 'ff'],
  ['28', '46', '62', '80', '9f', 'ae', 'cc', 'de', 'f7', 'ff']
]

function getHexFromSplash(splash) {
  // Pull out the channels into an array
  const splashChannels = splash.toString().padStart(3, "0").split("")

  // Look up the hexadecimal values for each channel
  const hexChannels = splashChannels.map((v, i) => CHANNEL_VALUES[i][v])
  return "#" + hexChannels.join("")
}


This way, you can abstract away your particular theme preferences and let the user play with the much more human-readable splash numbers.

Of course... Like I said earlier, "one thousand" is not a very big number really. So you can just use a lookup table if you want. No calculations required.

// Easy!
function getHexFromSplash(splash) {
  return SPLASH_TO_HEX[splash]
}

// Long! (but not too long)
const SPLASH_TO_HEX = [
  "#000000", "#00001c", "#000038", "#000055", "#000071", "#00008d", "#0000aa", "#0000c6", "#0000e2", "#0000ff", "#001c00", "#001c1c", "#001c38", "#001c55", "#001c71", "#001c8d", "#001caa", "#001cc6", "#001ce2", "#001cff", "#003800", "#00381c", "#003838", "#003855", "#003871", "#00388d", "#0038aa", "#0038c6", "#0038e2", "#0038ff", "#005500", "#00551c", "#005538", "#005555", "#005571", "#00558d", "#0055aa", "#0055c6", "#0055e2", "#0055ff", "#007100", "#00711c", "#007138", "#007155", "#007171", "#00718d", "#0071aa", "#0071c6", "#0071e2", "#0071ff", "#008d00", "#008d1c", "#008d38", "#008d55", "#008d71", "#008d8d", "#008daa", "#008dc6", "#008de2", "#008dff", "#00aa00", "#00aa1c", "#00aa38", "#00aa55", "#00aa71", "#00aa8d", "#00aaaa", "#00aac6", "#00aae2", "#00aaff", "#00c600", "#00c61c", "#00c638", "#00c655", "#00c671", "#00c68d", "#00c6aa", "#00c6c6", "#00c6e2", "#00c6ff", "#00e200", "#00e21c", "#00e238", "#00e255", "#00e271", "#00e28d", "#00e2aa", "#00e2c6", "#00e2e2", "#00e2ff", "#00ff00", "#00ff1c", "#00ff38", "#00ff55", "#00ff71", "#00ff8d", "#00ffaa", "#00ffc6", "#00ffe2", "#00ffff", "#1c0000", "#1c001c", "#1c0038", "#1c0055", "#1c0071", "#1c008d", "#1c00aa", "#1c00c6", "#1c00e2", "#1c00ff", "#1c1c00", "#1c1c1c", "#1c1c38", "#1c1c55", "#1c1c71", "#1c1c8d", "#1c1caa", "#1c1cc6", "#1c1ce2", "#1c1cff", "#1c3800", "#1c381c", "#1c3838", "#1c3855", "#1c3871", "#1c388d", "#1c38aa", "#1c38c6", "#1c38e2", "#1c38ff", "#1c5500", "#1c551c", "#1c5538", "#1c5555", "#1c5571", "#1c558d", "#1c55aa", "#1c55c6", "#1c55e2", "#1c55ff", "#1c7100", "#1c711c", "#1c7138", "#1c7155", "#1c7171", "#1c718d", "#1c71aa", "#1c71c6", "#1c71e2", "#1c71ff", "#1c8d00", "#1c8d1c", "#1c8d38", "#1c8d55", "#1c8d71", "#1c8d8d", "#1c8daa", "#1c8dc6", "#1c8de2", "#1c8dff", "#1caa00", "#1caa1c", "#1caa38", "#1caa55", "#1caa71", "#1caa8d", "#1caaaa", "#1caac6", "#1caae2", "#1caaff", "#1cc600", "#1cc61c", "#1cc638", "#1cc655", "#1cc671", "#1cc68d", "#1cc6aa", "#1cc6c6", "#1cc6e2", "#1cc6ff", "#1ce200", "#1ce21c", "#1ce238", "#1ce255", "#1ce271", "#1ce28d", "#1ce2aa", "#1ce2c6", "#1ce2e2", "#1ce2ff", "#1cff00", "#1cff1c", "#1cff38", "#1cff55", "#1cff71", "#1cff8d", "#1cffaa", "#1cffc6", "#1cffe2", "#1cffff", "#380000", "#38001c", "#380038", "#380055", "#380071", "#38008d", "#3800aa", "#3800c6", "#3800e2", "#3800ff", "#381c00", "#381c1c", "#381c38", "#381c55", "#381c71", "#381c8d", "#381caa", "#381cc6", "#381ce2", "#381cff", "#383800", "#38381c", "#383838", "#383855", "#383871", "#38388d", "#3838aa", "#3838c6", "#3838e2", "#3838ff", "#385500", "#38551c", "#385538", "#385555", "#385571", "#38558d", "#3855aa", "#3855c6", "#3855e2", "#3855ff", "#387100", "#38711c", "#387138", "#387155", "#387171", "#38718d", "#3871aa", "#3871c6", "#3871e2", "#3871ff", "#388d00", "#388d1c", "#388d38", "#388d55", "#388d71", "#388d8d", "#388daa", "#388dc6", "#388de2", "#388dff", "#38aa00", "#38aa1c", "#38aa38", "#38aa55", "#38aa71", "#38aa8d", "#38aaaa", "#38aac6", "#38aae2", "#38aaff", "#38c600", "#38c61c", "#38c638", "#38c655", "#38c671", "#38c68d", "#38c6aa", "#38c6c6", "#38c6e2", "#38c6ff", "#38e200", "#38e21c", "#38e238", "#38e255", "#38e271", "#38e28d", "#38e2aa", "#38e2c6", "#38e2e2", "#38e2ff", "#38ff00", "#38ff1c", "#38ff38", "#38ff55", "#38ff71", "#38ff8d", "#38ffaa", "#38ffc6", "#38ffe2", "#38ffff", "#550000", "#55001c", "#550038", "#550055", "#550071", "#55008d", "#5500aa", "#5500c6", "#5500e2", "#5500ff", "#551c00", "#551c1c", "#551c38", "#551c55", "#551c71", "#551c8d", "#551caa", "#551cc6", "#551ce2", "#551cff", "#553800", "#55381c", "#553838", "#553855", "#553871", "#55388d", "#5538aa", "#5538c6", "#5538e2", "#5538ff", "#555500", "#55551c", "#555538", "#555555", "#555571", "#55558d", "#5555aa", "#5555c6", "#5555e2", "#5555ff", "#557100", "#55711c", "#557138", "#557155", "#557171", "#55718d", "#5571aa", "#5571c6", "#5571e2", "#5571ff", "#558d00", "#558d1c", "#558d38", "#558d55", "#558d71", "#558d8d", "#558daa", "#558dc6", "#558de2", "#558dff", "#55aa00", "#55aa1c", "#55aa38", "#55aa55", "#55aa71", "#55aa8d", "#55aaaa", "#55aac6", "#55aae2", "#55aaff", "#55c600", "#55c61c", "#55c638", "#55c655", "#55c671", "#55c68d", "#55c6aa", "#55c6c6", "#55c6e2", "#55c6ff", "#55e200", "#55e21c", "#55e238", "#55e255", "#55e271", "#55e28d", "#55e2aa", "#55e2c6", "#55e2e2", "#55e2ff", "#55ff00", "#55ff1c", "#55ff38", "#55ff55", "#55ff71", "#55ff8d", "#55ffaa", "#55ffc6", "#55ffe2", "#55ffff", "#710000", "#71001c", "#710038", "#710055", "#710071", "#71008d", "#7100aa", "#7100c6", "#7100e2", "#7100ff", "#711c00", "#711c1c", "#711c38", "#711c55", "#711c71", "#711c8d", "#711caa", "#711cc6", "#711ce2", "#711cff", "#713800", "#71381c", "#713838", "#713855", "#713871", "#71388d", "#7138aa", "#7138c6", "#7138e2", "#7138ff", "#715500", "#71551c", "#715538", "#715555", "#715571", "#71558d", "#7155aa", "#7155c6", "#7155e2", "#7155ff", "#717100", "#71711c", "#717138", "#717155", "#717171", "#71718d", "#7171aa", "#7171c6", "#7171e2", "#7171ff", "#718d00", "#718d1c", "#718d38", "#718d55", "#718d71", "#718d8d", "#718daa", "#718dc6", "#718de2", "#718dff", "#71aa00", "#71aa1c", "#71aa38", "#71aa55", "#71aa71", "#71aa8d", "#71aaaa", "#71aac6", "#71aae2", "#71aaff", "#71c600", "#71c61c", "#71c638", "#71c655", "#71c671", "#71c68d", "#71c6aa", "#71c6c6", "#71c6e2", "#71c6ff", "#71e200", "#71e21c", "#71e238", "#71e255", "#71e271", "#71e28d", "#71e2aa", "#71e2c6", "#71e2e2", "#71e2ff", "#71ff00", "#71ff1c", "#71ff38", "#71ff55", "#71ff71", "#71ff8d", "#71ffaa", "#71ffc6", "#71ffe2", "#71ffff", "#8d0000", "#8d001c", "#8d0038", "#8d0055", "#8d0071", "#8d008d", "#8d00aa", "#8d00c6", "#8d00e2", "#8d00ff", "#8d1c00", "#8d1c1c", "#8d1c38", "#8d1c55", "#8d1c71", "#8d1c8d", "#8d1caa", "#8d1cc6", "#8d1ce2", "#8d1cff", "#8d3800", "#8d381c", "#8d3838", "#8d3855", "#8d3871", "#8d388d", "#8d38aa", "#8d38c6", "#8d38e2", "#8d38ff", "#8d5500", "#8d551c", "#8d5538", "#8d5555", "#8d5571", "#8d558d", "#8d55aa", "#8d55c6", "#8d55e2", "#8d55ff", "#8d7100", "#8d711c", "#8d7138", "#8d7155", "#8d7171", "#8d718d", "#8d71aa", "#8d71c6", "#8d71e2", "#8d71ff", "#8d8d00", "#8d8d1c", "#8d8d38", "#8d8d55", "#8d8d71", "#8d8d8d", "#8d8daa", "#8d8dc6", "#8d8de2", "#8d8dff", "#8daa00", "#8daa1c", "#8daa38", "#8daa55", "#8daa71", "#8daa8d", "#8daaaa", "#8daac6", "#8daae2", "#8daaff", "#8dc600", "#8dc61c", "#8dc638", "#8dc655", "#8dc671", "#8dc68d", "#8dc6aa", "#8dc6c6", "#8dc6e2", "#8dc6ff", "#8de200", "#8de21c", "#8de238", "#8de255", "#8de271", "#8de28d", "#8de2aa", "#8de2c6", "#8de2e2", "#8de2ff", "#8dff00", "#8dff1c", "#8dff38", "#8dff55", "#8dff71", "#8dff8d", "#8dffaa", "#8dffc6", "#8dffe2", "#8dffff", "#aa0000", "#aa001c", "#aa0038", "#aa0055", "#aa0071", "#aa008d", "#aa00aa", "#aa00c6", "#aa00e2", "#aa00ff", "#aa1c00", "#aa1c1c", "#aa1c38", "#aa1c55", "#aa1c71", "#aa1c8d", "#aa1caa", "#aa1cc6", "#aa1ce2", "#aa1cff", "#aa3800", "#aa381c", "#aa3838", "#aa3855", "#aa3871", "#aa388d", "#aa38aa", "#aa38c6", "#aa38e2", "#aa38ff", "#aa5500", "#aa551c", "#aa5538", "#aa5555", "#aa5571", "#aa558d", "#aa55aa", "#aa55c6", "#aa55e2", "#aa55ff", "#aa7100", "#aa711c", "#aa7138", "#aa7155", "#aa7171", "#aa718d", "#aa71aa", "#aa71c6", "#aa71e2", "#aa71ff", "#aa8d00", "#aa8d1c", "#aa8d38", "#aa8d55", "#aa8d71", "#aa8d8d", "#aa8daa", "#aa8dc6", "#aa8de2", "#aa8dff", "#aaaa00", "#aaaa1c", "#aaaa38", "#aaaa55", "#aaaa71", "#aaaa8d", "#aaaaaa", "#aaaac6", "#aaaae2", "#aaaaff", "#aac600", "#aac61c", "#aac638", "#aac655", "#aac671", "#aac68d", "#aac6aa", "#aac6c6", "#aac6e2", "#aac6ff", "#aae200", "#aae21c", "#aae238", "#aae255", "#aae271", "#aae28d", "#aae2aa", "#aae2c6", "#aae2e2", "#aae2ff", "#aaff00", "#aaff1c", "#aaff38", "#aaff55", "#aaff71", "#aaff8d", "#aaffaa", "#aaffc6", "#aaffe2", "#aaffff", "#c60000", "#c6001c", "#c60038", "#c60055", "#c60071", "#c6008d", "#c600aa", "#c600c6", "#c600e2", "#c600ff", "#c61c00", "#c61c1c", "#c61c38", "#c61c55", "#c61c71", "#c61c8d", "#c61caa", "#c61cc6", "#c61ce2", "#c61cff", "#c63800", "#c6381c", "#c63838", "#c63855", "#c63871", "#c6388d", "#c638aa", "#c638c6", "#c638e2", "#c638ff", "#c65500", "#c6551c", "#c65538", "#c65555", "#c65571", "#c6558d", "#c655aa", "#c655c6", "#c655e2", "#c655ff", "#c67100", "#c6711c", "#c67138", "#c67155", "#c67171", "#c6718d", "#c671aa", "#c671c6", "#c671e2", "#c671ff", "#c68d00", "#c68d1c", "#c68d38", "#c68d55", "#c68d71", "#c68d8d", "#c68daa", "#c68dc6", "#c68de2", "#c68dff", "#c6aa00", "#c6aa1c", "#c6aa38", "#c6aa55", "#c6aa71", "#c6aa8d", "#c6aaaa", "#c6aac6", "#c6aae2", "#c6aaff", "#c6c600", "#c6c61c", "#c6c638", "#c6c655", "#c6c671", "#c6c68d", "#c6c6aa", "#c6c6c6", "#c6c6e2", "#c6c6ff", "#c6e200", "#c6e21c", "#c6e238", "#c6e255", "#c6e271", "#c6e28d", "#c6e2aa", "#c6e2c6", "#c6e2e2", "#c6e2ff", "#c6ff00", "#c6ff1c", "#c6ff38", "#c6ff55", "#c6ff71", "#c6ff8d", "#c6ffaa", "#c6ffc6", "#c6ffe2", "#c6ffff", "#e20000", "#e2001c", "#e20038", "#e20055", "#e20071", "#e2008d", "#e200aa", "#e200c6", "#e200e2", "#e200ff", "#e21c00", "#e21c1c", "#e21c38", "#e21c55", "#e21c71", "#e21c8d", "#e21caa", "#e21cc6", "#e21ce2", "#e21cff", "#e23800", "#e2381c", "#e23838", "#e23855", "#e23871", "#e2388d", "#e238aa", "#e238c6", "#e238e2", "#e238ff", "#e25500", "#e2551c", "#e25538", "#e25555", "#e25571", "#e2558d", "#e255aa", "#e255c6", "#e255e2", "#e255ff", "#e27100", "#e2711c", "#e27138", "#e27155", "#e27171", "#e2718d", "#e271aa", "#e271c6", "#e271e2", "#e271ff", "#e28d00", "#e28d1c", "#e28d38", "#e28d55", "#e28d71", "#e28d8d", "#e28daa", "#e28dc6", "#e28de2", "#e28dff", "#e2aa00", "#e2aa1c", "#e2aa38", "#e2aa55", "#e2aa71", "#e2aa8d", "#e2aaaa", "#e2aac6", "#e2aae2", "#e2aaff", "#e2c600", "#e2c61c", "#e2c638", "#e2c655", "#e2c671", "#e2c68d", "#e2c6aa", "#e2c6c6", "#e2c6e2", "#e2c6ff", "#e2e200", "#e2e21c", "#e2e238", "#e2e255", "#e2e271", "#e2e28d", "#e2e2aa", "#e2e2c6", "#e2e2e2", "#e2e2ff", "#e2ff00", "#e2ff1c", "#e2ff38", "#e2ff55", "#e2ff71", "#e2ff8d", "#e2ffaa", "#e2ffc6", "#e2ffe2", "#e2ffff", "#ff0000", "#ff001c", "#ff0038", "#ff0055", "#ff0071", "#ff008d", "#ff00aa", "#ff00c6", "#ff00e2", "#ff00ff", "#ff1c00", "#ff1c1c", "#ff1c38", "#ff1c55", "#ff1c71", "#ff1c8d", "#ff1caa", "#ff1cc6", "#ff1ce2", "#ff1cff", "#ff3800", "#ff381c", "#ff3838", "#ff3855", "#ff3871", "#ff388d", "#ff38aa", "#ff38c6", "#ff38e2", "#ff38ff", "#ff5500", "#ff551c", "#ff5538", "#ff5555", "#ff5571", "#ff558d", "#ff55aa", "#ff55c6", "#ff55e2", "#ff55ff", "#ff7100", "#ff711c", "#ff7138", "#ff7155", "#ff7171", "#ff718d", "#ff71aa", "#ff71c6", "#ff71e2", "#ff71ff", "#ff8d00", "#ff8d1c", "#ff8d38", "#ff8d55", "#ff8d71", "#ff8d8d", "#ff8daa", "#ff8dc6", "#ff8de2", "#ff8dff", "#ffaa00", "#ffaa1c", "#ffaa38", "#ffaa55", "#ffaa71", "#ffaa8d", "#ffaaaa", "#ffaac6", "#ffaae2", "#ffaaff", "#ffc600", "#ffc61c", "#ffc638", "#ffc655", "#ffc671", "#ffc68d", "#ffc6aa", "#ffc6c6", "#ffc6e2", "#ffc6ff", "#ffe200", "#ffe21c", "#ffe238", "#ffe255", "#ffe271", "#ffe28d", "#ffe2aa", "#ffe2c6", "#ffe2e2", "#ffe2ff", "#ffff00", "#ffff1c", "#ffff38", "#ffff55", "#ffff71", "#ffff8d", "#ffffaa", "#ffffc6", "#ffffe2", "#ffffff" 
]


This might seem silly but this is what I do in Cellpond and I promise u it works really well. If you're interested, here's the big lookup file I use. But yeah if you want to explore the SOURCE of the CELLPOND more then please be brave

Doing something with colours? Consider splash. It's human-readable. It's computer-readable. It's performant. It stops you being perfect. Now play! 999 Cellpond theme?

999

#ffffff

rgb(255, 255, 255)

Thanks very much for reading / trying my thing! Please let me know what you think. I'm @todepond everywhere.

And if you like splash colours, consider sharing this page with your friends! 🥺

This page was heavily inspired by Felix Roos's garten which is a great website. pls check it out!!

But yeah. Whether u wanna be slippy or scrappy, i think that being splashy can help ok bye.

Update!

Matan made an SCSS function that implements splash.

@function splash($r, $g, $b) {
  // 255/9 ≈ 28.34
  @return rgb($r * 28.34, $g * 28.34, $b * 28.34);
}


It lets you specify any splash colour.

.foo {
  background-color: splash(0, 0, 9)
}


They also made a static CSS file that you can use. Get it from their repo, or use it now by linking it in your head.

<link rel="stylesheet" href="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/gh/matan-h/splash-css@master/dist/styles.css">


It comes pre-baked with all the splash colours.

<span style="background-color: var(--sp090)">090</span>


It's powering this one: 090

Another update!

Roman Komarov implemented splash using CSS mixins.

Read their blog post about it.
Try it out in their sandbox.

It lets you specify colours using mixins.

<span style="--splash-bg: 971">971</span>


It's powering this one: 971

And I was pleased to read how easy it was.

A format being just a three-digit number makes it straightforward to work with. If it had any letters in it, it would be much harder to work with in CSS!

More updates?

If you make something splash-related, let me know and I'll be delighted to add it here :)

back to the wikiblogardenite

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

29. An Ohio Valley 100k-watt FM signal is severed in broad daylight

Source: https://www.radioworld.com/news-and-business/headlines/an-ohio-valley-100000-watt-fm-signal-is-severed-in-broad-daylight
Site: Radio World
Author: Nick Langan
Published: 2026-06-01
HN activity: 165 points · 166 comments
Length: 882 words (~4 min read)
Language: en-US

The community has rallied around "The Dawg," Mike Kirtner explains
The severed transmission line leading up WDGG(FM)’s antenna tower in Boyd County, Ky. Credit: Mike Kirtner

Evan Adkins, director of engineering, called Mike Kirtner, the president of Kindred Communications, last Thursday just prior to lunchtime.

“Are you sitting down?” Adkins asked Kirtner after he answered the phone.

Kirtner, 75, has seen a lot in his time as a broadcast owner in the tri-state area of Kentucky, West Virginia and Ohio along the Ohio River.

One of his AM station’s copper radials once fell victim to a copper thief cutting its wires.

But an FM transmission line being snapped and cleared in broad daylight? He couldn’t quite believe what he was hearing.

The alleged perpetrator — Paul Crisp of Catlettsburg, according to WSAZ(TV)’s reporting — had severed the main transmission line leading up to the broadcast tower of 93.7 WDGG(FM), a 100,000-watt country-formatted FM station licensed to Ashland, Ky., which goes by the moniker “The Dawg.”

Kirtner isn’t sure how the suspect is still alive.

“He was lucky in that he didn’t die, he was unlucky that he got caught,” Kirtner said.

The cable crosses a bridge from the transmitter building and then runs up the tower located on Musser Lane in Catlettsburg, and Kirtner said the thief cut all of it.

Crisp, according to Kirtner, allegedly dragged the heavy line down to his house, only a few hundred yards over a hill from the tower site, and had already cut it into smaller sections, presumably in an attempt to scrap the copper out of the wire.

Kirtner suspected the perpetrator must have scoped out the theft in advance — including by disabling the site’s video surveillance system prior to cutting the lines. WSAZ reported there was also a copper theft at the same site on May 23.

“It was definitely well-thought out,” he said.

The Boyd County, Ky., Sheriff’s Office later obtained a search warrant, discovered the cut-up transmission line in his yard and obtained a warrant for Crisp’s arrest.

WSAZ said Crisp was apprehended after a short pursuit by deputies and charged with second-degree fleeing or evading police, among other offenses.

WDGG was left with its Class C1 FM signal off the air.

Kirtner said the station is currently operating at heavily reduced power — around 10 watts — utilizing both a backup transmitter and an auxiliary antenna.

Recovery effort

WDGG’s damaged transmission line itself, Kirtner noted, is of an unusual size. Because the lines contain pressurized gasses, simply splicing the cut pieces back together introduces a risk of gas leaks.

As a result, Kirtner is seeking to source an alternative route. Total repair costs, he estimates, are somewhere between $70,000 and $100,000, as the line can run as much as $160 per foot.

Adkins is spearheading the recovery efforts, putting together cost estimates and coordinating with the station’s insurance company.

He comes from a lineage of engineering — Adkins’ late father, Virgil, was a longtime chief engineer for Daystar Television Networks.

“He’s been a godsend working through all of this,” Kirtner said of his director of engineering.

The station’s tower climbing crew is on notice, and Kirtner hopes to have a direct transmission path installed and operational by Friday, June 5 — though he emphasized that it will take more time to resume at full broadcast power.

Kirtner and Adkins are also still unclear if the main antenna itself suffered electrical or physical damage from the incident.

Local difference
Mike Kirtner. Credit: Marshall University Athletics

WDGG is one of seven stations operated by Kirtner’s group. He’s been moved by the response in and around Huntington, Ashland and beyond.

“Because we’re locally owned, listeners see this as a community business that’s been attacked,” Kirtner said.

At church services on Sunday, for example, he had several congregation members come up to him to offer their support. Even if they aren’t around-the-clock listeners, he explained, they see the stations active around the tri-state area.

Kirtner’s stations offer a weekly street promotion, “9th Street Live,” which transforms a block of downtown Huntington, W.Va., into a Friday night of live music and food from local vendors.

WDGG is also running the 22nd annual “Dawg Dazzle” from Huntington’s Harris Riverfront Park this July 3, which features plenty of patriotic fireworks and a headlining performance by country music star and Cross Lanes, W.Va., native Kathy Mattea.

It draws approximately 15,000 people each year, Kirtner said, with West Virginia-based artists in conjunction with both local county and city governments.

“It just benefits everybody, and I think that was one of the reasons people were so sympathetic to us on what has happened,” Kirtner said. “They’re very familiar with our promotional events.”

Lessons learned

Kirtner is not sure if the incident could have been prevented, but he warns even FM station owners: A copper theft, rendering your station completely off the air, can happen anyplace, anytime.

“Criminal intent is hard to avoid,” he said.

Looking back, Kirtner may have sought to have around 200 feet of transmission line available — easier said than done because of the unusual size, he added.

“But it doesn’t hurt to have on hand,” Kirtner said.

[Do you receive the Radio World SmartBrief newsletter each weekday morning? We invite you to sign up here.]

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

30. Office-open-xml-viewer: Office XML document viewer that renders to HTML Canvas

Source: https://github.com/yukiyokotani/office-open-xml-viewer
Site: GitHub
Submitter: maxloh (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-07 17:22 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 124 points · 48 comments
Length: 3.2K words (~15 min read)
Language: en

This entire codebase — Rust parsers, TypeScript renderers, tests, and tooling — was implemented by Claude (Anthropic's AI assistant) through iterative prompting. No human-written application code exists in this repository.

Demo (Storybook)

A browser-based viewer for Office Open XML documents that renders to an HTML Canvas element. The parsers are written in Rust and compiled to WebAssembly; the renderers use the Canvas 2D API. Each format also exposes a headless engine (DocxDocument / XlsxWorkbook / PptxPresentation) that renders into any caller-supplied canvas, so you can compose your own UI — scroll views, thumbnail grids, master-detail panes — instead of being locked into the built-in viewer. See the Examples section in the Storybook demo.

DOCX XLSX PPTX

npm install @silurus/ooxml
# or
pnpm add @silurus/ooxml

Bundler note: this package embeds .wasm files. With Vite add vite-plugin-wasm; with webpack use experiments.asyncWebAssembly.

Bundle size note: the package is ESM-only (.mjs). npm's Unpacked Size sums all four entry bundles, including the opt-in math engine (MathJax + STIX Two Math, ~3 MB). What actually lands in your app is much smaller — import only the format you need (e.g. @silurus/ooxml/pptx). The math engine is a separate entry (@silurus/ooxml/math): it is bundled only if you import it and pass it to a viewer (see Rendering equations). Viewers that never receive a math engine — and all xlsx usage — tree-shake the ~3 MB away entirely.

Quick Start

import { DocxViewer } from '@silurus/ooxml/docx';
import { XlsxViewer } from '@silurus/ooxml/xlsx';
import { PptxViewer } from '@silurus/ooxml/pptx';

// DOCX — caller provides the <canvas>
const canvas = document.getElementById('docx-canvas') as HTMLCanvasElement;
const docx = new DocxViewer(canvas);
await docx.load('/document.docx');
docx.nextPage();

// XLSX — viewer manages its own <canvas> + tab bar
const container = document.getElementById('xlsx-container') as HTMLElement;
const xlsx = new XlsxViewer(container);
await xlsx.load('/workbook.xlsx');

// PPTX — caller provides the <canvas>
const canvas = document.getElementById('pptx-canvas') as HTMLCanvasElement;
const pptx = new PptxViewer(canvas);
await pptx.load('/deck.pptx');
pptx.nextSlide();

Rendering equations

OMML equations (m:oMath / m:oMathPara) in .docx / .pptx are rendered with MathJax + STIX Two Math. That engine is ~3 MB, so it is opt-in: import the math engine from the separate @silurus/ooxml/math entry and pass it to the viewer. Pass it and equations render; omit it and the engine is referenced nowhere, so a bundler tree-shakes the ~3 MB away entirely (equations are simply skipped). It is fully self-contained: no network, no cross-origin requests.

import { DocxViewer } from '@silurus/ooxml/docx';
import { math } from '@silurus/ooxml/math';

const canvas = document.getElementById('docx-canvas') as HTMLCanvasElement;
const docx = new DocxViewer(canvas, { math }); // ← equations now render
await docx.load('/paper-with-equations.docx');

The same math engine works for PptxViewer and the headless DocxDocument / PptxPresentation APIs (which take math in their options). xlsx has no equation support and never references the engine.

Architecture diagram

flowchart TB
    subgraph build["🦀  Build-time  (Rust → WebAssembly)"]
        direction LR
        docx_rs["packages/docx/parser/src/lib.rs"]
        xlsx_rs["packages/xlsx/parser/src/lib.rs"]
        pptx_rs["packages/pptx/parser/src/lib.rs"]
        docx_rs -- wasm-pack --> docx_wasm["docx_parser.wasm"]
        xlsx_rs -- wasm-pack --> xlsx_wasm["xlsx_parser.wasm"]
        pptx_rs -- wasm-pack --> pptx_wasm["pptx_parser.wasm"]
    end

    subgraph browser["🌐  Runtime  (Browser)"]
        subgraph core_pkg["@silurus/ooxml-core  (shared primitives)"]
            CORE["renderChart · resolveFill · applyStroke\nbuildCustomPath · autoResize · shared types"]
        end
        subgraph docx_pkg["@silurus/ooxml · docx"]
            DV["DocxViewer"] --> DD["DocxDocument"]
            DD --> DW["worker.ts\n〈Web Worker — parse only〉"]
            DD --> DR["renderer.ts\n〈Canvas 2D — main thread〉"]
        end
        subgraph xlsx_pkg["@silurus/ooxml · xlsx"]
            XV["XlsxViewer"] --> XB["XlsxWorkbook"]
            XB --> XW["worker.ts\n〈Web Worker — parse only〉"]
            XB --> XR["renderer.ts\n〈Canvas 2D — main thread〉"]
        end
        subgraph pptx_pkg["@silurus/ooxml · pptx"]
            PV["PptxViewer"] --> PP["PptxPresentation"]
            PP --> PW["worker.ts\n〈Web Worker — parse only〉"]
            PP --> PR["renderer.ts\n〈Canvas 2D — main thread〉"]
        end
        DR -. uses .-> CORE
        XR -. uses .-> CORE
        PR -. uses .-> CORE
    end

    docx_wasm --> DW
    xlsx_wasm --> XW
    pptx_wasm --> PW
    DR --> canvas["&lt;canvas&gt;"]
    XR --> canvas
    PR --> canvas
 Loading

All three formats follow the same shape: the worker parses the .docx / .xlsx / .pptx archive via WASM and posts a JSON model back to the main thread, where the renderer draws to the canvas. Rendering stays on the main thread so the canvas shares the document's FontFaceSet — an OffscreenCanvas in a worker has its own font registry and would silently fall back to a system font, producing subtly different text measurements (and wrap positions) from the installed theme webfonts. @silurus/ooxml-core holds the cross-format primitives that the three renderers all depend on: a unified chart renderer (bar / line / area / radar / waterfall), shape helpers (resolveFill, applyStroke, buildCustomPath, hexToRgba), the autoResize viewer utility, and the shared type definitions.

Key files

File Role
packages/docx/parser/src/lib.rs Rust WASM parser — DOCX ZIP → Document JSON
packages/xlsx/parser/src/lib.rs Rust WASM parser — XLSX ZIP → Workbook JSON
packages/pptx/parser/src/lib.rs Rust WASM parser — PPTX ZIP → Presentation JSON
packages/docx/src/renderer.ts Canvas 2D rendering engine with text layout (main thread)
packages/xlsx/src/renderer.ts Canvas 2D rendering engine with virtual scroll (main thread)
packages/pptx/src/renderer.ts Canvas 2D rendering engine (main thread)
packages/*/src/worker.ts Web Worker: WASM init and parsing only (one per format)
packages/*/src/viewer.ts Public Viewer API — canvas lifecycle, navigation
packages/core/src/index.ts Cross-format primitives — chart renderer, shape helpers, autoResize, shared types

Framework Examples
React 19

// React 19.1 — vite-plugin-wasm required in vite.config.ts
import { useEffect, useRef, useState } from 'react';
import { PptxViewer } from '@silurus/ooxml/pptx';

export function PptxViewerComponent({ src }: { src: string }) {
  const canvasRef  = useRef<HTMLCanvasElement>(null);
  const viewerRef  = useRef<PptxViewer | null>(null);
  const [slide, setSlide] = useState({ current: 0, total: 0 });

  useEffect(() => {
    const canvas = canvasRef.current;
    if (!canvas) return;

    const viewer = new PptxViewer(canvas, {
      onSlideChange: (i, total) => setSlide({ current: i, total }),
    });
    viewerRef.current = viewer;
    viewer.load(src);
  }, [src]);

  return (
    <div>
      <canvas ref={canvasRef} style={{ width: 800 }} />
      <button onClick={() => viewerRef.current?.prevSlide()}>‹ Prev</button>
      <span> {slide.current + 1} / {slide.total} </span>
      <button onClick={() => viewerRef.current?.nextSlide()}>Next ›</button>
    </div>
  );
}
Vue 3.5

<!-- Vue 3.5 — useTemplateRef is a 3.5+ feature -->
<script setup lang="ts">
import { useTemplateRef, onMounted, ref } from 'vue';
import { PptxViewer } from '@silurus/ooxml/pptx';

const props = defineProps<{ src: string }>();

const canvas  = useTemplateRef<HTMLCanvasElement>('canvas');
let viewer: PptxViewer | null = null;
const current = ref(0);
const total   = ref(0);

onMounted(async () => {
  viewer = new PptxViewer(canvas.value!, {
    onSlideChange: (i, t) => { current.value = i; total.value = t; },
  });
  await viewer.load(props.src);
});
</script>

<template>
  <div>
    <canvas ref="canvas" style="width: 800px" />
    <button @click="viewer?.prevSlide()">‹ Prev</button>
    <span> {{ current + 1 }} / {{ total }} </span>
    <button @click="viewer?.nextSlide()">Next ›</button>
  </div>
</template>
Angular 19

// Angular 19 — standalone component with signal-based state
import {
  Component, ElementRef, viewChild,
  signal, AfterViewInit,
} from '@angular/core';
import { PptxViewer } from '@silurus/ooxml/pptx';

@Component({
  selector: 'app-pptx-viewer',
  standalone: true,
  template: `
    <div>
      <canvas #canvas style="width: 800px"></canvas>
      <button (click)="prev()">‹ Prev</button>
      <span> {{ current() + 1 }} / {{ total() }} </span>
      <button (click)="next()">Next ›</button>
    </div>
  `,
})
export class PptxViewerComponent implements AfterViewInit {
  canvasEl = viewChild.required<ElementRef<HTMLCanvasElement>>('canvas');
  current = signal(0);
  total   = signal(0);
  private viewer?: PptxViewer;

  ngAfterViewInit(): void {
    this.viewer = new PptxViewer(this.canvasEl().nativeElement, {
      onSlideChange: (i, t) => { this.current.set(i); this.total.set(t); },
    });
    this.viewer.load('/deck.pptx');
  }

  prev(): void { this.viewer?.prevSlide(); }
  next(): void { this.viewer?.nextSlide(); }
}

Add "allowSyntheticDefaultImports": true and configure @angular-builders/custom-webpack (or use esbuild builder) with WASM support in your Angular workspace.
Svelte 5

<!-- Svelte 5 — runes syntax ($props, $state) -->
<script lang="ts">
  import { onMount } from 'svelte';
  import { PptxViewer } from '@silurus/ooxml/pptx';

  let { src }: { src: string } = $props();

  let canvas: HTMLCanvasElement;
  let viewer: PptxViewer;
  let current = $state(0);
  let total   = $state(0);

  onMount(async () => {
    viewer = new PptxViewer(canvas, {
      onSlideChange: (i, t) => { current = i; total = t; },
    });
    await viewer.load(src);
  });
</script>

<div>
  <canvas bind:this={canvas} style="width: 800px"></canvas>
  <button onclick={() => viewer?.prevSlide()}>‹ Prev</button>
  <span> {current + 1} / {total} </span>
  <button onclick={() => viewer?.nextSlide()}>Next ›</button>
</div>
SolidJS 1.9

// SolidJS 1.9
import { createSignal, onMount, onCleanup } from 'solid-js';
import { PptxViewer } from '@silurus/ooxml/pptx';

export function PptxViewerComponent(props: { src: string }) {
  let canvasEl!: HTMLCanvasElement;
  let viewer: PptxViewer | undefined;
  const [current, setCurrent] = createSignal(0);
  const [total,   setTotal  ] = createSignal(0);

  onMount(async () => {
    viewer = new PptxViewer(canvasEl, {
      onSlideChange: (i, t) => { setCurrent(i); setTotal(t); },
    });
    await viewer.load(props.src);
  });

  onCleanup(() => { /* viewer?.destroy?.() */ });

  return (
    <div>
      <canvas ref={canvasEl} style={{ width: '800px' }} />
      <button onClick={() => viewer?.prevSlide()}>‹ Prev</button>
      <span> {current() + 1} / {total()} </span>
      <button onClick={() => viewer?.nextSlide()}>Next ›</button>
    </div>
  );
}
Qwik 2

// Qwik 2.0 — dynamic import to keep WASM out of SSR bundle
import { component$, useSignal, useVisibleTask$ } from '@builder.io/qwik';
import type { PptxViewer as PptxViewerType } from '@silurus/ooxml/pptx';

export const PptxViewerComponent = component$<{ src: string }>(({ src }) => {
  const canvasRef = useSignal<HTMLCanvasElement>();
  const current = useSignal(0);
  const total   = useSignal(0);
  let viewer: PptxViewerType | undefined;

  // useVisibleTask$ runs only in the browser, never during SSR
  useVisibleTask$(async () => {
    if (!canvasRef.value) return;
    const { PptxViewer } = await import('@silurus/ooxml/pptx');
    viewer = new PptxViewer(canvasRef.value, {
      onSlideChange: (i, t) => { current.value = i; total.value = t; },
    });
    await viewer.load(src);
  });

  return (
    <div>
      <canvas ref={canvasRef} style={{ width: '800px' }} />
      <button onClick$={() => viewer?.prevSlide()}>‹ Prev</button>
      <span> {current.value + 1} / {total.value} </span>
      <button onClick$={() => viewer?.nextSlide()}>Next ›</button>
    </div>
  );
});

Feature Support

Word (.docx)

Category Feature Status
Document Page rendering ✅
Page size and margins ✅
Headers / footers (default / first / even) ✅
Section breaks (continuous / nextPage / oddPage / evenPage) ✅
Text Paragraphs ✅
Bold, italic, underline, strikethrough ✅
Font family, size, color ✅
Hyperlinks ✅
Superscript / subscript (w:vertAlign) ✅
Ruby annotations / furigana (w:ruby) ✅
Formatting Paragraph alignment (left/center/right/justify) ✅
Line spacing (auto / atLeast / exact) ✅
Line grid (w:docGrid, §17.6.5) ✅
Margin collapsing between paragraphs ✅
Indents and tab stops ✅
Lists (bullet and numbered) ✅
Paragraph styles (Heading 1–9, Normal, custom) ✅
Table style w:pPr cascade (§17.7.6) ✅
Table style borders / shading / banding (tblStylePr, cnfStyle, §17.4.7) ✅
Table of contents (TOC field) — dot leaders, right-aligned page numbers ✅
keepNext / keepLines / widowControl ✅
Elements Tables (with borders, fills, merges, banding, alignment) ✅
Math equations (OMML m:oMath / m:oMathPara, rendered via MathJax — opt-in @silurus/ooxml/math) ✅
Images (inline and anchored, with text wrap) ✅
Text boxes / drawing shapes ✅
WMF / EMF metafile images (legacy vector) ❌ Not planned
Advanced Footnote / endnote reference markers ✅
Track changes (w:ins / w:del — author-coloured underline / strikethrough) ✅
Comments / footnote bodies (parsed, not yet rendered inline) ⚠️
Mail merge fields ❌ Not planned
Interaction Text selection (transparent overlay, native copy) ✅

Excel (.xlsx)

Category Feature Status
Workbook Multiple sheets, sheet names ✅
Sheet tab colors (<sheetPr><tabColor> — theme / tint / indexed / rgb) ✅
Cells Text, number, boolean, error values ✅
Formula results (from cached <v>) ✅
Dates (ECMA-376 date format codes) ✅
Rich text (per-run formatting) ✅
Formatting Bold, italic, underline (single / double / singleAccounting / doubleAccounting), strikethrough ✅
Superscript / subscript (vertAlign) ✅
Font family, size, color ✅
Cell background color (solid + gradient) ✅
Pattern fills (gray125 / gray0625 / lightGray / mediumGray / darkGray and the 12 light* / dark* directional hatches) ✅
Borders (thin, medium, thick, hair, double, dashed, dotted, dashDotDot, …) ✅
Diagonal borders (diagonalUp / diagonalDown, single + double) ✅
Horizontal / vertical alignment ✅
Text wrapping ✅
Number formats (0.00, %, #,##0, custom date/time) ✅
Structure Merged cells ✅
Frozen panes ✅
Row / column sizing (custom widths and heights) ✅
Hidden rows / columns ✅
Elements Images (<xdr:twoCellAnchor>) ✅
Drawing shapes / text boxes (xdr:sp, xdr:txBody) ✅
Charts (bar, line, area, radar, scatter / bubble) ✅
Chart markers (circle / square / diamond / triangle / x / plus / star / dot / dash, per-point <c:dPt> overrides) ✅
Chart data labels (<c:dLbl> per-point with CELLRANGE / VALUE / SERIESNAME / CATEGORYNAME field references, position l/r/t/b/ctr/outEnd) ✅
Chart error bars (<c:errBars> X/Y direction, cust / fixedVal / stdErr / stdDev / percentage, dashed/styled lines) ✅
Chart manual layout (<c:title><c:layout> and <c:plotArea><c:layout>) ✅
Sparklines (x14:sparklineGroup — line / column / win-loss, with markers and high/low/first/last/negative highlights) ✅
Advanced Conditional formatting (cellIs, colorScale, dataBar, iconSet, top10, aboveAverage) ✅
Slicers (static, Office 2010 extension) ✅
Pivot tables ❌ Not planned
Data validation / comments ❌ Not planned
Interaction Cell selection (single / range / row / column / all) ✅
Excel-style row / column header highlight on selection ✅
Shift+click to extend, Ctrl+C to copy as TSV ✅
Text selection inside cells (transparent overlay) ✅
onSelectionChange callback, getCellAt(x, y) API ✅
Zoom slider (Excel-style, right of the tab bar, 10–400% with 100% centered; showZoomSlider option) ✅

PowerPoint (.pptx)

Category Feature Status
Slides Slide rendering ✅
Slide layout / master inheritance ✅
Slide size (custom dimensions) ✅
Slide background (solid, gradient, image) ✅
Slide numbers ✅
Notes pages ❌
Animations / transitions ❌ Not planned
Element types Shapes (sp) ✅
Pictures (pic) ✅
Groups (grpSp) with nested transforms ✅
Connectors (cxnSp) ✅
Tables (tbl in graphicFrame) ✅
Charts (bar, line, area, radar, waterfall) ✅
Charts (pie, doughnut) ✅
Charts (scatter — scatterStyle marker / line / smooth variants) ✅
Charts (bubble — bubbleSize per-point area scaling) ✅
SmartArt ❌
OLE objects ❌
Video / audio (poster + interactive playback) ✅
Ink / handwriting (p:contentPart, raster fallback) ✅
Shape geometry 130+ preset shapes (prstGeom) ✅
Custom geometry (custGeom) on shapes and pictures (clipping) ✅
Rotation and flip (flipH / flipV) ✅
3D preset shapes ❌
Fills Solid fill (solidFill) ✅
Linear / radial gradient (gradFill) ✅
No fill (noFill) ✅
Pattern fill (pattFill) — 30 preset bitmaps incl. pct5–pct90 / horz / vert / cross / diag / grid / brick / check / trellis ✅
Image fill on shapes (blipFill in sp) ✅
Strokes Solid line color and width ✅
Dash / dot styles ✅
Arrow heads (headEnd / tailEnd) ✅
Compound / double lines (`<a:ln cmpd="dbl thinThick
Shape effects Drop shadow (outerShdw) ✅
Glow (glow — radius + colour) ✅
Inner shadow (innerShdw — parsed; rendering follow-up) ⚠️
Soft edge (softEdge — parsed; rendering follow-up) ⚠️
Reflection (reflection — parsed; rendering follow-up) ⚠️
Bevel / 3D extrusion ❌
Text — characters Bold, italic, strikethrough (incl. dblStrike) ✅
Underline styles (sng / dbl / dotted / dash / dashLong / dotDash / dotDotDash / wavy / wavyDbl and *Heavy variants) ✅
Per-run underline colour (uFill / uFillTx) ✅
Font family, size, color ✅
East Asian font (rPr > a:ea — separate typeface for CJK glyphs) ✅
Caps transform (all / small) ✅
Letter spacing (spc) ✅
Superscript / subscript ✅
Hyperlinks (hlinkClick — theme hlink colour + auto underline) ✅
Text shadow (rPr > effectLst > outerShdw) ✅
Text outline (rPr > a:ln) ✅
Math equations (OMML m:oMath / m:oMathPara, incl. a14:m / mc:AlternateContent; STIX Two Math via MathJax — opt-in @silurus/ooxml/math) ✅
Text — paragraphs Horizontal alignment (left / center / right / justify) ✅
Vertical anchor (top / center / bottom) ✅
Line spacing (spcPct, spcPts) ✅
Space before / after paragraph ✅
Bullet points (character and auto-numbered) ✅
Tab stops ✅
Indent / margin ✅
Vertical text (bodyPr@vert — vert / vert270 / eaVert) ✅
Right-to-left paragraph (pPr@rtl — Arabic / Hebrew default alignment + browser bidi) ✅
Text — body Text padding (insets) ✅
normAutoFit (shrink to fit) ✅
spAutoFit (expand box; suppresses wrap when text fits in one line) ✅
Word wrap / no wrap ✅
Multi-column text body (numCol / spcCol — balanced flow) ✅
Theme object-default inheritance (<a:objectDefaults><a:txDef|spDef> bodyPr fallback) ✅
Tables Cells, rows, columns ✅
Cell merges (horizontal / vertical) ✅
Cell borders ✅
Cell fills (solid / gradient) ✅
Cell diagonal lines (lnTlToBr / lnBlToTr) ✅
Table theme styles (74 built-in PowerPoint presets) ✅
Theme Scheme colors (dk1/lt1/accent1–6) ✅
Font scheme (+mj-lt, +mn-lt) ✅
lumMod / lumOff / alpha transforms ✅
Interaction Text selection (transparent overlay, native copy) ✅

A note on text selection. Across DOCX / PPTX / XLSX, text selection is currently implemented by rendering glyphs to the canvas while overlaying a transparent DOM layer that mirrors the canvas text positions for native browser selection. This dual-layer approach is a deliberate stop-gap: once the Canvas drawElement API (proposed in WICG/html-in-canvas, currently in Chromium Origin Trial) ships across browsers, the project plans to migrate to a single DOM-as-source-of-truth pipeline where the canvas mirrors the DOM directly — eliminating the duplication while keeping z-order correctness and native selection / a11y.

Companion packages

packages/markdown/ — @silurus/ooxml-markdown and the ooxml-md CLI convert .pptx / .docx / .xlsx to GitHub-flavoured markdown via the workspace WASM parsers. Same projection used by the MCP server (~21× smaller than the raw XML on the demo deck, ~8% bigger than a flat-text extractor). Includes a node20-based GitHub Action for bulk repo-wide conversion.
packages/node/ — Node-side parsers (@silurus/ooxml-node) exposing parsePptx / parseDocx / parseXlsx / parseXlsxAllSheets against the workspace WASM artifacts, with no DOM or Web Worker dependency. Useful for CI checks, headless rendering pipelines, and CLI tools. Includes an ooxml-thumbnail CLI (pptx-only first pass; requires skia-canvas).
packages/vscode-extension/ — VS Code extension (ooxml-viewer) that registers CustomEditorProviders for .docx, .xlsx, and .pptx, and (opt-in) auto-installs and registers the ooxml-mcp-server so AI coding agents in the same window (Copilot Agent mode, Claude, …) can read those files via dedicated tools.
packages/mcp-server/ — Rust MCP server (ooxml-mcp-server) exposing the parsers as tools for AI agents (Claude, Copilot, Codex, etc.). Provides structured queries (docx_get_structure, xlsx_get_cell_range, pptx_get_slide_structure, …) so agents can inspect OOXML files without shelling out to unzip. Prebuilt binaries are attached to each GitHub Release for macOS / Linux / Windows; the VS Code extension downloads them on demand.

Development

# Install dependencies
pnpm install

# Build all WASM parsers (requires Rust + wasm-pack)
pnpm build:wasm

# Start Storybook dev server (port 6006)
pnpm storybook

# Type-check all packages
pnpm typecheck

# Run visual regression tests (local only — not run in CI)
pnpm vrt
# Adopt the current rendering as the new reference baseline
UPDATE_REFS=1 pnpm vrt

# Build the library
pnpm build

WASM build (individual packages)

cd packages/docx/parser && wasm-pack build --target web && cp pkg/docx_parser_bg.wasm  pkg/docx_parser.js  ../src/wasm/
cd packages/xlsx/parser && wasm-pack build --target web && cp pkg/xlsx_parser_bg.wasm  pkg/xlsx_parser.js  ../src/wasm/
cd packages/pptx/parser && wasm-pack build --target web && cp pkg/pptx_parser_bg.wasm pkg/pptx_parser.js ../src/wasm/

Security & Privacy

Canvas-only rendering. Documents are decoded and drawn to an HTMLCanvasElement. No script, link, form, or other active content from the source file is executed or injected into the DOM.
ZIP decompression cap. Each entry in the source archive is limited to 512 MiB of uncompressed output by default to block zip-bomb DoS. Override per viewer with maxZipEntryBytes (bytes) — raise it for legitimate decks with large embedded media, lower it to tighten the budget for untrusted input:

new PptxViewer(canvas, { maxZipEntryBytes: 64 * 1024 * 1024 }); // 64 MiB Supported uniformly by DocxViewer, PptxViewer, and XlsxViewer. Zero / negative values fall back to the default.
No network by default. The library does not send telemetry or analytics, and does not contact third-party services unless you ask it to. In particular, theme webfonts (and Office font metric substitutes for XLSX) are not loaded from Google Fonts unless you pass useGoogleFonts: true to the relevant Viewer / load(...) options — supported uniformly by DocxViewer, PptxViewer, and XlsxViewer. Enabling that option causes the end-user's browser to send an HTTP request (IP and User-Agent) to fonts.googleapis.com, which may have GDPR implications for your application — consider self-hosting the required fonts via @font-face instead.
XML parsing. Uses roxmltree, which does not resolve external entities (XXE-safe by default).

License

MIT

