Hacker News Top 30 — 2026-05-20

Generated on 2026-05-20 10:33 UTC

1. Everything in C is undefined behavior

Source: https://blog.habets.se/2026/05/Everything-in-C-is-undefined-behavior.html
Site: blog.habets.se
Submitter: lycopodiopsida (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-20 06:07 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 196 points · 240 comments
Length: 2.3K words (~11 min read)
Language: en

If he had been a programmer, Cardinal Richelieu would have said “Give me six lines written by the hand of the most expert C programmer in the world, and I will find enough in them to trigger undefined behavior”.

Nobody can write correct C, or C++. And I say that as someone who’s written C and C++ on an almost daily basis for about 30 years. I listen to C++ podcasts. I watch C++ conference talks. I enjoy reading and writing C++.

C++ has served us well, but it’s 2026, and the environment of 1985 (C++) or 1972 (C) is not the environment of today.

I’m definitely not the first to say this. I remember reading a post by someone prominent about a decade ago saying that a good case can be made that use of C++ is a SOX violation. And while I was not onboard with the rest of their rant (nor their confusion about “its” vs “it’s”), I never disagreed about that point.

With time I found it to be more and more true. WAY more things are undefined behavior (UB) than you’d expect.

Everyone knows that double-free, use after free, accessing outside the bounds of an object (e.g. array), and accessing uninitialized memory is UB. After all, C & C++ are not memory safe languages. And yet we as an industry seem to be unable to stop making even those mistakes over and over.

But there’s more. More subtle. More illogical.

It’s not about optimizations

Some people seem to think that as long as they don’t compile with optimizations turned on, undefined behavior can’t hurt them. They believe that the compiler is somehow being deliberately hostile, going “AHA! UB! I can do whatever I want here!”, and without optimizations turned on it won’t.

This is incorrect.

UB doesn’t mean that the compiler can take advantage of your sloppiness. UB means that the compiler can assume that your code is valid. It means that the intention of your code that’s oh so obvious when read by a human, doesn’t even have a way to be expressed between compiler stages or modules.

UB means that the compiler doesn’t even have to implement some special cases in its code generation, because they “can’t happen”.

The compiler, and really the underlying hardware too, is playing a game of telephone with your UB intentions. It may end up with what you wanted, but there’s no guarantee for now or in the future.

UB is everywhere

The following is not an attempt at enumerating all the UB in the world. It’s merely making the case that UB is everywhere, and if nobody can do it right, how is it even fair to blame the programmer? My point is that ALL nontrivial C and C++ code has UB.

Accessing an object which is not correctly aligned

As an example of this, take this code:

int foo(const int* p) {
   return *p;
}


If this function is called with a pointer not correctly aligned (probably meaning on an address that’s a multiple of sizeof(int), but who knows), this is UB. C23 6.3.2.3.

On Linux Alpha, in some cases this would merely trap to the kernel, which would software emulate what you intended. In other cases it would (probably) crash your program with a SIGBUS.

On SPARC it would cause a SIGBUS.

Sure, on x86/amd64 (henceforth just “x86”) this is likely fine. Hell, it’s probably even an atomic read. x86 is famously extremely forgiving about cache coherency subtleties.

So here we have three cases:

kernel gave a helping hand (Alpha for some loads)
crash (other Alpha loads, and SPARC)
not a problem (x86)

What about ARM, RISC-V, and others? What about future architectures? A future architecture could even have special int-pointer registers that do not populate the lowest bits, because such pointers cannot exist.

Even if it works, maybe the compiler one day changes from using one load instruction to another, and suddenly that’s no longer fixed up by the kernel.

Because the compiler is not obligated to generate assembly instructions that work on unaligned pointers. Because it’s UB.

Or how about this:

void set_it(std::atomic<int>* p) {
        p->store(123);
}
int get_it(std::atomic<int>* p) {
        return p->load();
}


Is this operation atomic when the object is not correctly aligned? That’s the wrong question to ask. Mu, unask the question. It’s UB. (but also yes, in practice this can easily be an atomicity problem)

If you want to get even more convinced, you can try thinking about what happens if an object you thought you were reading atomically spans pages. But don’t think too much about it, or you may conclude that “it’s fine”. It’s not. It’s UB.

Actually, it was UB even before that

Don’t blame the foo() function, above. The act of dereferencing the pointer wasn’t the problem. Merely creating the pointer was enough to be a problem.

Example:

bool parse_packet(const uint8_t* bytes) {
        const int* magic_intp = (const int*)bytes;   // UB!
        int magic_raw = foo(magic_intp);  // Probably crashes on SPARC.
        int magic = ntohl(magic_raw); // this is fine, at least.
        […]
}


That cast is the problem, not foo().

It’s perfectly valid for the compiler to assign specific meaning, such as garbage collection or security tagging bits, to the lower bits of an int*.

isxdigit() on char input

bool bar(char ch) {
        return isxdigit(ch);
}


isxdigit() is a simple function that takes a character and returns 1 if it’s a hex digit. 0-9 or a-f. It can also take the value EOF. Uh, ok. What value is EOF? Per C23 7.4p1 we know it’s an int, and we can infer that it’s not representable by unsigned char.

isxdigit() therefore takes an int, not a char. All values of char fit inside int, so we should be fine. Casting from char to int fits, so per section 6.3.1.3 we’re fine, right?

No. Because if bar() is called with a value other than 0-127, and on your architecture char is signed (implementation defined, per 6.2.5, paragraph 20 in C23), then the integer value ends up negative.

And the following is a valid implementation of isxdigit(), that would cause a read of who-knows-what memory. It could even be I/O mapped memory, triggering things to happen that is more than merely getting a random value or crash. It could cause the motor to start. Less likely in an application running in a desktop operating system than in an embedded system, sure. But there are user space network drivers (for performance), so even user space won’t protect you.

int isxdigit(int c) {
        if (c == EOF) {
                return false;
        }
        return some_array[c];
}


Casting from float to int

int milliseconds(float seconds) {
        int tmp = (int)(seconds * 1000.0); /* WRONG */
        return tmp + 1; /* WRONG separately (signed overflow is UB) */
}


When a finite value of real floating type is converted to an integer type[…]If
the value of the integral part cannot be represented by the integer type, the
behavior is undefined.
— 6.3.1.4


And, by omission, it’s also UB if the float is a non-finite value.

So how do you compare a float to INT_MAX? Do you cast the float to int? No, that’s the UB you want to avoid. So you cast INT_MAX to float? How do you know it can be represented exactly? Maybe casting INT_MAX to float rounds to a value not representable in int, and your comparison becomes non-representative?

Maybe the following works? You’ll miss out on representing some really high values, but maybe that’s OK?

int milliseconds(float seconds) {
        const float ftmp = seconds * 1000.0f;
        if (!isfinite(ftmp)) {
                // or other error reporting.
                return 0;
        }
        if ((float)(INT_MIN + 1000) > ftmp) {
                // or other error reporting.
                return 0;
        }
        if ((float)(INT_MAX - 1000) < ftmp) {
                // or other error reporting.
                return 0;
        }
        // Now safe to convert.
        const int tmp = (int)ftmp;
        if (INT_MAX == tmp) {
                // or other error reporting.
                return 0;
        }
        // Now safe to add.
        return tmp + 1;
}


I just wanted to convert a float to an int. :-(

I bet there’s lots of code out there that take a value in seconds, and convert it to integer milliseconds, by just multiplying and casting.

Object at address zero

Most programmers won’t have to deal with this, but I don’t think there’s any C standards compliant way in practice to put an object at address zero. This can come up in OS kernel and embedded coding.

By 6.3.2.3 an integer constant zero (which is convertible to a pointer) and nullptr are the “null pointer constant” (which I’ll just call NULL). C doesn’t specify that the actual pointer NULL points addr machine address zero, because the C standard only talks of the C abstract machine, not about hardware.

All C guarantees is that if you compare NULL to zero you’ll see them equal. But for all you know that’s because the zero is converted to the native platform’s NULL, which happens to be 0xffff.

It also explicitly says that dereferencing a null pointer, no matter what the value, is undefined behavior. It’s the example of UB under 3.4.3.

This also means that you can’t assume that memset(&ptr, 0, sizeof(ptr)); will create a NULL pointer! You cannot initialize your structs this way and assume member pointers are NULL! And this does apply to most programmers.

And yes, some historic machines used non-zero NULL pointers.

But let’s say you have a modern machine, where NULL is a pointer to address zero, and you actually have an object there.

Again, C 6.3.2.3 says that NULL compares unequal to “any object or function”. So this is UB:

void (*func_ptr)() = NULL;
func_ptr();


C says “there is no function there”. For all you know the compiler has no internal way to even express your intention here. You may argue that “but surely it’ll just emit a call instruction to the bit pattern of all zeroes? Nothing else seems reasonable.

What is “all zeroes”, though? On 16bit x86, is it 0000:0000? Is it CS:0000?

Variable arguments and types (e.g. printf with %ld instead of %lld)

This is UB:

execl("/bin/sh", "sh", "-c", "date", NULL);     /* WRONG */
execl("/bin/sh", "sh", "-c", "date", 0);     /* WRONG */


This is not:

execl("/bin/sh", "sh", "-c", "date", (char*)NULL);


Because the argument needs to be a pointer, and the NULL macro may be misinterpreted as an integer zero.

Similarly, this is UB:

uint64_t blah = 123;
printf("%ld\n", blah);  /* WRONG */


It needs to be:

uint64_t blah = 123;
printf("%"PRIu64"\n", blah);


So how do you print an uid_t? Well, you could cast them to uintmax_t and print them using PRIuMAX. But is uid_t even unsigned? Oh well, worst case you get a nonsense value printed instead of -1, I guess.

Divide by zero is UB

Sure, you probably knew this. But did you consider the security aspects of it? It’s not rare for the denominator to come from untrusted input.

And there’s so much more. The C23 standard contains 283 uses of the word “undefined”. And that’s not even including the things that are undefined by omission.

Bonus non-UB

Nobody can apply integer promotion rules at code skimming speeds. Nobody.

This post is already long enough, but as a start:

unsigned char a = 0xff;
unsigned char b = 1;
unsigned char zero = 0;
bool overflowed = (a + b) == zero;
// overflowed is set to zero, not one.

unsigned char a = 0x80;
uint64_t b = a << 24;     // Bonus UB(?)
// b is now 18446744071562067968 (ffffffff80000000), not 2147483648 (0x80000000).
// even with all our variables unsigned.


LLMs are better than us at this

Point an LLM at ANY C code, asking it to find UB, and it will. And it’ll be right almost all the time, nowadays.

I felt a bit bad after it correctly found ones in my code, so I thought I’d point it at the mature and pedantically written OpenBSD. I just picked the first tool I could think of, find, and it spit out a bunch.

I sent the project a patch for an out of bounds write (and also for a non-UB logic bug). I didn’t send them patches for the UB that was left and right, partly because the OpenBSD project has not been very receptive in the past for bug reports, my sense of “this is probably fine, in practice”, and that if OpenBSD wants to weed out UB from their code base, then that’s a major project that should be done in a better way than me just being the middle man between the LLM and them for a patch here and there.

So what do we do now?

We can’t just throw away our C and C++ code bases. But leaving them inherently broken is also not an option.

We need some way of fixing UB at scale, without committing AI slop nor overwhelming human reviewers.

This too is not a new opinion, nor a great revelation.

But yes, writing C or C++ in 2026 without an LLM supervising you for UB should probably be seen as a SOX violation, and just plain irresponsible. If OpenBSD people can’t find these problems given 30+ years, what chance do the rest of us have?

It may not scale to large code bases, but for my own projects I’ve asked the LLM to find UB, if necessary explain it, and fix it. And then stare at the output until I can confirm the issue and the fix.

A problem with this is that in order to confirm the findings, you’ll need an expert human. But generally expert humans are busy doing other things. This is janitor work, but too subtle to leave to the junior programmers who have traditionally been assigned janitor work.

No way to parse integers in C
Integer handling is broken
UB in the Linux kernel
Integer promotion

disqus has started showing ads. :-(

Showing (probably incomplete) comments in a static read-only view. Click button to be able to leave comments.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

2. Gemini 3.5 Flash

Source: https://blog.google/innovation-and-ai/models-and-research/gemini-models/gemini-3-5/
Site: Google
Author: Koray Kavukcuoglu
Published: 2026-05-19
HN activity: 802 points · 560 comments
Length: 1.2K words (~6 min read)
Language: en-us

May 19, 2026

Gemini 3.5 is built to help you execute complex, agentic workflows.

In this story

Gemini 3.5 Flash
Frontier intelligence, exceptional speed
Agentic tasks at scale
Richer graphics
Real-world impact
Personal AI agents
Built with Frontier safeguards
Available today

Listen to article

This content is generated by Google AI. Generative AI is experimental

[[duration]] minutes

Today, we’re introducing Gemini 3.5, our latest family of models combining frontier intelligence with action. This represents a major leap forward in building more capable, intelligent agents. We’re kicking off the series by releasing 3.5 Flash. It delivers frontier performance for agents and coding, excelling at complex long-horizon tasks that deliver real-world utility.

3.5 Flash is available today to billions of people globally:

For everyone via the Gemini app and AI Mode in Google Search
For developers in our agent-first development platform Google Antigravity and Gemini API in Google AI Studio and Android Studio
For enterprises in Gemini Enterprise Agent Platform and Gemini Enterprise.

We’re also hard at work on 3.5 Pro. It's already being used internally, and we look forward to rolling it out next month.

3.5 Flash: frontier performance for agents and coding

Gemini 3.5 Flash delivers intelligence that rivals large flagship models on multiple dimensions, at the speeds you have come to expect from the Flash series. It’s our strongest agentic and coding model yet, outperforming Gemini 3.1 Pro on challenging coding and agentic benchmarks like Terminal-Bench 2.1 (76.2%), GDPval-AA (1656 Elo) and MCP Atlas (83.6%), and leading in multimodal understanding (84.2% on CharXiv Reasoning). When looking at output tokens per second, it is 4 times faster than other frontier models.

Landing in the top-right quadrant of the Artificial Analysis index, 3.5 Flash delivers frontier-level intelligence at exceptional speed — proving you no longer have to trade quality for latency.

3.5 Flash: agentic tasks at scale

This balance of speed and performance makes 3.5 Flash ideal for tackling long-horizon agentic tasks. What used to take a developer days or an auditor weeks, 3.5 Flash can now help complete in a fraction of the time, often at less than half the cost of other frontier models. It rapidly plans, builds and iterates to solve real-world problems, whether it’s developing new applications, maintaining codebases or helping to prepare financial documents.

When coupled with the updated Antigravity harness, 3.5 Flash becomes a powerful engine for deploying collaborative subagents to tackle problems at scale for the most demanding use cases. Under supervision, it can reliably execute multi-step workflows and coding tasks while sustaining frontier performance.

Powered by Antigravity, 3.5 Flash executes multi-step workflows to automatically rename and categorize unstructured assets based on dynamic criteria.

Leveraging Antigravity, 3.5 Flash uses two agents to synthesize the AlphaZero paper and code a fully playable game in six hours.

3.5 Flash uses the Antigravity harness to transform a messy legacy codebase to Next.js.

3.5 Flash uses subagents to create new city landscapes in Antigravity.

3.5 Flash uses two agents: a builder and a player, working in a rapid self-improvement loop to develop a game in Antigravity.

Building on the strong multimodal foundation of Gemini 3, 3.5 Flash generates richer, more interactive web UIs and graphics.

3.5 Flash creates interactive animations for a research paper on AI Studio.

3.5 Flash turns a plain text description into interactive hardware on AI Studio.

3.5 Flash executes multiple concepts in parallel to build a full branding concept for a school fundraiser on AI Studio.

3.5 Flash generates different UX approaches for a checkout flow in just 60 seconds on AI Studio.

3.5 Flash: real-world impact

3.5 Flash’s real-world agentic capabilities are already driving meaningful progress for our developers and enterprises alike. In developing the 3.5 model series, we worked closely with industry partners to understand where toil and complexity arose in their workflows. Partners are seeing meaningful impact — from banks and fintechs automating multi-week workflows to data science teams unearthing insights amidst complex data environments.

Shopify is running subagents in parallel to analyze complex data over a long horizon for more accurate merchant growth forecasts at a global scale.

Macquarie Bank is piloting how 3.5 Flash can accelerate customer onboarding by reasoning over complex 100+ page documents, retrieving relevant information and making reliable recommendations with low latency.

Salesforce is integrating 3.5 Flash into Agentforce to reliably automate complicated enterprise tasks by deploying multiple subagents that retain context and execute complex, multi-turn tool calling.

3.5 Flash is helping Ramp enable smarter, more reliable OCR through multimodal understanding of complex invoices combined with reasoning over historical patterns.

Xero is deploying agents to autonomously manage complex, multi-week workflows, such as identifying suppliers and gathering information for 1099 tax forms, enabling small businesses to automate tedious admin tasks.

Databricks is using agentic workflows to monitor and retrieve real-time information, reason across massive datasets to diagnose issues, identify fixes and propose solutions for data scientists.

Personal AI agents: built with 3.5 Flash

3.5 Flash is now the default model for the Gemini app and AI Mode in Search globally. At I/O today, we showed how its agentic capabilities are powering new features to bring frontier-level intelligence to your daily life.

The new Gemini Spark, your personal AI agent, uses 3.5 Flash. It runs 24/7, helping you navigate your digital life, taking action on your behalf while under your direction. We’re starting to roll out Gemini Spark to trusted testers today, and we’re planning on bringing the Beta to Google AI Ultra subscribers in the US next week.

Gemini Spark uses 3.5 Flash to help accomplish these tasks

Gemini Spark uses 3.5 Flash to help accomplish these tasks

Gemini Spark uses 3.5 Flash to help accomplish these tasks

Gemini Spark uses 3.5 Flash to help accomplish these tasks

Gemini Spark uses 3.5 Flash to help accomplish these tasks

The enhanced agentic coding capabilities of 3.5 Flash are also delivering even more intelligent experiences across Search, from introducing new information agents that work for you 24/7 to unlocking more dynamic generative UI experiences. Learn more in our blog post.

Search leverages 3.5 Flash to build an interactive visual explaining Gyroid patterns.

Gemini 3.5: built with frontier safeguards

Gemini 3.5 was developed in accordance with our Frontier Safety Framework. We have strengthened our cyber and CBRN safeguards, which means it's less likely to generate harmful content, and to mistakenly refuse to answer safe queries. We achieve this with new, more advanced safety training and mitigations, including interpretability tools that help check and understand the AI's inner reasoning before it provides a response.

3.5 Flash is available today

Gemini 3.5 Flash is generally available via Google Antigravity, the Gemini API in Google AI Studio and Android Studio, Gemini Enterprise Agent Platform and Gemini Enterprise. It’s also now available to everyone in the Gemini app and AI Mode in Search. On behalf of the entire Gemini team, we can’t wait to see what you build.

Get more stories from Google in your inbox.

Done. Just one step more.

Check your inbox to confirm your subscription.

You are already subscribed to our newsletter.

You can also subscribe with a

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

3. FiveThirtyEight articles on the Internet Archive

Source: https://fivethirtyeightindex.com/
Site: fivethirtyeightindex.com
Author: Byline
Submitted: 2026-05-20 01:34 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 207 points · 49 comments
Length: 155 words (~1 min read)
Language: en

Date	Headline	Byline
2008-03-01	Frequently Asked Questions, Last Revised 8/7/08	Nate Silver
2008-03-03	Pollster Ratings v1.0	Nate Silver
2008-03-07	A Reality Check on South Dakota?	Nate Silver
2008-03-07	Summary Results, 3/7/2008	Nate Silver
2008-03-08	Still in Beta Test Mode	Nate Silver
2008-03-09	538 versus Intrade	Nate Silver
2008-03-09	FAQ	Nate Silver
2008-03-09	Regions	Nate Silver
2008-03-09	Still in Beta Test Mode	Nate Silver
2008-03-10	Moving beyond the Big Three	Nate Silver
2008-03-11	Plenty of Democrats in Red States	Nate Silver
2008-03-11	Some "New" North Carolina polls	Nate Silver
2008-03-11	The Clinton voters who won't vote for Obama	Nate Silver
2008-03-12	Carolinas Down, 48 to Go	Nate Silver
2008-03-12	New Pennsylvania, Michigan polls are good news for McCain	Nate Silver
2008-03-12	Pollster Ratings v2.0	Nate Silver
2008-03-13	Does Obama benefit from an active primary campaign?	Nate Silver
2008-03-13	Swing State Analysis	Nate Silver
2008-03-14	New Maps	Nate Silver
2008-03-15	Beware of (Temporarily) Falling Polls	Nate Silver

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

4. Learnings from 100K lines of Rust with AI (2025)

Source: https://zfhuang99.github.io/rust/claude%20code/codex/contracts/spec-driven%20development/2025/12/01/rust-with-ai.html
Site: Cheng Huang’s corner
Submitter: pramodbiligiri (Hacker News)
Published: 2025-12-01
HN activity: 9 points · 4 comments
Length: 1.6K words (~7 min read)
Language: en

In the past few months, I’ve been stress-testing how far AI coding agents can take us when building real, production-grade distributed systems.

The result: a Rust-based multi-Paxos consensus engine that not only implements all the features of Azure’s Replicated State Library (RSL) [1] — which underpins most major Azure services — but also modernizes it for today’s hardware.

The entire project took me ~3 months, with 100K lines of Rust code written in ~4 weeks and performance optimization from 23K operations/sec to 300K ops/sec achieved in ~3 weeks.

Besides unprecedented productivity, I discovered several techniques that were instrumental. This post shares my most valuable learnings on: ensuring correctness with code contracts, applying lightweight spec-driven development, and pursuing aggressive performance optimization — plus my wish list for the future of AI-assisted coding.

Why Modernize RSL?

Azure’s RSL implements the multi-Paxos consensus protocol and forms the backbone of replication in many Azure services. However, RSL was written more than a decade ago. While robust, it hasn’t evolved to match modern hardware and workloads.

There are three key gaps motivated this project:

No pipelining: When a vote is in flight, new requests must wait, inflating latency.
No NVM support: Non-volatile memory is now common in Azure datacenters and can drastically reduce commit time.
Limited hardware awareness: RSL wasn’t built to leverage RDMA, which is now pervasive in Azure data centers.

Removing these limitations could unlock significantly lower latency and higher throughput — critical for modern cloud workloads and AI-driven services.

Given my interest in Rust and AI-accelerated development, I set out to build a modern RSL equivalent from scratch.

Massive Productivity Boost

In roughly six weeks, I’ve driven AI and implemented over 130K lines of Rust code covering the full feature set of RSL, including multi-Paxos, leader election, log replication, snapshotting, and configuration changes.

I utilized many available AI coding agents: GitHub Copilot, Claude Code, Codex, Augment Code, Kiro, and Trae. My workflow evolved quickly, but today my main drivers are Claude Code and Codex CLI, with VS Code handling diffs and minor edits.

I’ve found that coding from the CLI creates a perfect asynchronous flow that maximizes my productivity. I also discovered a simple psychological trick:

I pay $100/month for Anthropic’s max plan. This became a forcing function — if I don’t kick off a coding task with Claude before bed, I feel like I’m wasting money.

When Codex CLI arrived, I added a second ChatGPT Plus subscription to handle rate limits — one subscription for Monday–Wednesday, the other for Thursday–Sunday.

Code Contracts — By AI, For AI

The question I get most often is: How can AI possibly implement something as complex as Paxos correctly?

Testing is the first layer of defense. My system now includes 1,300+ tests — from unit tests to minimal integration tests (e.g., proposer + acceptor only), all the way to multi-replica full integration tests with injected failures. See the project status.

But the real breakthrough came from AI-driven code contracts.

Code contracts specify preconditions, postconditions, and invariants for critical functions. These contracts are converted into runtime asserts during testing but can be disabled in production builds for performance. While I started using this approach long ago with .NET [2], AI has made contracts vastly more powerful.

Here’s how I apply them at three levels:

1. Ask AI to write contracts. Opus 4.1 writes good contracts, but GPT-5 High writes excellent ones. I focus on reviewing and refining. For example, the process_2a method (handling phase 2a messages in Paxos) has 16 contracts, including this one:

2. Generate tests from contracts. Once contracts are defined, I ask AI to create targeted test cases for each post-condition. It excels at this, generating meaningful edge cases automatically.

3. Property-based tests for contracts. This is my favorite. AI translates contracts into property-based tests, exploring a vast space of randomized inputs. Any contract violation triggers a panic, exposing deep bugs early.

For instance, one AI-generated contract found a subtle Paxos safety violation:

That single contract saved what could have been a serious replication consistency issue — well before it ever hits production.

Lightweight Spec-Driven Development

I’ve tried various Spec-Driven Development (SDD) tools. In fact, the earlier components (such as leader election, proposer, acceptor, and learner) were all implemented following a rigid SDD approach. I would start with a requirement markdown, turn it into a design markdown, and then a task list markdown. However, I gradually found this process too rigid; making changes along the way and ensuring all documents remained consistent became a headache.

I’ve now switched to a more lightweight approach. When I work on a feature (e.g., snapshotting), I use /specify from spec kit [3] to generate a spec markdown. This spec consists of a few user stories and acceptance criteria.

Here is an example user story for snapshotting:

I then use /clarify to ask the AI to self-critique and improve the user stories and criteria. I also ask it to suggest additional user stories not covered in the initial spec. I spend the majority of my time here.

Once satisfied, I jump into plan mode and ask AI to generate a plan for a specific user story. Given the capability of today’s AI coding agents, a single user story feels like the “sweet spot” unit of work they can manage effectively. Along the way, we may discover additions or tweaks, which are easy to handle in the same coding session (agents might compress context, but I typically don’t worry about losing too much).

Here is a sample /clarify interaction for configuration changes:

● Question 4: Starting Slot Determination

  How should the starting slot for the new configuration be determined relative to the ending slot?

  Recommended: Option A - Always exactly ending_slot + 1

  This ensures no gaps in the slot sequence and maintains continuity between configurations, preventing any slots from being orphaned or unassigned.

  | Option | Description                                                    |
  |--------|----------------------------------------------------------------|
  | A      | Always exactly ending_slot + 1                                 |
  | B      | Allow operator to specify any value > ending_slot              |
  | C      | Next multiple of 1000 after ending_slot for cleaner boundaries |
  | D      | Same as ending_slot (both configs share final slot)            |

  You can reply with the option letter (e.g., "A"), accept the recommendation by saying "yes" or "recommended", or provide your own short answer.


Aggressive Performance Optimization

Performance optimization is where AI really shines. After ensuring initial correctness, I spent about three weeks purely on throughput tuning — and AI became my co-pilot in performance engineering.

Through iterative cycles, we boosted throughput from ~23K ops/sec to ~300K ops/sec on a single laptop. Here’s the loop I followed repeatedly:

Ask AI to instrument latency metrics across all code paths.
Run performance tests and output trace logs.
Let AI analyze latency breakdowns (it writes Python scripts to calculate quantiles and identify bottlenecks).
Ask AI to propose optimizations, implement one, re-measure, and repeat.

This process surfaced insights I might have missed — for example, lock contention on async paths, redundant memory copies, and unnecessary task spawns.

Rust’s safety model made it easy to push these optimizations confidently. Key gains came from minimizing allocations, applying zero-copy techniques, avoiding locks, and selectively removing async overhead. Each improvement felt like peeling another layer of latency off a high-performance engine — without fear of corrupting memory.

Wish List for AI-Assisted Coding

Reflecting on my journey, I keep wondering where AI could deliver even more value. Here are some items on my wish list:

End-to-End User Story Execution: I still prefer to define the user stories myself. As an architect, I feel I have a better sense of what I’m building and how I’d like to build it. However, the delivery of a perfect execution is something I believe AI can handle increasingly well. Today, I still have to spend a fair amount of time steering the AI — telling it to continue when it pauses, suggesting refactoring, reviewing test coverage, and suggesting additional tests. I would prefer the AI take more autonomy to drive this end-to-end.

Automated Contract Workflows: The flow of applying contracts seems largely automatable. While I’d still want to review the contracts and offer suggestions, I’d like the AI to drive the rest: generating tests based on contracts, debugging individual test cases, ensuring consistency between tests and contracts, and writing property-based tests. When a test fails, I’d like the AI to debug and fix trivial issues automatically, only notifying me when there are genuine correctness issues in the contracts or the implementation.

Autonomous Performance Optimization: Performance tuning seems ripe for more automation. Much of what I’ve done is repetitive and parallelizable. Projects like AlphaEvolve (or OpenEvolve) show promise in this direction. Ideally, I would suggest potential optimization avenues, and the AI would execute the experiments completely by itself. While current tools handle small bodies of code, applying similar techniques to larger codebases with end-to-end measurement seems feasible.

Appendix: Project Status

The seed of the project is an elegant design markdown authored by Jay Lorch [4] from Microsoft Research. This design greatly simplifies all the components in multi-Paxos, making it easier to implement and reason about.

So far, 2 out of the 3 RSL limitations have been addressed: pipelining and NVM support (Jay integrated the fully verified persistence log for NVM which was published in the PoWER Never Corrupts paper [5] at OSDI 2025). The RDMA support is still TBD.

To date, the project has grown to over 130K lines of Rust code, with 1,300+ tests accounting for more than 65% of the codebase.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

5. I’ve built a virtual museum with nearly every operating system you can think of

Source: https://virtualosmuseum.org/
Site: The Virtual OS Museum
Author: Andrew Warkentin
Submitted: 2026-05-19 15:53 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 788 points · 172 comments
Length: 1.3K words (~6 min read)
Language: en-US

This is a virtual museum of operating systems (and standalone applications) running under emulation, implemented as a Linux VM for QEMU, VirtualBox, or UTM.

A custom emulator-independent launcher is provided, and all OSes and emulators are pre-installed and pre-configured. The launcher includes a snapshot feature to quickly revert broken installations back to a working state. Hypervisor installers and shortcuts to run the VM on Windows, macOS, and Linux are also included.

Want to see the earliest resident monitors? The ancestor of all modern OSes (CTSS)? The earliest versions of Unix? The first OS with a desktop metaphor GUI (Xerox Star Pilot/ViewPoint)? Early versions of mainstream OSes? If you want to explore historical OSes and platforms without having to worry about configuring/installing emulators and OSes or corrupting emulated installations, you’ve come to the right place.

Just about every well-known OS and platform (and also a lot of obscure ones) is included in some form, spanning the entire history of stored-program computing from the Manchester Baby of 1948 (the first stored-program computer) to the present day.

The catalogue covers, among many other things:

The earliest mainframes: Manchester Baby test/demo programs, Mark 1 Scheme A/B/C/T (the earliest examples of system software that could be considered as an OS), various EDSAC software, etc.
Later mainframes and minicomputers: CTSS, MVS, VM/370, TOPS-10/20, ITS, Multics, RSX, RSTS, and more
Workstations and Unix variants: PERQ OSes, SunOS, IRIX, OSF/1, A/UX, NeXTSTEP, Plan 9, various BSDs, plus Linux distributions across the decades, and more
Home computers: various CP/M variants, Apple II, Commodore 8-bit machines, Atari 8-bit, MSX, Tandy TRS-80, BBC Micro, ZX Spectrum, Sharp MZ, and more
Personal computer operating systems: various DOS variants, OS/2, BeOS, Windows from 1.0 to early Longhorn betas, classic Mac OS through Mac OS X 10.5 PPC, and more
Mobile and embedded: PalmOS, EPOC/Symbian, Windows CE, Newton OS, early Android and iOS where emulation permits, QNX, etc.
Research and obscure systems: ZetaLisp, Smalltalk environments, Oberon, Plan 9, and many more that few people now have ever booted

If a working version of an operating system exists somewhere, the goal is to have it here, in a form anyone can run on a reasonably modern laptop/desktop.

By the Numbers

1700+

installs

250+

platforms

570+

distinct oses

1948-now

era

Downloads

Both a full and a lite version are available. The full version ships with everything pre-downloaded and runs offline. The lite version downloads disk/tape/etc. images for guest VMs the first time they are run. Automatic and manual updates are supported on both editions so new installations land without re-downloading the whole VM.

Download the Virtual OS Museum

Screenshots

0. Launcher main window
1. Launcher VM info
2. Unix PC SVR2 and XVM RSX
AFROS (XaAES) 8.12 - 00 TeraDesk
AO-DOS 2.10 - 00 Intro
ATT Unix PC System V R2 3.51m - 00 File Manager and Terminal
A_UX 3.1.1 - 00 Finder with utilities
Amiga UNIX (AMIX) 2.1c - 00 OpenLook desktop with applications
CP_M for PSI98 2.2 (6.31-Z) - 00 DIR
CSIDOS 3.32 - 00 Intro
Coherent 4.2.14 - 00 olwm with applications
Domain_OS SR10.4 - 01 VUE desktop
E_OS LX 0.2.5 - 00 Terminal
FlexOS 2.3 (COROS LS-B 4.01) - 03 About
GNO_ME 2.0.6 - 01 TMTerm
HP-UX 11i v1 (B.11.11) - 00 CDE with utilities
Human68K 3.02 - 00 LHES
IBM 1130 DMS V2M12 - 00 LET listing
IBM OS_2 (Extended Edition) 1.1 - 00 Desktop Manager
IRIX 6.5.22m - 00 IMD with applications
Inferno Fourth Edition (20100115) - 00 GUI with applications
LisaOS 3.1 - 02 LisaDraw
MOS for BBC Master Compact 5.10 (Base) - 02 Desktop
Mac OS (Classic) 1.0 alpha; Sony Test (System '7.0', Finder 1983-10-04) - 00 Finder
Mac OS 9.0.4 - 00 Finder, Internet Explorer,and Help
Mach386 2.6 1.0 (X108_MSD) - 00 X11 with applications
Minerva 1.98 (QL_E (shares disk images with SMSQ_E QL_E)) - 00 Desktop with applications
Minix 3.4.0rc6 - 00 X11 Terminal and Links
NeXTStep (68k) 3.3 - 00 Desktop with applications
OS-9_x86 (a.k.a. OS-9000_x86) 6.1 - 00 XiBase
PSI-OS 12.2 - 00 Start
Plan 9 4th Edition - 01 acme filesystem server
QNX 1.2 - 00 boot
RISC OS 3.11 (Minimal (Old boot)) - 00 Desktop with applications
SILLIAC software collection - 00 Blob demo
SINIX (PC-X) 1.2 - 01 Login Prompt
SX-WINDOW 3.1 - 00 Desktop
Sharp Personal CP_M for MZ-2500 (MZ-6Z001) 1.0a - 00 VCCP
Softlanding Linux System 1.0 - 00 ls uname and kernel source
Solaris_SPARC 9 (s9_58shwpl3) - 00 CDE terminal help and file manager
Syllable 0.5.2 - 00 Desktop with applications
SymbOS 1.0 Beta - 01 About
Tru64 UNIX 5.1B - 00 CDE with utilities
ULTRIX_VAX 4.0 - 00 DECwindows with applications
UNICOS 10.0.0.2 - 01 X11 with utilities

More screenshots

Why this exists

While the state of software preservation has improved significantly over the past two decades, many of the existing software preservation projects are still not particularly accessible.

When I started collecting emulator images (2003), there were only a few small archives of software images and the corresponding documentation, and relatively few emulators for anything other than well-known consumer-oriented platforms. Nowadays there are many large archives of historical software and documentation, and a lot of emulators for even a lot of very obscure platforms.

However, while such efforts are valuable when it comes to keeping historical software available and runnable (and without them this project would have never been possible; see the credits page for a list of emulators, pre-installed images, and media archives I have used), it often still takes time and effort to get runnable VM installations from them. OSes may have complicated install procedures. Some may depend on particular device configurations within an emulator. Some will only run in certain emulator versions, breaking in later ones due to regressions. Some emulators might have complex configuration files, or may require a specific environment on the host system.

This project is an attempt to keep reachable as much of the history that’s been preserved in various places as possible. Not theoretically reachable. Not “bootable in principle if you assemble the right toolchain on a Tuesday.” Reachable. You click an entry, it runs, and where possible it runs with software of the era already loaded the way someone might actually have used the machine at the time.

The work behind it

This is the result of over 20 years of collecting. OS installations have been sourced from various places. Some have been downloaded as pre-installed images, whereas others were installed from images of original install media. Some were installed in less than an hour, whereas others took almost a week.

A decent number only run in particular emulator versions due to regressions in later versions, and some emulators needed minor patches to run on modern Linux or to play nice with the launcher. A few emulators have been patched to run OSes that were previously broken.

Many installations also include various add-on software - applications, development tools, games, utilities, etc. - set up the way it actually might have been used.

This is still far from finished; I have many more images sitting around that I have yet to install and emulators I want to fix; check out my YouTube channel, blog, or BlueSky to see what I’m currently working on.

Support the project

This is a personal project, run and curated by one person, sustained by patience and time. If you find it interesting, the easiest ways to support it are:

Patreon for ongoing support
Ko-fi for one-off contributions
Discord/Fluxer to talk about it, ask questions, or suggest new platforms/OSes to add (new entries may not be added immediately since I’ve got a lot of stuff to add)
GitLab to submit bug reports or patches related to the launcher and scripts
Telling someone who works on, writes about, or studies the history of computing that this exists

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

6. Infomaniak transitions to a foundation model to protect user data privacy

Source: https://news.infomaniak.com/en/infomaniak-foundation-sovereign-cloud/
Site: Infomaniak Network News
Author: Thomas Jacobsen
Published: 2026-05-20
HN activity: 81 points · 17 comments
Length: 3.0K words (~14 min read)
Language: en-US

Since 1994, Infomaniak has followed the same path: privacy, environmental responsibility, and local roots. Thirty-two years on, these commitments are no longer just promises. On 13 May 2026, our founder Boris Siegenthaler transferred the majority of Infomaniak’s voting rights to a Swiss public-interest foundation: the Infomaniak Foundation. An irrevocable move, rare in Europe, that places the company beyond the reach of any takeover and sets its DNA in stone. For you, our customers, this means one thing: your cloud will remain Swiss, independent, and true to its values. Forever.

“Technology only makes sense if it improves lives, respects our planet, and strengthens our collective autonomy.”

— Boris Siegenthaler, founder of Infomaniak

Why now?

For a long time, Boris Siegenthaler had a different plan. Each year, he opened up the company’s capital to staff by handing over a portion of his shares. The idea was that the company would gradually become theirs. Thirty-six of them were already shareholders, holding 25% of the capital. A gradual handover, aligned with the company’s values.

But this plan remained fragile. If several employee-shareholders left at the same time, Infomaniak would have to buy back their shares, with financial costs that could become unsustainable. And above all, there was the question of succession: if Boris were to pass away, his heirs, who have no operational knowledge of the company, would have been immediately approached by investors. With a majority of voting rights, you control a company. You can change everything. Undo everything.

We needed an anchor point that no longer depended on a single person. The context made completion urgent: the acceleration of AI, takeovers of European cloud players, the strengthening of extraterritorial legislation, geopolitical tensions. And our responsibility was growing: millions of individuals and hundreds of thousands of businesses and institutions entrust us with their most sensitive data every day. We owe it to them to secure their choice for the long term.

What has concretely changed

The Infomaniak Foundation now holds the majority of voting rights in Infomaniak Group SA, in the form of special shares: a category that gives the Foundation a permanent blocking power and that can never be transferred. Boris Siegenthaler and the 36 employee-shareholders have all unanimously approved this transfer, accepting that the voting rights attached to their shares decrease accordingly. To date, Infomaniak has no external investors.

Concretely, this means that no takeover of the company is possible without the Foundation’s approval. Even if Boris were to pass away, even if an irresistible investor came knocking, control of Infomaniak remains in the hands of a structure dedicated to its mission.

Not a promise. Not an intention. A structure.

The two roles of the Infomaniak Foundation

It’s important to understand that the Infomaniak Foundation has two distinct roles.

A primary public-interest mission

The Infomaniak Foundation is first and foremost a Swiss foundation recognised as serving the public interest, one of the most demanding legal statuses under Swiss law: its statutes are signed before a notary, its public-interest mission is enshrined in its statutes, and it is placed under the ongoing supervision of the cantonal authorities of Geneva.

Its mission: to support independent projects in four areas that extend well beyond Infomaniak’s own scope.

Digital sovereignty and education
Ethical technology
Environment and biodiversity
Energy transition

This mission builds on initiatives Infomaniak has supported for years, such as DebConf (the international Debian developers’ conference), the 42 Lausanne project (a coding school), and Agent Green (an environmental NGO whose founder Gabriel Paun received the United Nations “Champion of the Earth” award in 2024).

The Foundation is funded by a share of up to 5% of Infomaniak’s annual profit. The more Infomaniak grows, the more projects the Foundation can support.

A role as reference shareholder, guardian of Infomaniak’s commitments

As the reference shareholder of Infomaniak Group SA, the Foundation ensures that the company remains true to its mission. It makes no operational decisions: it is a silent but powerful guardian, intervening only at critical moments in the company’s life.

Its guiding framework is the Shareholding Charter, whose 9 principles are detailed below.

The Foundation Board

Its Board has four volunteer members:

Marc Maugué, with many years of experience in the foundation sector in French-speaking Switzerland,
Jonathan Normand, a key figure in governance and positive-impact strategies in Switzerland,
Claire Siegenthaler, representing the third generation of a family committed to environmental and ethical causes,
Boris Siegenthaler, founder and Chief Strategy Officer of Infomaniak, who chairs the Board during an initial three-year phase.

The Shareholding Charter: 9 principles set in stone

At the heart of the structure is a founding document signed before a notary: the Shareholding Charter. This Charter defines what the Foundation must defend as Infomaniak’s reference shareholder. It sets out 9 fundamental principles that form the company’s DNA. These principles can be strengthened by the Foundation Board, but never weakened. That is what makes the commitment unshakable.

I. Independence

To ensure the means to remain faithful to the company’s mission and values over the long term, by subordinating profit to the project’s longevity and intended impact, in order to build, invest, and decide freely in the interest of future generations and the living world.

II. Digital sovereignty

To anchor technological mastery where the data resides. Sovereignty is built through mastery of code (open or local) and key skills, ensuring that technological value is created and retained within the local ecosystem.

III. Privacy

Data entrusted by customers remains their property or, failing that, under their exclusive control. It may only be used strictly to deliver the service requested. Any use beyond this, including the training of AI models, must be disabled by default and may only take place with explicit, free, and revocable consent.

IV. Environmental responsibility

The ecological impact of all activities must be avoided at source and continuously reduced. Procurement choices favour proximity to the place of operation, in order to limit transport-related emissions and avoid circumventing environmental standards. All CO₂ emissions generated must be offset through projects whose reduction effect is real, measurable, and verifiable.

V. Useful and accessible innovation

Technology must serve real needs, favouring open source and open standards. Any technical lock-in must be justified, documented, and periodically reviewed. Prices reflect the real cost of the service, with no rent-seeking or abusive margins. Essential digital tools must remain accessible to as many people as possible.

VI. Transparency

Transparency is the condition of trust. Telling the truth, acknowledging shortcomings, and reporting on results are absolute duties towards customers, shareholders, and employees.

VII. Local roots

The value created must primarily benefit the territory that made it possible. Jobs and suppliers are chosen by prioritising the local territory, then the continent, and only out of necessity the rest of the world. Offshoring driven by financial optimisation is contrary to the spirit of the founder and of this Charter.

VIII. Working life

The company is a place that supports those who bring it to life. Each person must practise work that is meaningful to them, and put that meaning at the service of a single requirement: respecting the customers whose trust makes the company possible. Working hours are respected, overtime is compensated, and pay is kept as fair as the company’s means allow.

IX. Sustainable prosperity

The sustainability of the mission requires a company that is consistently profitable. Profits first fund research, development, and sovereign infrastructure, then reward shareholders. When the accounts allow, a share of up to 5% of profit is paid to the Foundation for its public-interest purposes.

Each year, Infomaniak will be accountable to the Foundation for upholding these 9 principles, through a public impact report. This is the mechanism that turns commitment into measurable reality.

Strengthened corporate governance

Alongside the creation of the Foundation, the Board of Directors of Infomaniak Group has been strengthened to structure the next stage of its development. Beyond Boris Siegenthaler and Frank Guemara, an Infomaniak director and corporate finance specialist, two independent directors have joined the Board:

Patricia Solioz Mathys, Vice-Chair of the Board of Directors, with extensive experience leading major Swiss public bodies and industrial services.
Paul Such, a recognised cybersecurity expert in Switzerland, head of Swiss Post Cybersecurity and founder of several companies.

Two independent committees have also been set up: an Audit and Risk Committee (chaired by Paul Such), which oversees financial soundness and the management of major risks, and a Remuneration Committee (chaired by Patricia Solioz Mathys), which ensures that pay remains aligned with the company’s philosophy. These are the highest governance standards, the kind found in the most solid companies on the market.

The company remains led by its management team: Marc Oehler (CEO), Céline Morey (CFO) and Boris Siegenthaler (CSO), who remains fully engaged in Infomaniak’s strategy.

Why this is unique in Europe

The shareholder-foundation model is not new in Europe. Bosch, Carl Zeiss, Bertelsmann, Rolex, and Victorinox adopted it before us, sometimes more than a century ago.

What makes Infomaniak’s approach distinctive is that to our knowledge, no other European cloud provider has chosen today to place the majority of its voting rights in a public-interest foundation to protect a commitment held since 1994: sovereignty, privacy, the environment, and local roots, all addressed head-on and enshrined in the Foundation’s Shareholding Charter.

In Europe, several cloud providers have ended up in the portfolios of foreign investment funds. Infomaniak, on the other hand, is now majority-owned by a Swiss public-interest foundation, whose primary mission is the public good. It is today a cloud used by millions of users and hundreds of thousands of businesses and institutions across Europe.

“Our independence isn’t a promise. It’s a structure. This foundation is the culmination of thirty years of commitment and guarantees that Infomaniak will continue to serve a form of technology that serves people, respects the planet, and preserves Europe’s autonomy, well beyond the people who make it happen today.”

— Boris Siegenthaler, founder of Infomaniak and Chair of the Infomaniak Foundation

Pioneers of the sovereign Web, with DNA unique in Europe

Infomaniak’s story begins in 1990 with Boris Siegenthaler, in a computing club in Bellevue, run by a group of Geneva enthusiasts. In 1994, the club gave rise to a computer shop in Châtelaine, which assembled and sold PCs for CHF 1,500 when others were charging 3,000. Very quickly, Infomaniak turned to the Internet and offered free access when operators were charging CHF 150 per month, then web hosting for CHF 200 per year when others were charging the same per month. Between 1994 and 1998, more than 40,000 Geneva residents got online thanks to Infomaniak. That was the original idea: to democratise technology.

Between 1994 and 1998, we made Internet access accessible to all when operators treated it as a luxury product.
In 2007, we signed our first environmental charter when no one was yet talking about the carbon footprint of technology.
In 2013, we removed refrigerant-based cooling from our data centres, since cooled solely with filtered outside air, and became a full cloud operator with mastery of OpenStack.
In 2021, we launched our sovereign Public Cloud, 100% Swiss, at a time when dependence on American hyperscalers was beginning to worry European institutions.
In 2022, we launched kSuite, a sovereign collaborative alternative to Microsoft 365 and Google Workspace, well before digital sovereignty became a European political issue.

When Google and Microsoft rewrite their terms and conditions every two years, in response to controversies or new use cases, we have defended the same things from the start: we never resell your data and we don’t use it to train our AI models without your explicit consent. When some offshored their support, outsourced their development, or sold out to investment funds, Infomaniak did the opposite: we design, develop, and operate everything in Switzerland, with 100% of our staff on site.

Environmental commitment, long before it became a topic

This commitment is nothing new. It has shaped our technical choices for nearly twenty years. Our data centres have energy efficiency among the best in the world (a PUE, the industry’s benchmark indicator, among the lowest), and our water consumption is also very low, because we cool our data centres with filtered outside air, without mechanical air conditioning.

We keep our servers for up to 15 years, compared with 3 to 5 years in the rest of the industry. Our electricity is 100% renewable, including 30% that we generate ourselves through our own solar plants equipped with modules entirely manufactured in Europe. And since 2018, we have offset 200% of our carbon emissions (100% since 2007).

Our fourth-generation data centre goes further: it recovers 100% of the electricity it consumes as heat. Located in the basement of an eco-district, it heats 6,000 households in winter and provides daily showers for 20,000 people in summer. All of this is documented in open source at d4project.org, so other players can take inspiration from it.

100% Swiss expertise, with no outsourcing

Our data centres are built, operated, and secured in Switzerland, with no foreign outsourcing. Our cloud platforms and software are designed, developed, and operated by our teams. Our supplier partners are also local wherever possible.

And behind this infrastructure, 100% of our team is in Switzerland, in Geneva and Zurich. Not 200 people in Switzerland and 2,000 in Vietnam. Everyone here. And unlike the web giants that rely on tax engineering, we also pay all our taxes in Switzerland.

For you, this translates into concrete commitments. Your data is in Switzerland, beyond the reach of the Cloud Act (US legislation on data access) and other extraterritorial laws. It is never resold, never exploited, and access to it is strictly controlled. And if you want to leave, you leave the way you came: open formats, documented APIs, no exit fees. We believe we should earn your loyalty, not lock it in.

We go further still: 1% of our annual growth is donated to NGOs such as Agent Green, Amnesty International, Reclaim Finance, Public Eye, Wikimedia, and Kokopelli.

What next? Growing, without betraying ourselves

The Foundation is now the guardian of Infomaniak’s DNA and mission. This structure sets the necessary precondition for any future evolution of the shareholding. From now on, Infomaniak can accelerate its development and bring in, in complete safety, the resources needed for its growth, without ever compromising the commitments made to its customers. Over the coming months, the company will gradually open up part of its capital to investors aligned with its values, in order to develop a sovereign cloud on a European scale, in a context where digital sovereignty is a strategic issue.

No takeover, sale, or change of control can now take place without the Foundation’s approval, which guarantees Infomaniak’s independence and mission over time. Infomaniak can never be sold or diverted from its mission.

Choosing Infomaniak is a strategic choice

From today:

A protected decision-making structure: the Foundation holds the majority of voting rights in the form of special non-transferable shares, a transfer unanimously approved by all shareholders.
Our commitments are enshrined in the Foundation’s Shareholding Charter: digital sovereignty, respect for privacy, environmental responsibility, local roots. Any structural change requires the Foundation’s approval, and the Foundation can only strengthen these principles, never weaken them.
Growing without ever betraying ourselves: Infomaniak can continue to develop, invest, and welcome new shareholders if useful to its mission. The Foundation, as majority shareholder, ensures that the company’s DNA remains preserved across every decision affecting its identity.
The company remains led by its team: the Foundation makes no operational decisions. The management team continues to run Infomaniak as before.
Up to 5% of annual profit paid to the Foundation, which will fund independent projects in digital sovereignty, ethical technology, the environment, and the energy transition.

Frequently asked questions (and a message to our customers)

Will my contract, my data, or my services change?

Nothing changes for customers. The governance has evolved, but the team, the services, the prices, and your data all remain strictly the same.

Who runs Infomaniak today?

The same management team: Marc Oehler (CEO), Céline Morey (CFO) and Boris Siegenthaler (CSO). The Foundation makes no operational, commercial, or technical decisions. It acts only as a safeguard over independence and values.

Can the Foundation’s Charter be modified?

Swiss law strictly governs the modification of the statutes of a public-interest foundation: any change requires approval from the cantonal supervisory authorities, can only happen in exceptional cases, and must remain faithful to the founder’s intent. The Shareholding Charter signed before a notary sets out the framework the Foundation must uphold: its principles (sovereignty, privacy, environment, local roots) can be strengthened by the Foundation Board, but never weakened. The structure is designed so that the values can only move forward, never back, even as the people running the company today change.

What if Infomaniak opens up its capital to investors in the future?

That’s the plan: Infomaniak will gradually open up its capital to accelerate the development of a sovereign cloud on a European scale. This opening may take several forms depending on needs and market conditions. Whatever form is chosen, the Foundation retains the majority of voting rights, which guarantees that the company’s DNA, mission, and commitments remain preserved. This is precisely what this structure makes possible: growing, without betraying ourselves.

How is the Foundation funded?

Through a share of up to 5% of Infomaniak’s annual profit.

Where can I find out more?

The dedicated website: fondation-infomaniak.ch
The Infomaniak Foundation’s Shareholding Charter
The statutes of the Infomaniak Foundation
Infomaniak’s Governance and Investors pages

To you, who have made Infomaniak over the past 32 years

If Infomaniak has been able to maintain its independence all these years, it’s also thanks to you.
To those who joined us at the beginning, when we were just a computing club in Geneva.
To those who are discovering us today and choosing a different, more respectful cloud.
To all the employees who have contributed to building Infomaniak.

This independence is your victory too. Without you, none of this would have been possible. Thank you.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

7. Japan is gripped by mass allergies. A 1950s project is to blame

Source: https://www.bbc.com/future/article/20260515-the-1950s-blunder-which-causes-mass-hay-fever-in-japan
Site: BBC
Author: Nithin Coca
Published: 2026-05-19
HN activity: 115 points · 42 comments
Length: 1.9K words (~9 min read)
Language: en-GB

1 day ago

Nithin Coca

Getty Images

(Credit: Getty Images)

A decision made 70 years ago to reforest vast swathes of Japan with just two kinds of tree has come back to haunt the country.

In February, videos showing what looked like waves of smoke blowing off an evergreen forest went viral in Japan. It wasn't smoke – it was pollen, and the videos were a warning to tens of millions of residents of the archipelago nation: prepare your masks and allergy medicine.

Every spring (which is already arriving earlier in Japan due to climate change) you'll see people of all ages wearing masks on the streets of cities across the country. The reason: hay fever, driven by all the pollen.

Pollen allergies have become a national health issue in Japan – Noriko Sato

As well as the discomfort, these allergies can lead to sleep loss and poor concentration, and sufferers are more likely to experience other conditions such as asthma and food allergies. At the peak of Japan's hay fever season, the economic impact from both sick days and lower consumer spending is estimated at $1.6bn (£1.2bn) per day.

So why does Japan have such bad allergies? The reason has little to do with poor health or pollution, or even the natural environment, but decisions made by leaders more than 70 years ago in the decades after World War Two.

An overlooked crisis

During the war, oil and gas shortages led Japan to turn to the nation's most abundant natural resource – forests – as a source of fuel for home and industry. The result was widespread deforestation of natural forests, with the mountains around major cities like Tokyo, Osaka and Kobe completely stripped bare of trees.

"After World War Two, many of Japan's mountains became barren, causing disasters in various regions," says Noriko Sato, a professor and forestry researcher at Kyushu University in Fukuoka, Japan. (Bare mountains can increase the incidence of landslides and flooding). "Large-scale afforestation was carried out by public works, funded by tax revenues, to prevent soil erosion."

Aiming for rapid reforestation, the government chose to plant reams of only two different native, fast-growing evergreen species that could quickly reforest landscapes and provide wood for future use in construction: the Japanese cedar, sugi, and the Japanese cypress, hinoki.

Getty Images

Each spring in Japan, reams of pollen waft off Japanese cedar and cypress plantations, often floating towards cities where it causes hay fever (Credit: Getty Images)

The problem is, sugi and hinoki trees also produce large amounts of lightweight pollen which can easily drift into cities. It's this pollen, often released all at once from the monoculture plantations, that is responsible for most seasonal allergies in Japan. The issue has become all the worse since these trees release ever more pollen after maturing at 30 years of age – now the case for nearly all of them.

"Pollen allergies have become a national health issue in Japan," says Sato. "Addressing this problem is urgent."

In 2023, Japan declared allergies a national social problem and the central government set out an ambitious plan – reduce pollen by 50% in 30 years. As a first step, it aims to reduce the forest areas planted with sugi trees by 20%.

But swapping out forests covering over 2% of Japan in 10 years is a massive endeavour. Plus, simply cutting these trees down won't be enough – they also need to be replaced with new forests to avoid soil erosion or accidentally undercutting Japan's own climate targets.

Return to life

Walking through sugi or hinoki plantation forests is eerie – all the trees are the same height and there are few birds or insects. The ground is spongy with dry needles, and there's little light or sound.

Across Japan, forests can be found right by cities. Japanese even has a word for the transition area between city and forest: satoyama.

Alamy

Japanese people spend huge amounts on anti-allergy products, and the country is developing new medicines from long-lasting treatments to anti-allergy rice (Credit: Alamy)

Still, even before the 2023 government declaration, some local actors and non-profits had begun efforts to turn these forests into biodiverse ecosystems, and some are already seeing the benefits. The small town of Nishiawakura, Okayama, for example, has created an entire economy around reducing the 84% of its forests made up only of hinoki and sugi, turning wood into heat for eel farms as well as chopsticks and timber.

In 2020, Kobe, a larger port city in central Japan with a dense urban core and vast forests within its city limits, began an effort to turn more than 180 hectares (445 acres) of plantation back into natural broadleaf forests in a 15-year cycle.

Every year, an area is selectively clear-cut, removing sugi, hinoki but also other invasive species like bamboo. Broadleaf trees are left, and with more sun coming through to the ground, they grow back, along with other new seedlings either planted by staff or brought by birds or animals.

With its scheme now about halfway done, local government workers say they have been pleasantly surprised by how quickly biodiversity has returned.

"Our wildlife monitoring is showing more animals and insects returning, including badgers, pond turtles, many species of frogs, and rare insects too, which is encouraging," says Atsushi Okada, head of the Kobe City Environmental Bureau.

As well as addressing the pollen issue, the scheme aims to fulfil the Kobe's pledge to increase its protected areas to 30% of all land by 2030. More diverse forests should also protect the city against the landslides and natural disasters poised to become more frequent due to climate change, says Daisuke Tochimoto, a forester with the City of Kobe.

As for the cut trees, they are used for heating, furniture production and Japanese white charcoal, a smoke-free barbeque fuel which could also be used in industrial processes. The hope is that, over time, the project can become financially sustainable and not reliant on public funds, says Okada.

An epic challenge

Similar projects are beginning in other parts of Japan. One project in Hotani, Osaka, is now restoring wetlands and grasslands. And the largest effort aims to turn 10,000 hectares (25,000 acres) of plantation forests in Gumna prefecture to meadows and mixed deciduous woodland.

City of Kobe

Kobe's dense urban core is surrounded by vast forests, including both mixed woodlands and sugi plantations – a significant cause of hay fever (Credit: City of Kobe)

Smaller-scale projects are also common, says Akira Mori, a professor of biodiversity and ecosystem services at the University of Tokyo, pointing to dozens of initiatives around Japan.

Since the goal of removing 20% of the plantations was announced, the country has designated approximately 980,000 hectares (2.4 million acres) of sugi plantation forests as areas for focused logging and replanting. Still, not all of this is being turned into broadleaf forests: some of it is fresh plantations, often planted with low-pollen or pollen free sugi.

Japan's ministry of agriculture, forestry and fisheries did not respond to a request for comment on how much of this allocated area has been removed and replanted so far.

And even if it achieves the goal, 80% of the plantation forests will remain. So Japan is also trying other ways to tackle hay fever.

Pollen data and forecasts, for example, are being used to better understand of where dispersion is likely, allowing authorities to selectively cut down the worst offending forests, and researchers are even looking at spraying trees with solutions to suppress pollen. In 2023, one forecasting company distributed thousands of pollen-detecting robots – whose eyes go different colours depending on pollen levels – across Japan.

A careful transition

FPCJ

A recently clear-cut plot at Kobe's 180-hectare restoration project shows signs of regeneration, with pink tags showing native broadleaf trees (Credit: FPCJ)

Of course, if Japan is going to exploit its forests, it has to avoid the same mistakes made in Southeast Asia, where cheap wood means the clear-cutting of tropical forests. Junichi Mishiba, forest project coordinator at the non-profit Friends of the Earth Japan, worries that more incentives to cut down trees is leading to bad environmental practices. "There is an increase in clear-cut areas resulting from policies promoting harvesting," he says.

To support its efforts to replace the plantations, in 2024 the national government began collecting a new tax of 1000 yen ($6/£5) per year on all residents. The money is being used to support sustainable forestry, including reducing plantation forests and replacing older sugi with new, low-pollen seedlings, especially in urban areas.

Data on its impact is not yet available, but Mori argues the support is not enough, with municipalities often lacking the capacity and expertise to design and monitor such changes to forests. A 2023 report by the Forest Declaration Assessment noted that in recent years, only 30-40% of Japan's newly harvested land has been replanted

Good forest management will be essential, agrees Mika Akesaka, an associate professor of economics at Kobe University. Leaving felled trees unmanaged, for example, can increase landslide risk and reduce water retention capacity, she says.

Mishiba, though, fears that by focusing only on seasonal allergies rather than wider ecological indicators, Japan is once again prioritising short-term solutions. The country needs to think 50 or even 100 years ahead, he says, considering biodiversity, climate and the role of the people who will live alongside these forests.

Japan's ministry of agriculture, forestry and fisheries did not respond to a request for comment on these concerns.

Climate threat

Urgency to act is also growing because of another unplanned factor – climate change. Around the world, temperature and weather shifts are impacting pollen spread and Japan saw its earliest pollen dispersal ever in 2025.

Getty Images

It's not just people: animals can suffer from hay fever too, such as this Japanese macaque monkey in Sumoto, Japan in 2014 (Credit: Getty Images)

"Pollen dispersal is greatly influenced by weather conditions such as temperature and wind," says Mai Sato, a spokesperson with the Japan Weather Association (JWA), a forecasting company which releases regular pollen forecasts to the public.

More like this:

Still, since 2004 Japan has seen a declining trend in the yearly amount being absorbed which it attributes to the maturity of its forests. Research has shown that since ageing trees absorb less carbon, thinning forests of old trees and planting new, younger and more diverse species will be essential to keeping Japan's forests an effective carbon sink.

Japan's ministry of agriculture, forestry and fisheries did not respond to a request for comment on how the plans to replant sugi and hinoki forests may impact its climate goals.

Before the 1960s, Japan didn't even have a word for hay fever. Japanese cedar pollinosis was first identified in 1963 and, according to researchers at the time, was new to the country. The hope is that with the return of more natural, diverse forests, Japan can one day go back to enjoying its springs – without the sneezes.

--

For more science, technology, environment and health stories from the BBC, follow us on Facebook and Instagram.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

8. Google changes its search box

Source: https://blog.google/products-and-platforms/products/search/search-io-2026/
Site: Google
Author: Elizabeth Reid
Published: 2026-05-19
HN activity: 556 points · 738 comments
Length: 1.3K words (~6 min read)
Language: en-us

May 19, 2026

We’re bringing our advanced model capabilities to Search with new AI features, enabling you to use agents just by asking a question. We’re also introducing a new, intelligent AI-powered Search box, marking its biggest upgrade in over 25 years.

In this story

Powerful AI
Search agents
Agentic coding
Personal Intelligence

The goal of Search has always been simple: to help you ask anything on your mind — from quick facts to the deep, complex or hyper-specific questions that can be hard to articulate.

To make this possible, we’ve continued to reimagine what Search can do with AI. The momentum has been incredible: Just one year after its debut, AI Mode has surpassed one billion monthly users, with queries more than doubling every quarter since launch. As people have realized just how much more Search can do for them, they’re searching more than ever before — so much so that last quarter, we saw queries reach an all-time high.

Today at I/O, we shared the next step in our journey to bring together the best of a search engine with the best of AI. Here's a look at what we announced.

Powerful AI, right in Search

Starting today, we’re upgrading Search with Gemini 3.5 Flash — our newest Flash model delivering sustained frontier performance for agents and coding — as the new default model in AI Mode for everyone globally.

Because your curiosity doesn’t always fit into keywords, we’re also introducing the biggest upgrade to our Search box in over 25 years — now completely reimagined with AI. This intelligent Search box puts our most powerful AI tools right at your fingertips, making it easier to ask your questions.

It’s more intuitive than ever, dynamically expanding to give you space to describe exactly what you need. Designed to anticipate your intent, it also helps you formulate your question with AI-powered suggestions that go beyond autocomplete. And you can search across modalities, using text, images, files, videos or Chrome tabs as inputs. You’ll continue to get a range of results from Search, just like you do today. The new intelligent Search box is starting to roll out today, in all countries and languages where AI Mode is available.

We’re also making it even simpler to continue the conversation with Search. You can easily ask a follow-up question right from an AI Overview, and flow into a conversational back and forth with AI Mode. Your context stays with you, and as you explore more deeply, the links and supporting articles get even more relevant. This seamless experience is live today across desktop and mobile, worldwide.

Search agents

We’re entering the era of Search agents, where you can easily create, customize and manage multiple AI agents for your many tasks, right in Search. We’re starting with information agents. Operating in the background, 24/7, these agents intelligently reason across information to find exactly what you need at exactly the right moment.

With information agents, you can stay updated on whatever matters most to you. Your agent will intelligently look across everything on the web, like blogs, news sites and social posts, plus our freshest data, such as real-time info on finance, shopping and sports, to monitor for changes related to your specific question.

It will send you an intelligent, synthesized update, with the ability to take action. So if you’re apartment hunting, you can brain dump all of the exact requirements you’re looking for, and your agent will continuously scan for you, notifying you when listings meet your needs. Or if you want to know the instant any of your favorite pro athletes announce a sneaker collab, your agent will let you know when a new drop lands so you don’t miss out. Information agents will launch first for Google AI Pro & Ultra subscribers this summer.

We’re also expanding agentic booking capabilities in Search to a wide range of new tasks, including local experiences and services. Just share your specific criteria — like finding a private karaoke room for six on a Friday night that serves food late — and Search brings together the latest pricing and availability with direct links to finish booking through the provider of your choice. And for select categories like home repair, beauty or pet care, you can ask Google to call businesses on your behalf. These capabilities will roll out to everyone in the U.S. this summer.

We're also introducing new agentic capabilities to help you shop in Search. Read more in our Shopping blog post.

Agentic coding in Search

We’re bringing the power of Google Antigravity and the agentic coding capabilities of Gemini 3.5 Flash right into Search. Search can build the ideal response, in the right format for your question — completely on the fly. So you can get custom generative UI, including visual tools and simulations, tailored precisely to your needs.

Whether you want to wrap your mind around astrophysics or visualize how your watch works, Search can design custom layouts, assembling components (like interactive visuals, tables, graphs or simulations) in real-time. These generative UI capabilities will be available for everyone in Search this summer, free of charge.

But often, you aren’t asking one-off questions — you have an ongoing task you find yourself searching for over and over, like planning a wedding or managing a home move. Search can go a step further, building you custom dashboards or trackers that you can continue to come back to and make progress on. You can think of these like mini apps for your own specific tasks.

Say you’re looking to establish a new health and wellness routine. You can ask Search to build you a custom fitness tracker. Search will code it for you, tapping into fresh, real-time sources including reviews, live maps and local data like the weather, so you get a tracker that works for you, helping you stay on track week after week.

You’ll be able to build custom experiences with Antigravity, like mini apps, right in Search in the coming months, starting first for Google AI Pro and Ultra subscribers in the U.S.

Expanded Personal Intelligence in Search

Finally, for AI to be most helpful, it shouldn't just know the world’s information, it should understand your context, too. So today, we’re expanding Personal Intelligence in AI Mode to more people in nearly 200 countries and territories across 98 languages — no subscription required. You can securely connect apps like Gmail and Google Photos, and soon Google Calendar. Personal Intelligence was designed with transparency, choice and control at its core. You’re always in control — you choose if and when you want to connect apps like Gmail and Google Photos.

This is the next chapter of Google Search: intelligent AI that puts the world’s information to work for you. So ask whatever’s on your mind, and Search can now do more for you than ever before.

Get more stories from Google in your inbox.

Done. Just one step more.

Check your inbox to confirm your subscription.

You are already subscribed to our newsletter.

You can also subscribe with a

About the author

Elizabeth Reid

VP, Search

Elizabeth (Liz) Reid leads the Search organization at Google. Liz joined Google in 2003 as the company’s first female engineer in its New York office and was part of the team that built Google Local, the foundation for much of the local information within Google Maps today. Since 2021, Liz has led teams reimagining the Search experience by helping people ask questions in entirely new ways, like with Lens and multisearch; making authentic, human voices more accessible; and transforming how people navigate and understand information with generative AI. Read more from Elizabeth

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

9. Show HN: Forge – Guardrails take an 8B model from 53% to 99% on agentic tasks

Source: https://github.com/antoinezambelli/forge
Site: GitHub
Submitter: zambelli (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-19 12:23 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 497 points · 174 comments
Length: 1.1K words (~5 min read)
Language: en

A reliability layer for self-hosted LLM tool-calling. Forge lifts an 8B local model to the top of its class on multi-step agentic workflows through guardrails (rescue parsing, retry nudges, step enforcement) and context management (VRAM-aware budgets, tiered compaction). The current top self-hosted config (Ministral-3 8B Instruct Q8 on llama-server) scores 86.5% across forge's 26-scenario eval suite — and 76% on the hardest tier.

Three ways to use it:

WorkflowRunner — Define tools, pick a backend, run structured agent loops. Forge manages the full lifecycle: system prompts, tool execution, context compaction, and guardrails. SlotWorker adds priority-queued access to a shared inference slot with auto-preemption — for multi-agent architectures where specialist workflows share a GPU slot. Best when you're building on forge directly.

Guardrails middleware — Use forge's reliability stack (composable middleware) inside your own orchestration loop. You control the loop; forge validates responses, rescues malformed tool calls, and enforces required steps.

Proxy server — Drop-in OpenAI-compatible proxy (python -m forge.proxy) that sits between any client (opencode, Continue, aider, etc.) and a local model server. Applies guardrails transparently — the client thinks it's talking to a smarter model.

Supports Ollama, llama-server (llama.cpp), Llamafile, and Anthropic as backends.

Requirements

Python 3.12+
A running LLM backend (see below)

Install

pip install forge-guardrails                # core only
pip install "forge-guardrails[anthropic]"   # + Anthropic client

For development:

git clone https://github.com/antoinezambelli/forge.git
cd forge
pip install -e ".[dev]"

Backend setup (pick one)

llama-server (recommended — top 10 eval configs all run on llama-server):

# Install from https://github.com/ggml-org/llama.cpp/releases
llama-server -m path/to/Ministral-3-8B-Instruct-2512-Q8_0.gguf --jinja -ngl 999 --port 8080

Ollama (alternative — easier setup, slightly weaker on harder workloads):

# Install from https://ollama.com/download
ollama pull ministral-3:8b-instruct-2512-q4_K_M

Anthropic (API, no local GPU needed):

pip install -e ".[anthropic]"
export ANTHROPIC_API_KEY=sk-...

See Backend Setup for full instructions and Model Guide for which model fits your hardware.

Quick Start

import asyncio
from pydantic import BaseModel, Field
from forge import (
    Workflow, ToolDef, ToolSpec,
    WorkflowRunner, OllamaClient,
    ContextManager, TieredCompact,
)

def get_weather(city: str) -> str:
    return f"72°F and sunny in {city}"

class GetWeatherParams(BaseModel):
    city: str = Field(description="City name")

workflow = Workflow(
    name="weather",
    description="Look up weather for a city.",
    tools={
        "get_weather": ToolDef(
            spec=ToolSpec(
                name="get_weather",
                description="Get current weather",
                parameters=GetWeatherParams,
            ),
            callable=get_weather,
        ),
    },
    required_steps=[],
    terminal_tool="get_weather",
    system_prompt_template="You are a helpful assistant. Use the available tools to answer the user.",
)

async def main():
    client = OllamaClient(model="ministral-3:8b-instruct-2512-q4_K_M", recommended_sampling=True)
    ctx = ContextManager(strategy=TieredCompact(keep_recent=2), budget_tokens=8192)
    runner = WorkflowRunner(client=client, context_manager=ctx)
    await runner.run(workflow, "What's the weather in Paris?")

asyncio.run(main())

For multi-step workflows, multi-turn conversations, and backend auto-management, see the User Guide. If you're building a long-running session (CLI, chat server, voice assistant), see the long-running session advisory for important guidance on filtering transient messages.

Proxy Server

Drop-in replacement for a local model server. Point any OpenAI-compatible client at the proxy and get forge's guardrails for free.

# External mode — you manage llama-server, forge proxies it
python -m forge.proxy --backend-url http://localhost:8080 --port 8081

# Managed mode — forge starts llama-server and the proxy together
python -m forge.proxy --backend llamaserver --gguf path/to/model.gguf --port 8081

Then configure your client to use http://localhost:8081/v1 as the API base URL.

Note: The proxy automatically injects a synthetic respond tool when tools are present in the request. The model calls respond(message="...") instead of producing bare text, keeping it in tool-calling mode where forge's full guardrail stack applies. The respond call is stripped from the outbound response — the client sees a normal text response (finish_reason: "stop") and never knows the tool exists. This is essential for small local models (~8B), which cannot be trusted to choose correctly between text and tool calls — guiding them to a tool is a must. See ADR-013 for the full analysis.

Backends

Backend Best for Native FC?
Ollama Easiest setup, model management built-in Yes
llama-server Best performance, full control Yes (with --jinja)
Llamafile Single binary, zero dependencies No (prompt-injected)
Anthropic Frontier baseline, hybrid workflows Yes

See Backend Setup for installation and Model Guide for which model to pick.

Running Tests

python -m pytest tests/ -v --tb=short

python -m pytest tests/ --cov=forge --cov-report=term-missing

Eval Harness

26 scenarios measuring how reliably a model + backend combo navigates multi-step tool-calling workflows — split into an OG-18 baseline tier and an 8-scenario advanced_reasoning tier for top-end separation. See Eval Guide for full CLI reference.

# llama-server (start in another terminal first; see Eval Guide)
python -m tests.eval.eval_runner --backend llamafile --llamafile-mode prompt --gguf "path/to/Ministral-3-8B-Instruct-2512-Q8_0.gguf" --runs 10 --stream --verbose

# Batch eval (JSONL output, automatic resume)
python -m tests.eval.batch_eval --config all --runs 50

# Reports (ASCII table, HTML dashboard, markdown views)
python -m tests.eval.report eval_results.jsonl

Project Structure

src/forge/
  __init__.py          # Public API exports
  errors.py            # ForgeError hierarchy
  server.py            # setup_backend(), ServerManager, BudgetMode
  core/
    messages.py        # Message, MessageRole, MessageType, MessageMeta
    workflow.py        # ToolSpec, ToolDef, ToolCall, TextResponse, Workflow
    inference.py       # run_inference() — shared front half (compact, fold, validate, retry)
    runner.py          # WorkflowRunner — the agentic loop
    slot_worker.py     # SlotWorker — priority-queued slot access
    steps.py           # StepTracker
  guardrails/
    nudge.py           # Nudge dataclass
    response_validator.py  # ResponseValidator, ValidationResult
    step_enforcer.py   # StepEnforcer, StepCheck
    error_tracker.py   # ErrorTracker
  clients/
    base.py            # ChunkType, StreamChunk, LLMClient protocol
    ollama.py          # OllamaClient (native FC)
    llamafile.py       # LlamafileClient (native FC or prompt-injected)
    anthropic.py       # AnthropicClient (frontier baseline)
  context/
    manager.py         # ContextManager, CompactEvent
    strategies.py      # CompactStrategy, NoCompact, TieredCompact, SlidingWindowCompact
    hardware.py        # HardwareProfile, detect_hardware()
  prompts/
    templates.py       # Tool prompt builders (prompt-injected path)
    nudges.py          # Retry and step-enforcement nudge templates
  tools/
    respond.py         # Synthetic respond tool (respond_tool(), respond_spec())
  proxy/
    proxy.py           # ProxyServer — programmatic start/stop API
    server.py          # Raw asyncio HTTP server, SSE streaming
    handler.py         # Request handler — bridge between HTTP and run_inference
    convert.py         # OpenAI messages ↔ forge Messages conversion
tests/
  unit/                # 865 deterministic tests — no LLM backend required
  eval/                # Eval harness — model qualification against real backends


Documentation

User Guide — Usage patterns, multi-turn, context management, guardrails, slot worker, long-running session advisory
Model Guide — Which model and backend for your hardware
Backend Setup — Backend installation and server setup
Eval Guide — Eval harness CLI reference, batch eval
Architecture — Full design document
Workflow Internals — Workflow design and runner internals
Contributing — How to set up, test, and add new backends or scenarios

Paper

The forge guardrail framework and ablation study are published as:

Zambelli, A. Forge: A Reliability Layer for Self-Hosted LLM Tool-Calling. https://doi.org/10.1145/3786335.3813193

A pre-publication preprint is also available at docs/forge_ieee_preprint.pdf — kept as a historical artifact. Cite the published version above; the DOI link may not resolve immediately depending on the publisher's release timing.

License

MIT — Copyright (c) 2025-2026 Antoine Zambelli

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

10. Remove-AI-Watermarks – CLI and library for removing AI watermarks from images

Source: https://github.com/wiltodelta/remove-ai-watermarks
Site: GitHub
Submitter: janalsncm (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-19 22:30 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 287 points · 169 comments
Length: 1.8K words (~8 min read)
Language: en

Remove visible and invisible AI watermarks from images generated by Google Gemini (Nano Banana), ChatGPT / DALL-E, Stable Diffusion, Adobe Firefly, Midjourney, and other AI models.

Strips SynthID, C2PA Content Credentials, EXIF/XMP "Made with AI" labels, and visible sparkle overlays — all in one command.

Features

Visible watermark removal — Gemini / Nano Banana sparkle logo via reverse alpha blending (fast, offline, deterministic)
Invisible watermark removal — SynthID, StableSignature, TreeRing via diffusion-based regeneration
AI metadata stripping — EXIF, PNG text chunks, C2PA provenance manifests (PNG / JPEG / AVIF / HEIF / JPEG-XL), XMP DigitalSourceType
"Made with AI" label removal — removes the metadata that triggers AI labels on Instagram, Facebook, X (Twitter)
Analog Humanizer — film grain and chromatic aberration to bypass AI image classifiers
Smart Face Protection — automatic extraction and blending of human faces to prevent AI distortion
Batch processing — process entire directories
Detection — three-stage NCC watermark detection with confidence scoring

Try it online — don't want to install anything? Use raiw.cc, a free web service powered by this library.

Examples

Before (Watermarked) After (Cleaned)

Supported models

AI model Visible watermark Invisible watermark Metadata Our approach
Google Gemini / Nano Banana / Gemini 3 Pro ✅ Sparkle logo ✅ SynthID v1 + v2 (default SDXL pipeline at native ~1024 px) ✅ C2PA + EXIF Alpha reversal + diffusion + metadata strip
OpenAI DALL-E 3 / ChatGPT — — ✅ C2PA manifest Metadata strip
OpenAI ChatGPT Images 2.0 (gpt-image-2) — ⚠️ imperceptible pixel watermark (no public detector yet) ✅ C2PA manifest (verified) Diffusion regeneration + metadata strip
Stable Diffusion (AUTOMATIC1111, ComfyUI) — ✅ DWT / steganographic ✅ PNG text chunks Diffusion regeneration + metadata strip
Adobe Firefly — — ✅ Content Credentials (C2PA) Metadata strip
Midjourney — — ✅ EXIF + XMP (prompt, model, seed) Metadata strip
StableSignature (Meta) — ✅ In-model watermark — Diffusion regeneration
TreeRing — ✅ Latent space watermark — Diffusion regeneration

Visible watermarks (logo overlays) are currently used only by Google Gemini / Nano Banana. Other services rely on invisible watermarks and/or metadata. Our diffusion-based regeneration works against any invisible watermark in pixel or frequency domain.

How it works

Removing the Gemini / Nano Banana sparkle watermark

Google Gemini (internally codenamed Nano Banana) adds a visible sparkle logo to generated images using alpha blending:

watermarked = α × logo + (1 − α) × original


We reverse this with a known alpha map (extracted from Gemini / Nano Banana output on a pure-black background):

original = (watermarked − α × logo) / (1 − α)


A three-stage NCC (Normalized Cross-Correlation) detector finds the watermark position and scale dynamically, so it works even if the image was resized or cropped. After removal, residual sparkle-edge artifacts are cleaned via gradient-masked inpainting.

Speed: ~0.05s per image. No GPU needed.

Removing SynthID and other invisible watermarks

Google embeds SynthID into every image generated by Gemini / Nano Banana. Other AI services use StableSignature, TreeRing, and similar schemes. These imperceptible frequency-domain patterns survive cropping, resizing, and JPEG compression.

The removal pipeline (default profile, SDXL):

image → resize to ~1024px (SDXL native) → encode to latent space (VAE)
      → add controlled noise (forward diffusion)
      → denoise (reverse diffusion, ~50 steps at strength 0.05)
      → decode back to pixels (VAE) → upscale to original resolution


SDXL is the default since May 2026: empirically defeats SynthID v2 on Gemini 3 Pro outputs, where the older SD-1.5 pipeline at 768 px did not. The SD-1.5 path was removed once it was verified not to handle v2.

Face Protection: before diffusion, YOLO detects people in the image and extracts them. After diffusion, the original faces are blended back with a soft elliptical mask to prevent AI distortion of facial features.

Analog Humanizer: optional film grain and chromatic aberration injection that makes the output indistinguishable from a photo of a screen, defeating AI-generated image classifiers.

Stripping C2PA, EXIF, and "Made with AI" metadata

AI tools embed generation metadata that social platforms use to show "Made with AI" labels:

EXIF tags — prompt, seed, model hash, sampler settings (Stable Diffusion, Midjourney)
XMP DigitalSourceType — trainedAlgorithmicMedia tag used by Instagram, Facebook, and X (Twitter) to show "Made with AI"
PNG text chunks — ComfyUI workflows, AUTOMATIC1111 parameters
C2PA Content Credentials — cryptographic provenance manifests from Google Imagen, OpenAI DALL-E, Adobe Firefly

The cleaner parses each layer, removes AI-related fields, and preserves standard metadata (Author, Copyright, Title).

Installation

Recommended

Install as an isolated CLI tool — no need to manage virtual environments:

# Using pipx (https://pipx.pypa.io)
pipx install git+https://github.com/wiltodelta/remove-ai-watermarks.git

# Or using uv (https://docs.astral.sh/uv)
uv tool install git+https://github.com/wiltodelta/remove-ai-watermarks.git

To update to the latest version:

pipx upgrade remove-ai-watermarks

# or
uv tool upgrade remove-ai-watermarks

Install from repository

Prerequisites: Python 3.10+ and pip (or uv).

# 1. Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/wiltodelta/remove-ai-watermarks.git
cd remove-ai-watermarks

# 2. Install the package in editable mode
pip install -e .

# Or, if you use uv:
uv pip install -e .

After installation the remove-ai-watermarks command is available system-wide.

Note: The base install covers visible watermark removal and metadata stripping. For invisible watermark removal (SynthID etc.), install GPU dependencies:

pip install -e ".[gpu]"   # or: uv pip install -e ".[gpu]"

Invisible watermark removal

Invisible removal uses diffusion models and a GPU for reasonable speed.

# On first run, the model (~2 GB) will be downloaded automatically.
# Device is auto-detected: CUDA (Linux/Windows) > MPS (macOS) > CPU.
# To force a device: --device cuda / --device mps / --device cpu

# Optional: set a HuggingFace token for gated/private models
cp .env.example .env
# Edit .env and set HF_TOKEN=hf_your_token_here

Developer setup

# Install with dev dependencies (pytest, ruff, pyright)
pip install -e ".[dev]"
# Or with uv:
uv pip install -e ".[dev]"

# Run tests
pytest

# Run linters
./maintain.sh

Usage

CLI

# Remove all watermarks from a single image (visible + invisible + metadata)
remove-ai-watermarks all image.png -o clean.png

# Process an entire directory
remove-ai-watermarks batch ./images/ --mode all

Individual commands

# Visible watermark only (Gemini / Nano Banana sparkle) — fast, offline
remove-ai-watermarks visible image.png -o clean.png

# Invisible watermark only (SynthID etc.) — requires GPU
remove-ai-watermarks invisible image.png -o clean.png --humanize 4.0

# Check / strip AI metadata (C2PA, EXIF, "Made with AI" labels)
remove-ai-watermarks metadata image.png --check
remove-ai-watermarks metadata image.png --remove

# Batch with a specific mode
remove-ai-watermarks batch ./images/ --mode visible

Python API

from remove_ai_watermarks.gemini_engine import GeminiEngine
import cv2

engine = GeminiEngine()
image = cv2.imread("watermarked.png")

# Detect
result = engine.detect_watermark(image)
print(f"Detected: {result.detected} (confidence: {result.confidence:.1%})")

# Remove
clean = engine.remove_watermark(image)
cv2.imwrite("clean.png", clean)

Metadata stripping

from remove_ai_watermarks.metadata import has_ai_metadata, remove_ai_metadata
from pathlib import Path

if has_ai_metadata(Path("image.png")):
    remove_ai_metadata(Path("image.png"), Path("clean.png"))

Requirements

Python ≥ 3.10
Visible removal / metadata: CPU only, no GPU required
Invisible removal: GPU recommended (CUDA or MPS), works on CPU (slow)

Troubleshooting

SSL certificate error (CERTIFICATE_VERIFY_FAILED):

# Install certifi (the tool auto-detects it)
pip install certifi

# macOS only: run the Python certificate installer
/Applications/Python\ 3.*/Install\ Certificates.command

First run is slow — this is expected. The tool downloads model weights (~2 GB) on first launch. Subsequent runs use cached models.

Credits

noai-watermark by mertizci — invisible watermark removal engine
GeminiWatermarkTool by Allen Kuo (MIT) — visible watermark removal algorithm
CtrlRegen by Liu et al. (ICLR 2025) — controllable regeneration pipeline
NeuralBleach (MIT) — analog humanizer technique

Roadmap

Tracked but not yet implemented:

SynthID-Image v2 automated regression test. The default SDXL profile defeats v2 per manual checks against the Gemini app's "Verify with SynthID" feature on a Gemini 3 Pro output (May 2026). An automated end-to-end test would need either programmatic access to the SynthID Detector portal (waitlist for media professionals and researchers) or an offline surrogate detector. Open.
AVIF / HEIF / JPEG-XL detection limits. Removal strips top-level C2PA uuid and JUMBF jumb boxes. EXIF/XMP boxes inside these containers are not yet scrubbed (PNG and JPEG are fully covered).
Video pipeline (noai-video): per-frame inpainting and tracking for Sora 2 dynamic logo, Veo 3.1 badge, Kling, Runway. Separate package, not folded into this repo.

Won't fix:

Nightshade / Glaze / PhotoGuard removal. These are defensive perturbations used by artists to protect their work from being scraped into AI training sets. Removing them attacks artists, not AI provenance. Out of scope.

Legal

Watermarking and provenance for AI-generated content is now regulated in several jurisdictions. The table below summarises the May 2026 status. None of this is legal advice.

Jurisdiction Instrument Status (May 2026) Relevance
EU AI Act, Article 50(2) Marking obligations postponed to 2 December 2026 under the December 2025 omnibus agreement. Code of Practice finalising May/June 2026. Removing mandated provenance markers with intent to deceive may be sanctioned under national implementations.
US (federal) COPIED Act Enacted 2025. Criminalises removal of provenance information with intent to deceive about content origin. The tool itself is lawful; usage may not be.
US (state) CA AB 2655, TX SB 751, similar In force. Content-specific (election deepfakes, sexual deepfakes). Not tool-specific.
China Deep Synthesis Regulation, 2025 updates In force. Mandatory visible label for AI content. Removal is an administrative offence.
UK Online Safety Act, 2025 transparency extension In force. Platform obligations, not user obligations.

Threat model

This tool defends already-distributed AI imagery against automatic detection systems (social-platform "Made with AI" labels, third-party classifiers, content-policy filters). It does not retroactively anonymise generation.

In particular, SynthID-Image v2 (Google, deployed October 2025 with Gemini 3 Pro / Nano Banana Pro / Imagen 4 / Veo) embeds a 136-bit payload (arxiv 2510.09263). The payload is believed to encode a user / session identifier. If the original watermarked file ever passed through a system controlled by the prompt originator (a saved Gemini account history, a screenshot uploaded to a Google product, a backup), Google retains the ability to link that original to the generating account. Stripping the watermark from a copy you possess does not erase Google's server-side record.

Use cases where the threat model fits:

You generated the image yourself, want to publish it as your own work, and accept the consequences if Google ever publishes their detector logs.
You are running a security / robustness evaluation.
You are preserving art or historical record against false-positive "AI-generated" labels.

Use cases where the threat model does not fit:

Generating an image, expecting that removing the watermark anonymises you to Google. It doesn't.
Distributing AI-generated content while claiming human authorship. The watermark is one of several traceability layers.

This tool is intended for legitimate purposes such as:

Privacy protection (removing metadata that leaks user account identifiers).
Art preservation and fair-use research.
Removing false-positive "Made with AI" labels from human-edited photographs.
Security research and watermark robustness study.

Removing AI provenance markers to misrepresent AI-generated content as human-created may violate the laws above, the DMCA, and platform terms of service. Users are solely responsible for ensuring their use complies with all applicable laws. The authors do not condone use of this tool for deception, fraud, or any activity that violates applicable laws or regulations.

License

MIT

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

11. Apple unveils new accessibility features

Source: https://www.apple.com/newsroom/2026/05/apple-unveils-new-accessibility-features-and-updates-with-apple-intelligence/
Site: Apple Newsroom
Submitter: interpol_p (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-19 12:04 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 676 points · 350 comments
Length: 787 words (~4 min read)
Language: en-US

opens in new window
PRESS RELEASE May 19, 2026
With Apple Intelligence, detailed descriptions and natural language navigation are coming to features such as VoiceOver, Magnifier, Voice Control, and Accessibility Reader

Apple also announced new features for controlling power wheelchairs with Apple Vision Pro and generating subtitles across the Apple ecosystem, all coming later this year
CUPERTINO, CALIFORNIA Apple today previewed a suite of accessibility updates that use Apple Intelligence to bring new capabilities to features users rely on every day, including VoiceOver, Magnifier, Voice Control, and Accessibility Reader.1 Apple also announced on-device generated subtitles for uncaptioned video content coming to the Apple ecosystem, as well as a new feature for Apple Vision Pro users to control compatible wheelchairs with their eyes. These new features, as well as updates using Apple Intelligence, are coming later this year. And starting today, the Hikawa Grip & Stand for iPhone — an adaptive MagSafe accessory designed with accessibility at the core — is available in three vibrant new colors on the Apple Store online.

VoiceOver and Magnifier Can Explore More

A Mac screen displaying a source document with a complex layout and small text.
The Mac screen showing the document reformatted by Accessibility Reader with larger, clearer text in a single column.

Generated Subtitles for Video
While captioning solutions are increasingly common for users who are deaf or hard of hearing, subtitles for spoken dialogue are rarely available for personal videos, content shared by friends and family, and other media. With new generated subtitles, videos can display transcriptions of spoken audio automatically when captions or subtitles are not already provided, including in clips recorded on iPhone, received from friends and family, or streamed online. With on-device speech recognition, subtitles are generated privately and appear automatically for uncaptioned videos on iPhone, iPad, Mac, Apple TV, and Apple Vision Pro. The appearance of subtitles can be customized in the video playback menu or in Settings.4

Additional Updates

Vehicle Motion Cues come to visionOS, which can help reduce motion sickness for people who use Apple Vision Pro as a passenger in a moving vehicle. Vision Pro will also support face gestures for performing taps and system actions, plus a new way to select elements with one’s eyes while using Dwell Control.

Touch Accommodations provide a new way to personalize setup in iOS and iPadOS.

Made for iPhone hearing aids pair and hand off between Apple devices more reliably, with an improved setup experience in iOS, iPadOS, macOS, and visionOS.

Larger Text support is coming to tvOS, so viewers who have low vision can increase onscreen text size to be easier to read.

The Apple TV interface shows a menu for the show “Prehistoric Planet: Ice Age” with the standard text size.
The Apple TV interface shows a control for increasing the text size.
The Apple TV interface shows a menu for the show “Prehistoric Planet: Ice Age” with a larger text size.

Name Recognition, which can notify users who are deaf or hard of hearing if someone says their name, works across more than 50 languages globally.

For sign language interpretation app developers, a new API supports users in adding a human interpreter to an ongoing FaceTime video call.

Those with difficulty interacting with traditional controllers can now connect the Sony Access controller as a game controller with iOS, iPadOS, and macOS. Users can configure the thumbstick, nine built-in buttons, and up to four additional external buttons or specialty switches to personalize layout. They can also combine two controllers for a deeply personalized gaming experience.

Media

Text of this article
Copy text

Media in this article

Apple Intelligence is available in beta with support for these languages: English, Danish, Dutch, French, German, Italian, Norwegian, Portuguese, Spanish, Swedish, Turkish, Vietnamese, Chinese (simplified), Chinese (traditional), Japanese, and Korean. Some features may not be available in all regions or languages. For feature and language availability and system requirements, see support.apple.com/en-us/121115.
VoiceOver and Magnifier should not be relied upon in circumstances where one could be harmed or injured, in high-risk situations, for navigation, or for the diagnosis or treatment of any medical condition.
Voice Control powered by Apple Intelligence will be available in English in the U.S., Canada, the UK, and Australia.
Generated subtitles will be available in English in the U.S. and Canada.
The feature and Apple Vision Pro are intended for use in controlled environments. For more information, visit support.apple.com/en-us/118507.
A wired connection requires the purchase of the Apple Vision Pro Developer Strap.
Customers can purchase the Hikawa Grip & Stand for iPhone on apple.com in Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, China, Denmark, France, Hong Kong, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Singapore, South Korea, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Taiwan, the United Arab Emirates, the UK, and the U.S.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

12. Mistral AI acquires Emmi AI

Source: https://www.emmi.ai/news/mistral-ai-acquires-emmi-ai
Site: emmi.ai
Submitter: doener (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-19 19:14 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 265 points · 80 comments
Length: 688 words (~3 min read)
Language: en

May 19, 2026

European AI leader Mistral AI is acquiring Emmi AI in one of Europe’s most important and strategic AI acquisitions to date.

Founded in Linz, Emmi AI has quickly emerged as one of Europe’s leading Engineering AI companies, developing Physics AI models for industrial engineering that dramatically accelerate industrial simulation and engineering workflows across sectors like energy, automotive, semiconductors, and aerospace.

The acquisition marks a major step in Europe’s industrial AI ambitions. By combining Mistral’s AI platform with Emmi’s deep expertise in engineering and manufacturing, Mistral AI will create the leading AI stack for Industrial Engineering and strengthen its position as the leading AI transformation partner for industrial enterprises.

Emmi’s co-founders and its team of more than 30 researchers and engineers, among the leading experts in Engineering AI globally, will join Mistral AI's Science and Applied AI teams in May 2026.

With this acquisition, Mistral AI accelerates its investment in Europe, in particular in Austria, Germany and Lithuania where the Emmi team is based. It will further hire locally among the best experts in the field. Importantly for Austria, Linz will become an official Mistral AI office alongside Paris, London, Amsterdam, Munich, San Francisco, and Singapore, deepening investment in European industrial AI talent and research.

“This strategic acquisition cements Mistral AI’s leadership in industrial AI and positions us as the partner of choice for manufacturers in high-stakes sectors like aerospace, automotive, or semiconductors. It empowers our customers with a fully integrated platform to solve complex challenges, transform core R&D processes, and accelerate high-value innovation”, said Arthur Mensch, co-founder and CEO, Mistral AI.

“This acquisition marks a turning point for industrial innovation. By engineering the first comprehensive AI stack fueled by Physics AI, we are set to deliver real-time simulations and sophisticated digital twins. We aim to break through long-standing technical barriers that have slowed progress for decades, enabling our partners to solve the world’s most daunting engineering challenges”, added Guillaume Lample, co-founder and Chief Science Officer, Mistral AI.

Johannes Brandstetter, Emmi AI’s co-founder and Chief Science Officer: “This is a pivotal moment for the future of industrial engineering and the broader AI4Science movement. At Emmi AI, we have dedicated ourselves to solving high-stakes physical challenges, ranging from the real-time stabilization of power grids to the intricate simulation of injection molding and automotive safety testing. By integrating our expertise into Mistral’s world-class AI ecosystem, we are positioned to revolutionize core R&D. Together, we are providing the foundational intelligence required to design and build the next generation of aircraft, vehicles, and semiconductors”.

‍

‍

‍

‍

May 14, 2025

Getting Started with AI Models for Physical Simulation

Explore how AI-powered models are transforming physics simulations—from thermodynamics to fluid dynamics—and learn how to get started building or integrating your own models.

Read article

May 14, 2025

Getting Started with AI Models for Physical Simulation

Explore how AI-powered models are transforming physics simulations—from thermodynamics to fluid dynamics—and learn how to get started building or integrating your own models.

Read article

May 14, 2025

Getting Started with AI Models for Physical Simulation

Explore how AI-powered models are transforming physics simulations—from thermodynamics to fluid dynamics—and learn how to get started building or integrating your own models.

Read article

April 25, 2025

Emmi AI raises EUR 15M to bring AI to the heart of industrial engineering

Funding from 3VC, Speedinvest, Serena, and PUSH marks the largest seed round ever raised by an Austrian startup and accelerates Emmi AI’s vision for AI-enabled engineering.

Read article

June 23, 2025

Emmi AI releases AB-UPT: Scaling Neural Surrogates to 100M+ Mesh Cells

Emmi AI presents AB-UPT, a novel architecture that scales neural surrogates for computational fluid dynamics (CFD) to industrial-scale problems with over 100 million mesh cells - achieving state of the art accuracy, mesh free inference, and physics consistent predictions.

Read article

September 3, 2025

NeuralDEM, Now Open Source: Real-Time Deep Learning for Industrial Particulate Flows

NeuralDEM introduced in November 2024 as the first end to end deep learning alternative to CFD–DEM multiphysics simulations, is now open source. The dataset and model enable real-time, physically consistent simulation of industrial particulate flows at production scale.

Read article

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

13. OpenAI Adopts Google's SynthID Watermark for AI Images with Verification Tool

Source: https://openai.com/index/advancing-content-provenance/
Site: OpenAI
Submitter: smooke (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-19 19:34 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 283 points · 154 comments
Length: 867 words (~4 min read)
Language: en-US

People are using OpenAI’s tools everyday to create and edit images and audio in ways that make communication more expressive, useful, and accessible. As these tools become a part of how people build, imagine, and share, it’s important that people can understand and verify where the media comes from so they can interpret it with more confidence. Provenance signals can help by giving people context about where content came from, how it was created or edited, and whether it is what it claims to be.

Today we’re strengthening our approach to content provenance with a multi-layered, ecosystem-driven model to building trust online. We are making our provenance signals easier for other tools and platforms to recognize through C2PA conformance, adding durable cross-platform SynthID watermarking to images through a partnership with Google, and sharing a preview of a tool the public can use to verify whether images came from OpenAI.

Together these updates build on our earlier work⁠ to support open standards, make OpenAI-generated content easier to identify, and collaborate across the industry to support a more trustworthy information ecosystem.

Building the trust ecosystem through C2PA conformance

OpenAI has been engaged in the development and adoption of provenance standards since 2024, when we began adding Content Credentials to images generated by DALL·E 3⁠(opens in a new window) and later to ImageGen⁠(opens in a new window) and Sora⁠(opens in a new window). We also joined the Steering Committee of the Coalition for Content Provenance and Authenticity (C2PA), the cross-industry group behind the open technical standard for content provenance. C2PA’s technical approach uses metadata and cryptographic signatures to help information about a piece of media securely travel with the content itself. This information includes context that helps journalists evaluating a source, platforms making integrity decisions, and people trying to understand what they are seeing online.

We recently took the step of making OpenAI a C2PA Conforming Generator Product⁠(opens in a new window). By becoming C2PA conformant, we are giving platforms a trusted way to read, preserve, and pass along the provenance information we attach to our content. This matters because provenance only works if it survives beyond the first platform where content is created, and conformance makes that possible.

A multi-layered approach to provenance with Google SynthID for images

C2PA metadata is an important foundation for provenance. It helps content carry information about where it came from, how it was created or edited, and who signed that information. But metadata is not foolproof. It can be stripped, lost through uploads and downloads, or broken by transformations like file format changes, resizing, or screenshots.

To make provenance more resilient, we are taking a multi-layered approach and incorporating watermarking through Google DeepMind’s SynthID⁠(opens in a new window), starting with images generated through ChatGPT⁠, Codex, or the OpenAI API. SynthID embeds an invisible watermarking layer that complements C2PA metadata-based approaches.

We’ve been building toward this for some time. We have used visible watermarks⁠ in Sora and an audio watermark⁠ in Voice Engine, and have continued to test and research accuracy and reliability over time. through deployment.

These two systems reinforce each other. C2PA helps content carry detailed context; SynthID helps preserve a signal when metadata does not survive. Watermarking can be more durable through transformations like screenshots, while metadata can provide more information than a watermark alone. Together, they make provenance more resilient than either layer would be on its own.

Detection and a preview of our public verification tool

Trusted metadata and watermarks that resist most modifications can make provenance signals more durable. But people need a way to detect these signals. We are now previewing a public verification tool⁠ that will help people verify whether an uploaded image was generated on ChatGPT, the OpenAI API, or Codex, by checking if it contains provenance signals, including Content Credentials and SynthID.

We believe provenance should be easier for people to verify and interpret, and that our tool can help people play a role in answering the question, “Was this generated with AI?” by integrating multiple signals. This builds on learnings from the initial research preview of our image detection classifier⁠ in 2024 and enables people to reliably detect whether a SynthID watermark originating from OpenAI is present in the media, as well as surface C2PA metadata when it is found.

No detection method is foolproof, so we take a cautious approach in cases when detection fails. If no metadata or watermark is detected, for example, the tool will not make a definitive conclusion about whether the image was generated with OpenAI tools since provenance signals can in some cases be stripped.

At launch, the tool is limited to content generated by OpenAI. In the upcoming months, we aim to support cross-industry efforts to make verification possible across platforms. Over time, we also expect to support more types of content that people may encounter online.

Looking ahead

No single provenance technique is enough on its own. We believe a strong approach combines shared standards, durable watermarking signals, and public verification. By building on our long-standing support for Content Credentials, becoming conformant with C2PA, adopting SynthID, and previewing public verification tooling, we hope to contribute in the long run to a more interoperable provenance ecosystem.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

14. Incident Report: Railway Blocked by Google Cloud (Resolved)

Source: https://blog.railway.com/p/incident-report-may-19-2026-gcp-account-outage
Site: Railway
Author: Chandrika Khanduri, Cody De Arkland
Published: 2026-05-20
HN activity: 479 points · 307 comments
Length: 1.5K words (~7 min read)

Table of Contents

Impact
Incident Timeline
What Happened?
Preventative Measures

🚅

This report reflects what we know at time of publication and may be updated pending Google Cloud's internal review.

Railway experienced a platform-wide service disruption due to Google Cloud incorrectly placing our account in a suspended status. This resulted in a temporary loss of service for all GCP hosted infrastructure. This infrastructure supports our dashboard, API, and pieces of our network infrastructure. As cached network routes expired, the outage extended beyond GCP to affect all Railway workloads.

Below, we walk through what happened, how we responded, and what we're doing to prevent a similar incident in the future.

Impact

On May 19, 2026 between 22:20 UTC and approximately 06:14 UTC on May 20 (~8 hours), Railway experienced a platform-wide outage after Google Cloud suspended services on our production account. This took our API, control plane and databases offline, along with compute infrastructure hosted on Google Cloud.

Users immediately experienced 503 errors on the dashboard and API, including "no healthy upstream" and "unconditional drop overload" messages, and were unable to log in. All workloads hosted on Google Cloud compute were taken offline.

While workloads on our own Railway Metal and AWS burst-cloud environments remained up, Railway's edge proxies rely on a Google Cloud-hosted control plane API to populate their routing tables, causing the outage to cascade beyond Google Cloud. As the route caches expired, these other workloads became unreachable, resulting in returning 404 errors as the network control plane could no longer resolve routes to active instances. At peak impact, all Railway workloads across all regions were rendered unreachable.

As we recovered our Google Cloud environment, builds and deployments were blocked platform-wide while we restored the individual services. Once the entirety of our infrastructure was restored, a significant backlog of queued deploys was gradually drained to avoid overwhelming the platform. In parallel, GitHub began rate-limiting Railway's OAuth and webhook integrations, temporarily blocking logins and builds. The volume of these calls increased as a result of our caches being cleared from the Google Cloud outage. As a side effect, Terms-of-service acceptance records were also reset, prompting users to re-accept on their next visit to the dashboard.

We take full responsibility for the architectural decisions that allowed a single upstream provider action to cascade into a platform-wide outage, and detail below what happened, how we recovered, and the changes we are making to prevent this from happening again.

Incident Timeline

May 19, 22:10 UTC - Our automated monitoring detected API health check failures and paged our on-calls, who started investigating the issue.
May 19, 22:11 UTC - Dashboard returning 503 errors. Users unable to log in.
May 19, 22:19 UTC - Root cause identified: Google Cloud Platform has suspended Railway's production account.
May 19, 22:22 UTC - P0 ticket filed with Google Cloud. Railway's GCP account manager engaged directly.
May 19, 22:29 UTC - Incident declared.
May 19, 22:29 UTC - GCP account access restored. All compute instances remained stopped and persistent disks inaccessible.
May 19, 22:35 UTC - Cached network routes began expiring; workloads on Railway Metal and AWS began returning 404 errors as the networking could no longer resolve routes.
May 19, 23:09 UTC - First persistent disk comes back online.
May 19, 23:54 UTC - All persistent disks restored to ready state. Network still down.
May 20, 00:39 UTC - Disks confirmed ready. Recovery blocked on Google Cloud networking restoration.
May 20, 01:30 UTC - Compute instances began recovering.
May 20, 01:38 UTC - Edge traffic being served again. Networking restored.
May 20, 01:57 UTC - Orchestration and build infrastructure restored. Deploys temporarily paused to prevent overwhelming systems as queued work attempted to execute simultaneously.
May 20, 02:04 UTC - Compute hosts being brought back online incrementally.
May 20, 02:47 UTC - GitHub began rate-limiting Railway's OAuth and webhook integrations; some users unable to log in, builds blocked.
May 20, 02:55 UTC - Dashboard accessible again.
May 20, 03:59 UTC - Deployments beginning to process again across all tiers.
May 20, 04:00 UTC - API, dashboard, and OAuth endpoints confirmed operational. Remaining workloads continuing to restore.
May 20, 06:14 UTC - Incident moved to monitoring.
May 20, 07:58 UTC - Incident is resolved.

What Happened?

At 22:20 UTC on May 19, Google Cloud placed Railway’s production account into a suspended status incorrectly, as part of an automated action. This action extended to many accounts within Google Cloud. As this was a platform-wide action, there was no proactive outreach to individual customers prior to the restriction.

This suspended status disabled our GCP related infrastructure, which supports the Railway Dashboard, API and parts of our Network infrastructure, along with additional burst-compute infrastructure hosted on Google Cloud.

Railway's control plane is a set of a core dependencies that serves the dashboard, processes builds and deployments, and populates the routing tables used by our edge. The impact was immediate for all workloads on Google Cloud.

Railway's edge proxies maintain a cache of routing tables from the network control plane, which is hosted within Google Cloud. While that cache held, workloads on Railway Metal and AWS continued to serve traffic. Once the cache expired, the edge could no longer resolve routes to active instances, and workloads across all regions, including Metal and AWS, began returning 404 errors. This caused the network outage impact to cascade beyond Google Cloud, into these regions as well, even though the workloads themselves remained online.

Railway's infrastructure is designed for high availability. Our databases run across multiple availability zones, and our network uses redundant connections between AWS, GCP, and Railway Metal. However, restoring account access did not restore these individual services. Persistent disks, compute instances, and networking all required separate recovery. Due to the nature of this recovery process, the outage was extended by several hours. Disks were restored to a ready state by 23:54 UTC, but core networking and edge routing did not fully restore until approximately 01:30 UTC on May 20. (We are awaiting confirmation to see if this delay and associated errors were on Google’s side)

As networking was restored, recovery of Railway core services and validation of end user workloads proceeded layer by layer. To prevent overwhelming our build systems we temporarily paused deploys, and gradually allowed them to resume. In parallel to our core system recovery, GitHub began rate-limiting Railway's OAuth and webhook integrations, due to the volume and burst nature of all retried requests, temporarily blocking user logins and builds.

By approximately 04:00 UTC on May 20, the API, dashboard, and OAuth endpoints were confirmed operational, with remaining workloads continuing to restore.

Preventative Measures

Railway’s network control plane is designed for resilience. It is a multi-AZ, multi-zone control plane which can tolerate the loss of multiple machines and components, while still functioning with zero user impact. This has been tested in both staging as well as live traffic (prior to its rollout a few months ago).

We have invested in resiliency as a result of prior incidents which have assisted us in dealing with the impact. A prior example of these lessons was Railway being able to gracefully recover user GitHub installations without triggering secondary rate-limits.

However, many have asked over multiple forums, how could Railway have a single dependency that would affect all customer workloads?

Railway’s network is a mesh ring, built up of high availability fiber interconnects between Metal <> GCP <> AWS. However, in this ring, there was still a hard dependency on workload discoverability being tied to the network control plane API that was hosted on the machines running in Google Cloud. This meant that despite the mesh continuing to operate for an hour, when the route cache expired, the mesh failed to re-populate the routing tables.

We are immediately working on removing this dependency, making this a true mesh. This means that if any of the interconnects go out, there is always a path between the clouds.

As a result of this, we will be extending the high availability database shards across AWS and Metal. In the future, should all instances in a particular cloud disappear instantly, database quorum will keep everything running and immediately failover any no longer running workloads.

Finally, we are in planning to remove Google Cloud services from our data plane’s hot path, and keeping them only for secondary/failover. This is in parallel to implementing a new architecture for our data plane (enabling connectivity to hosts), and our control plane (which powers the dashboard you use to access and manage Railway). These architecture upgrades will ensure that our core services, especially user facing components, are not dependent on any one vendor or platform.

Railway owns our vendor choices, and we ultimately own this one. Your customers don't care whether the failure was Google or Railway; they see your product. Your uptime is our responsibility, and we'll keep delivering on it.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

15. CopyFail: From Pod to Host

Source: https://xint.io/blog/copy-fail-pod-to-host
Site: xint.io
Author: Juno Im
Published: 2026-05-19
HN activity: 21 points · 0 comments
Length: 2.6K words (~12 min read)
Language: en

Two weeks ago, we disclosed Copy Fail, a new and exceptionally dangerous Linux local-privilege escalation vulnerability.

Copy Fail exploits a kernel memory corruption flaw without injecting code into a running kernel, which makes it small and unusually portable. Copy Fail gives attackers a repeatable, controlled 4-byte write into the Linux page cache backing any readable file; in other words, it allows attackers to rewrite the cached contents of files on a Linux filesystem.

To help operators determine their susceptibility to Copy Fail, we published a proof-of-concept exploit and a model attack path. Our model attack targets the su binary present on most Linux systems. Because su is setuid root, an attacker who can rewrite it and then execute it can escalate to root. Instead of having it ask for and check a root password, the rewritten su skips the paperwork and drops the caller straight into a root shell.

Our proof-of-concept led some to believe that rewriting setuid binaries like su was the extent of the attack. Not so! The capability that Copy Fail and related page cache writing exploits extend to attackers is powerful and versatile. As an example, let’s walk through how to use it to break out of a namespaced container.

To understand this new exploit pattern, you have to understand a little bit about what’s happening under the hood in Copy Fail.

Copy Fail works by confusing the kernel code that handles IPSec ESP Extended Sequence Numbers (authencesn). This code is exposed to unprivileged users via AF_ALG sockets, which are userland’s interface to Linux’s kernel cryptography subsystem.

Specifically, Copy Fail sets the authencesn code up to think it’s looking at disposable scratch memory when it’s really handling a mutable reference to the page cache. It tells the kernel’s cryptography code to decrypt a ciphertext blob, using bytes supplied by a zero-length copy from a pipe using splice(2).

Because the wire format for IPSec ESNs isn’t the implicit format the crypto code operates on, the authencesn code shuffles sequence numbers around. But the code isn’t handling a disposable buffer from a packet; Copy Fail has tricked it into operating on a reference to a cached file.

Cross-container kernel attacks usually corrupt kernel memory: race windows, UAFs, version-bound payloads. These primitives are powerful, as they can allow code execution at the kernel level. But they’re fragile. Copy Fail is deterministic. It’s a more reliable primitive for cross-pod compromise or runtime poisoning, without relying on kernel code execution.

There are two primary attack scenarios:

Scenario 1: cross-container poisoning. From a compromised pod, or from a freshly-launched attacker pod (only create pods rights required), potentially backdoor co-located pods that access the same vulnerable lower-layer file through the same underlying address_space. Image references can differ; only a layer hash needs to match. The compromise lives only in the kernel page cache so on-disk bytes are unchanged and it is invisible to agent-less disk scanners.

Scenario 2: container escape. From inside an unprivileged container, or from a compromised DaemonSet with host-filesystem mounts, get a root shell on the host.

Why the Page Cache Crosses Container Boundaries

The page cache is shared across containers.

No matter what namespace you’re in, every struct file the kernel handles carries an f_mapping pointer, which usually comes from the underlying inode’s i_mapping. That means that any two file descriptors sharing an f_mapping share the same cache data.

The kernel’s representation of contiguous pages of memory is called a “folio”. For ordinary buffered I/O on regular files, a write through one fd updates the cached folios. Subsequent reads, on every related fd, see the updated data (subject to normal concurrency and ordering rules). Copy Fail mutates the same folios via the AF_ALG/splice() path described in Part 1, bypassing the regular write accounting. The visibility property is unchanged: any fd whose f_mapping points at the affected address_space reads the modified bytes on its next page cache hit.

All of this is independent of containers. Container isolation lives in mount, network, PID, user, and IPC namespaces. None of them creates a per-container address_space or page cache. Containers share cached folios when their file accesses reach the same underlying address_space.

A Kubernetes container's root filesystem is commonly an overlayfs mount stitched together from a writable upper layer (usually per-container scratch) and one or more read-only lower layers (image layers). Container runtimes (containerd, CRI-O, others) deduplicate layers by content hash: if two containers on the same node use the same unpacked layer/snapshot, the corresponding lower-layer files can be backed by the same host inode/address_space, regardless of what the images are named. This reuse allows lowering the storage requirements for images by sharing common layers. python:3.12-slim and xint-flask-app:v1 (built FROM python:3.12-slim) share the Python layer. Both share debian:bookworm-slim underneath. A redis:7-bookworm pod on the same node shares the Debian layer with both.

In normal operation on an overlayfs mount, opening a lower-layer file for write access or truncation triggers overlayfs copy-up before writes proceed, allocating a new inode in the pod's upper layer so the change is private. By storing only this small set of differences, containers can reuse their lower layers efficiently while still allowing a writable copy to be presented to applications. However Copy Fail skips the standard write path entirely. The folios it mutates belong to the lower-layer address_space itself, shared host-wide, rather than the upper layers that were meant to store write deltas.

The pods' overlayfs mounts each present what looks like a private /usr/local/lib/python3.12/site-packages/foo.py (or /lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/libc.so.6), but overlayfs delegates file I/O to the real lower backing file. If those backing files are the same lower inode/address_space, the cached folios are shared:

Copy Fail's 4-byte write goes into that one underlying entry. Anything that subsequently reads the same lower-layer file through the same underlying address_space can read the poisoned bytes, until the page is evicted or the layer is dropped.

The on-disk inode is unchanged so of course image-registry scanners, file-integrity monitors examining the disk hash, and offline, snapshot, or block-level scanners that bypass the affected running kernel's page cache see the original content.

Scenario 1: Cross-Container Poisoning

Threat model. Unprivileged attacker, no privileged capabilities, no node access, no admission rights to mutate other workloads. Two ways to start: code execution in a pod the attacker already controls (1-1), or just create pods rights (1-2).

Target. Pick a file in a layer widely shared on the node: a Python site-packages/ module if the node hosts Python-derived workloads, a shared object such as glibc for broader reach, subject to executable mapping, patch alignment, and crash-safety constraints anything inside a Debian/Ubuntu/Alpine base layer. We will use a Python source file for this demo. Pick a module imported during interpreter startup or during a common framework's init, so target pods load it early.

The write. Python files are a good target for a demo because they are easier to read and are more portable than shellcode. Any changes to Python files can of course be made with Copy Fail by chaining our 4 byte write primitives together. The specific choice of a file and the contents to use to replace it are an important part of weaponization. We will only provide a simple proof of concept here.

The trigger. The next time any pod whose image includes the targeted overlayfs layer hash imports the target module. CPython opens the .py file, reads source bytes from the page cache, and compiles the patched bytes. The redirected dispatch resolves to attacker-controlled code already reachable in the image, or to a payload staged via additional Copy Fail invocations elsewhere in the layer.

1-1: Compromised pod sharing a base layer

The "sandbox each microservice in its own container" model assumes that code execution in any one container is bounded by that container's image and its supply chain. Shared lower-layer page cache can break that assumption. This allows not simply compromising a pod itself, but co-located pods that read the same targeted file from a shared lower layer. The target can be the most legitimate workload in the cluster: a metrics exporter, a log shipper, a CI runner, an unaudited debug sidecar. What matters is that it shares a base layer (debian:bookworm-slim, python:3.12-slim) with a hardened backend.

Demo. Pod A is the compromised pod, image python:3.12-slim. Pod B is an unrelated, security-hardened backend on the same node, image payments-api:v1, built FROM python:3.12-slim. The image references differ; the Python layer Pod A poisons is in Pod B's stack. Pod B's deployment imports a library that pulls in the targeted module on init.
Demo

A node-scoped disk scanner running outside both pods, hashing files via the host filesystem, sees nothing. A registry scan against the image digest sees nothing. A runtime EDR that hashes resident pages of the running python3 after import, or that watches execve and child processes inside Pod B, is the best bet for detecting the compromise.

1-2: Pod creation rights

In this scenario, the attacker has no existing access to any pod on the cluster. They have the ability to run create pods in some namespace. Common in multi-tenant clusters, CI runners, build agents, and shared-cluster tenancy patterns, as many CI, build, and multi-tenant service accounts are intentionally granted it.

The attack does not depend on luck about layer overlap. Here, if they can read victim pod specs, or otherwise infer the victim image and node placement, pull the relevant base image into the attacker pod, and request scheduling on the victim's node via nodeAffinity or nodeName. Container runtime layer-hash dedup makes the attacker's overlayfs lower-layer the same host inode as the victim's; the page cache write follows.

The interesting consequence is that this attack reaches across namespace and tenant boundaries that RBAC was meant to enforce. A service account with pods/create in its own namespace, no direct rights over the victim workload, can poison a backend in a different namespace by inheriting that backend's base image and landing on the same node.

Sub-case: compromise inside a DaemonSet. A compromised DaemonSet is a higher-leverage exploit path. Most production DaemonSets ship with hostPath mounts for legitimate reasons (CNI (Container Network Interface) agents, CSI (Container Storage Interface) drivers, log forwarders, monitoring agents, security agents). The page cache shared with the host filesystem is therefore directly inside the attacker's reach. This means with the same exploit primitive the lateral target set now includes host-side binaries (/usr/sbin/ipset, iptables, kubelet-spawned helpers), and poisoning them can lead to host-root execution if the host later executes the affected file and the patch is weaponized correctly the next time the host invokes them. Code execution in a DaemonSet is effectively pod-to-host without going through Scenario 2's mechanics.

Scenario 2: Container Escape

Threat model. Same starting position: Unprivileged container, code execution, no privileged caps. The goal is now a shell on the host.

The shared inode. When runc patched CVE-2019-5736, the original fix copied the runc binary to a memfd before each execve so it could not be overwritten from inside the container. A follow-up commit replaced the copy with a read-only bind mount of the host's runc into every container, to take advantage of kernel page cache sharing across the spawn fan-out. Of course, the kernel page cache is the very thing that we are overwriting, which means that design can again expose the host runc mapping to a page-cache write primitive.

The chain. Same shape as Datadog's Dirty Pipe container-escape PoC, with Copy Fail as the write primitive instead of Dirty Pipe.

Step 1: Force runc to run.

When the user exec into the container, kubelet implements it via runc exec into the already-running container, which is the window we need. Container starts, restarts, and init steps don't work: they run on a fresh filesystem, before the entrypoint has planted the trap. Datadog's PoC plants it by overwriting /bin/sh with #!/proc/self/exe. When runc exec's a shell, the kernel resolves the shebang and re-execs /proc/self/exe, which still points to runc mid-exec. That leaves a runc process pinned in the container's PID namespace, alive long enough for Step 2.

Anything that triggers a process inside the container suffices, specifically when running kubectl exec in your container, a container restart, or an init step. To make the wait deterministic, Datadog's PoC overwrites /bin/sh in the container with #!/proc/self/exe, so the next time anyone (or anything) execs a shell inside, runc is invoked.

Step 2: Locate the runc PID. Once runc appears in the container's PID namespace, scan /proc for the process whose /proc/<pid>/exe symlink resolves through the bind mount to the host runc inode.

Step 3: Poison via /proc/<runc_pid>/exe. Open that fd. Run Copy Fail against it; the page cache write lands in the first page backing runc, replacing its ELF header and the rest of the binary with a small malicious ELF. The cached pages are now poisoned and staged for the next invocation.

Step 4: Wait for the next runc. Any subsequent runc invocation on the host maps the cached pages and executes the modified code as root. This includes kubectl exec from an admin, the next pod start, the next probe, and so on. Attackers can often force this to happen by terminating the pod, forcing a restart.

This exploit path follows that of Dirty Pipe very closely. However, Copy Fail covers every kernel from the 2017 in-place commit (72548b093ee3) through the 2026 fix (a664bf3d603d).

PoC. A reverse shell from host context, captured on the listener:

ubuntu@ip-172-26-6-67:~$ nc -l 1234 -v
Listening on 0.0.0.0 1234
Connection received on ec2-43-202-13-255.ap-northeast-2.compute.amazonaws.com 52450
[cwd] /run/containerd/io.containerd.runtime.v2.task/k8s.io/880c5f77aa39359e231f5ea709148f7914584c9986f8636b1201430f842e94c2
[listdir: cwd]
.
..
init.pid
log.json
runtime
options.json
bootstrap.json
shim-binary-path
log
config.json
work
rootfs
[listdir: /]
.bottlerocket
bin
boot
dev
etc
...
x86_64-bottlerocket-linux-gnu

Two things to read off this output. The connecting peer is ec2-43-202-13-255.ap-northeast-2.compute.amazonaws.com, an AWS public DNS name in ap-northeast-2, an EKS worker EC2 instance. The shell's working directory is /run/containerd/io.containerd.runtime.v2.task/k8s.io/880c5f77aa3.../, the containerd shim's per-container runtime state directory on the host. That path does not exist inside any pod's mount namespace; only the host (or a container with the runtime state explicitly mounted) can chdir into it. The shell is on the node, not in a container.

Detection and Mitigation

What does and doesn't catch this:

Control

Effective?

Image registry scanning (Trivy, Clair, similar)

No. Image bytes unchanged.

Agent-less disk scanning (sensor-less node scans, snapshot-based scanners)

No. On-disk file unchanged.

File-integrity monitoring on disk (AIDE, Tripwire)

No. On-disk hash unchanged.

Runtime EDR hashing in-memory pages of running processes

Yes, in principle.

Runtime EDR monitoring execve argv and child processes

Partial. Catches post-exec behavior, not the page cache write.

Seccomp profile blocking socket(AF_ALG, ...)

Yes. Removes the primitive.

gVisor (runsc), GKE Sandbox

Yes. Separate user-space kernel, no shared host page cache.

Kata Containers

Yes. Per-pod VM, separate kernel, separate page cache.

Managed per-pod microVM (EKS Fargate; equivalents on other clouds)

Yes, by the same mechanism as Kata. Each pod runs in its own microVM with its own kernel and page cache.

Patched host kernel

Yes. Root cause fixed.

For mitigating this and future issues:

Patch the host kernel. Pull the fix (a664bf3d603d) through your managed platform's node-image update or via in-place node-OS patching. This is the best way to fix the Copy Fail bug.

Block AF_ALG. A pod seccomp profile that denies socket(AF_ALG, ...) removes the primitive used in Copy Fail. Most production workloads do not need AF_ALG, but validate this against cryptographic or VPN/storage workloads before enforcing globally and this has the benefit of reducing attack surface against a kernel component that has had several issues besides Copy Fail.

Use VMs or similar for tenant boundaries. Workloads that need hard isolation should never rely on containers as a security boundary. Migrating to VMs, microVMs, or systems like gVisor greatly reduce attack surface for guest-to-host attacks.

Agent-less disk scanners are unlikely to catch this compromise because the affected bytes live only in the running kernel's page cache.

https://github.com/Percivalll/Copy-Fail-CVE-2026-31431-Kubernetes-PoC

https://github.com/sgkdev/page_inject/

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

16. Gemini CLI will stop working from June 18, 2026

Source: https://developers.googleblog.com/an-important-update-transitioning-gemini-cli-to-antigravity-cli/
Site: developers.googleblog.com
Author: Dmitry Lyalin, Taylor Mullen
Published: 2026-05-19
HN activity: 226 points · 122 comments
Length: 613 words (~3 min read)
Language: en

MAY 19, 2026

When we shipped Gemini CLI last year, our goal was to bring the magic of Gemini directly into your terminal. Along the way, we’ve learned a lot from our community of millions of users, with over 100,000 GitHub stars, 6,000 merged pull requests, and hundreds of contributors, including: you love a good terminal UI, you appreciate that we ship weekly releases, and your workflows have simply outgrown those early days of 2025.

Gemini CLI proved the terminal could be an incredible interface for agentic tasks, but your needs shifted. You now require multiple agents communicating with each other to split up the work and solve complex problems. This means your terminal tools need to share a unified backend with the rest of your workflow.

Listening to your feedback made one thing clear: we can serve you best by pouring our energy into a single product built for today's multi-agent reality. To deliver the single platform you need to build the future, we're unifying our efforts into Google Antigravity, our premier agent-first development platform, which includes a powerful server-side harness and a brand-new terminal experience: Antigravity CLI.

While there won't be 1:1 feature parity right out of the gate, we made sure Antigravity CLI keeps the most critical features of Gemini CLI: Agent Skills, Hooks, Subagents, and Extensions (now as Antigravity plugins). Whether you use Gemini CLI to get quick, grounded answers, scaffold and build out a new coding project, or help provision your cloud infrastructure, you can still do all of that right in Antigravity CLI. And to make your experience better, we focused on the things that matter most to you, like:

Faster execution: Built in Go, Antigravity CLI is snappier and more responsive.
Asynchronous workflows: Antigravity CLI orchestrates multiple agents for complex tasks in the background, letting you run large-scale refactors or research several topics without locking up your terminal session.
Unified architecture: Antigravity CLI shares the same agent harness as Antigravity 2.0, the new Antigravity desktop application, ensuring that all future improvements to core agents are automatically applied wherever you use them.

Important timeline for Consumers

Starting today, Antigravity CLI is available to everyone.

On June 18, 2026, Gemini CLI and Gemini Code Assist IDE extensions will stop serving requests for Google AI Pro and Ultra, as well as those using it free of charge using Gemini Code Assist for individuals.

We are here to help make the transition to Antigravity CLI and Antigravity 2.0 as smooth as possible. You can get started now with our technical documentation, and we will be releasing video walkthroughs in the coming weeks.

For Gemini Code Assist for GitHub, this change will also apply and on June 18, 2026, there will be no new installations on Github organizations and requests in the following weeks will stop being served.

For enterprise customers

If your organization uses Gemini CLI or our IDE extensions via a Gemini Code Assist Standard or Enterprise license, or if your organization uses Gemini Code Assist for GitHub through Google Cloud, your access remains unchanged. We’ll continue to support Gemini CLI and Gemini Code Assist with access to the latest Gemini models and other updates. Gemini CLI will remain accessible via paid Gemini and Gemini Enterprise Agent Platform API keys. And if you’re excited to try Antigravity CLI, you can use it now with your Google Cloud projects.

We welcome your feedback in the Antigravity CLI community forum, especially if there is a feature you’d like to request during this transition. We look forward to seeing what you build next with Antigravity 2.0 and Antigravity CLI.

Explore this announcement and all Google I/O 2026 updates on io.google.

Previous

Next

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

17. RISC-V and Floating-Point

Source: https://fprox.substack.com/p/risc-v-and-floating-point
Site: What are you optimizing for?
Author: FPRox
Published: 2026-05-16
HN activity: 21 points · 16 comments
Length: 2.7K words (~12 min read)
Language: en

RISC-V support for floating-point arithmetic is a topic we have partially covered in a few previous posts but we felt like it deserves a full overview post of its own.

RISC-V base ISA (RV32I or RV64I) does not define any floating-point instructions. RISC-V provides extensions to the base ISA to bring such support for floating-point arithmetic.

The map of ratified floating-point ISA extensions (and their dependencies) is presented in the figures below. The first figure presents both scalar and vector ratified floating-point extensions. The listed scalar extensions are built around a dedicated scalar floating-point register file (FRF).

There exists a mirror set of scalar floating-point extensions operating from the general purpose register file (XRF). They are listed in the figure below:

RISC-V introduced support for floating-point through the F extension. This extension specifies a new register file (FRF) with FLEN-bit wide registers, and a set of operations to perform single precision floating-point (and related) operations. It builds on the 2008 revision of the IEEE-754 standard and includes basic operations (addition, subtraction, division/square root, conversions, …), but also the Fused Multiply-Add (FMA) which was not present in the original version of the IEEE-754 standard (1985).

RISC-V Architects made the choice of assigning a dedicated register file for floating-point operands and results of floating-point operations. We covered this in a previous post:

Compared to a unified integer1/floating-point register file, this choice implies additional cost for supporting Floating-Point as it adds 32 extra registers and the need for dedicated floating-point load/store and data moves between FRF and XRF; at the same time it simplifies register allocation in programs and provide more flexibility to assign architectural storage to floating-point data operands without competing for the same storage resources as the general purpose operations. The separate register files offer an extra layer of flexibility: general purpose register width, XLEN, can differ from floating-point register width, FLEN; allowing to tune the register size for the actual workload needs. For example RV32 + D requires 32 x 32-bit general purpose architectural registers (well actually “31 x”, since x0 is free) and 32 x 64-bit floating-point registers; similarly RV64 + F requires 31 x 64-bit general purpose registers and 32 x 32-bit floating-point registers: you just pay for what you need.

The base floating-point extension to the RISC-V ISA, the F extension, specifies format operations which make implementations compliant with the IEEE 754 standard (in particular its 2008 revision).

The IEEE-754 standard is the most widely accepted floating-point arithmetic standards for CPUs, so selecting it appear as a natural choice for RISC-V.

You can find a brief history of the IEEE 754 standard(s) in this post:

The F extension defines RISC-V support for single-precision format (IEEE-754’s binary32, sometimes dubbed FP32) and an associated of general operations (including conversions from and to integer formats). RISC-V floating-point support is built around IEEE-754 formats.

Historically, the second Floating-Point extension is the D extension, bringing scalar support for double precision format (IEEE-754’s binary64) and instructions operating on it.

A Quadruple Precision (IEEE-754’s binary128) extension, dubbed Q, has also been specified. It seems it has seen only limited interest from the RISC-V community and limited adoption.

The original set of F, D, Q extensions has since been extended with support for half precision (IEEE 754’s binary16) which was added with the Zfh and Zfhmin instruction set extensions. Zfhmin is a strict subset of Zfh and only contains basic data moves and conversions.

Note: One of the rationales behind Zfhmin is that it allows implementaters to chose to only support binary16 as a storage format and not bother with a full scalar support; saving hardware and still allowing computing on half precision datum after a promotion to binary32.

The F extension (scalar support for single precision) is mandated for most of the other floating-point extensions. For example, it is required to enable half precision support (Zfh or Zfhmin) or vector floating-point support (Zve32f onward).

Later in this post, we will cover the IEEE-754 support on the vector side and also look at support for non-standard floating-point formats.

The F extension has been extended by the Zfa extension which offers a few useful scalar floating-point operations. Zfa operations include a floating-point load immediate instruction (with 32 useful floating-point constants), a set of quiet floating-point comparisons, various rounding to integer values (in floating-point format) and a few other operations.

We covered Zfa in more details in this post:

Zfa is defined for the 3 standard formats (binary32, binary64, and binary16) with respective dependency on the F, D, and Zfh.

Note: fli.h is defined if and only if Zfh or Zvfh are defined. Since Zvfh depends on Zfhmin, it means that Zfhmin is necessary but not sufficient for fli.h to exist. The rationale being that if they are no vector support fli.h is not very useful on its own, e.g. using fli.s makes more sense than fli.h followed by fcvt.s.h.

Part of the extra cost of RISC-V floating-point support, namely the additional floating-point register file, can be avoided by selecting the Zfinx family of Floating-Point support for RISC-V. In this case, floating-point operations operate from general purpose registers. Zfinx should be read as “Z-F-in-X”, and indicates that the operations from the F extension are implemented using the XRF, a.k.a. the general purpose register file.

RISC-V specifies Zfinx as the equivalent to the F extension (single precision support), Zdinx as the equivalent to the D extension, and finally Zhinx / Zhinxmin as the equivalents to Zfh / Zfhmin. Those extensions reuse the F / D / Zfh / Zfhmin encodings and remove a few instructions (namely floating-point loads, stores and moves between register files) which would be redundant with existing general purpose instructions.

Note: Zfinx does not specify NaN boxing when a 32-bit F value is stored in a XLEN=64 RV64 register; it mandates sign extension (same as for integer values).

The baseline vector support for floating-point in RISC-V comes with RVV 1.0 which specifies support for single and double precision support.

The support is even more comprehensive than on the scalar side:

RVV 1.0 defines vector variants for all existing scalar instructions, but also instructions without scalar counterparts:

Widening addition/subtraction/multiply/multiply-accumulate instructions

Reciprocal and reciprocal square-root estimate instructions

Narrowing float-to-float conversions with rounding towards odd

One difference to notice is that contrary to their scalar counterparts, the vector multiply-accumulate instructions are destructive: one of the operand is overwritten as the destination. Multiple variants are defined with different “destructive” scheme:

vfmacc.vv vd, vs1, vs2, vm    # vd[i] = (vs1[i] * vs2[i]) + vd[i] (addend destructive)
vfmadd.vv vd, vs1, vs2, vm    # vd[i] = (vs1[i] * vd[i]) + vs2[i] (multiplier destructive)

Note: Both vfmacc and vfmadd implement FMA-like semantic: fused multiply-add with a single final rounding.

The vector extension also defines vector-specific operations: floating-point reductions (sum/min/max), vector-scalar/vector-vector variants (including reverse vector-scalar operations such as vfrdiv.vf and vfrsub.vf).

Later extensions, Zvfhmin and Zvfh, added large (resp. minimal) vector support for half precision / binary16. More recently minimal support for BFloat16 was added with Zvfbfmin (conversions) and Zvfbfwma (widening multiply-accumulate BF16.FP32).

A few non standard floating-point formats have made their apparition into ratified or under-specification RISC-V extensions. Some formats inherit from IEEE 754 patterns (e.g., BFloat16) others differ more widely (e.g., OpenCompute’s OFP8).

The first one is BFloat16 (a.k.a. BrainFloat16). This 16-bit floating-point format was never officially listed in any IEEE 754 specifications (at least up to the 2019 revision) but draws from the standard pattern: same encodings, same bias defintion, same special values. The original definition2 corresponds to a truncation of IEEE 754 binary32 (keeping only the upper 16 bits) and the original specification of operation on BFloat16 numbers specifies that subnormal numbers should be flushed to zero. RISC-V does use the standard encoding definition but mandate full subnormal support (adhering to IEEE 754 floating-point arithmetic mandate).

On the scalar side, RISC-V ISA can be extended with Zfbfmin (spec source) which defines basic data moves and BFloat16 conversions from/to single precision.

On the vector side, RISC-V can be extended with either basic data moves and conversions with Zvfbfmin or with widening multiply-accumulate with Zvfbfwma.

Those extensions were covered in a previous post:

Those 3 extensions are ratified and listed as optional into the user level RISC-V Application profile, RVA23U64. Thus, it can be expected that many RISC-V implementation will support them.

A new extension bringing extended vector BFloat16 support ro RVV is making its way through RISC-V specification process: Zfvfbfa.

The extension project is available as a pull-request against the official riscv-isa-manual repo. We covered this extension in this section from a previous post.

Zvfbfa represents a very large step towards full vector BFloat16 support compared to Zvfbfmin and Zvfbfwma: it offers almost as wide of a support for BFloat16 as Zve32f does for binary32. The only excluded operations are “division, square root, reductions, and conversions to/from integers wider than 8 bits”.

Note: at the time of writing (April 2026), there are no specified instructions to convert from half precision from/to BFloat16. Such conversions would have to go through single precision. It is assumed that such cases are rare and would not justify the opcode allocation. Similarly there are not mixed format operations, e.g. a widening product between half precision and BFloat16 with a binary32 result.

With the growing interest for small precision formats (e.g. 8-bit floating-point), RISC-V has been extended to support other non-IEEE floating-point formats. An example is Open Compute’s 8-bit floating-point formats: OFP8 with the Zvfofp8min vector extension project. This extension defines a few conversions instructions from/to both binary32 and BFloat16.

We cover this on-going extension project in RISC-V and MX Scaling Formats.

In this post we also presented another extension project to offer vector conversions from OpenCompute 4-bit floating-point format E2M1 and OFP8 E4M3 format: Zvfofp4min. At the time of writing, this extension is not an official RISC-V International project but it is likely to become one if interest for smaller and smaller floating-point formats continues to grow.

Let’s briefly review an incomplete subset of the upcoming RISC-V projects related to floating-point arithmetic.

It seems support for micro-scaling is a recurring ask and it will certainly materialize as one or more future RISC-V extensions.

Micro-scaling is a concept standardized by OpenCompute MX scaling format standard which defines the storage and operations on a block of values associated with a shared scaling factor.

More formally, there are n values stored v_0, v_1, …, v_{n-1} and a stored scaling factor S and the actual values represented are (v_0 * S), (v_1 * S), …, (v_{n-1} * S). So the storage of a value is split between an element and a shared scale factor. Assuming v_i used an e-bit encoding and S uses an s-bit encoding, n values are represented using n.e + s bits, rather than n.(e+s). Depending on the overlap between element and scale encoding, the actual saving might be less than (n-1).s bits and the algorithm used to determine the scale may also reduce the accuracy of some or all the elements.

Although scaling format support can already be implemented with existing or in-progress extensions (e.g. Zve32f+ Zfvfba + Zvfofp8min), it could be made more efficient by introducing instructions which operates directly on MX encoded blocks: handling the interpretation of the block value as part of the operation without having to explicitly lay down a sequence of multiple instructions.

This future work applies to both OpenCompute MX-Scaling Formats and IEEE P3109 formats (described in the next section).

IEEE is currently working on a standard for smaller formats (16-bit and less) targeted at machine learning applications and offering a very large space of possible formats.

We covered the status of the spec effort in this section of this previous post:

P3109 has made very different choices compared to OCP: while OCP specifies a small number of formats (2 OFP8 formats and 6 MX Scaling formats), P3109 defines a framework than can be used to specifies 100s of different formats. P3109 also defines a large number of primitives operations (including non-linear functions).

It is not the intent of P3109 that any hardware implementations support the full range of formats but rather than they select a relevant subset. For RISC-V, this will certainly mean defining one or more profile which the ecosystem could organize around.

P3109 is neither compatible with OFP8/MX-scaling formats, nor with IEEE 754 definition (e.g. it does not match the definition requirement for emax).

Although no official RISC-V project to support P3109 exist at the time of writing, it is highly likely that one or more will be spawned once P3109 gets closer to ratification.

RISC-V offers a rich support for floating-point, both on the scalar and the vector sides. This support ranges from the low-end Zfinx (scalar floating-point support operating on the general purpose register file) to the extensive V extension (with full single and double precision vector support). This support has been extended with half precision and BFloat16 support; and other extensions are in development. We covered a few in this post, but there are many other on-going efforts involving floating-point at RISC-V International including:

Specification for Dot Product and Matrix Operations (these would justify their own post series).

long dot product, batched dot product

Various flavors of matrix extensions: IME, VME, AME

Specifications for Data-Independent Execution Latency Floating-Point operations (for the implementation of cryptographic primitives).

In its on-going development work, RISC-V International faces a few challenges. For example, RVI has to tackle the existence of multiple competing standard (ratified or in project) for small floating-point formats. There are two distincts (and often opposite) mandates: specify rapidly to address key market/ecosystem need and specify for the long term, one would not want to waste time and encoding space working on supporting a set of formats which would be abandoned by the time the extension specification is ratified. RVIA can rely on its active member ecosystem to bubble-up critical need and work on long-term support while the member companies continues to experiment with custom extensions.

If you think someone could benefit from reading this post or could contribute to the RISC-V floating-point effort, feel free to share this post with them:

Share

To stay informed about the on-going floating-point development at RVI (or contribute), you can join the following RISC-V groups:

The Floating-Point Special Interest Group (SIG FP): https://lists.riscv.org/g/sig-fp

The Vector SIG: https://lists.riscv.org/g/sig-vector

The Unprivileged ISA Committee (Unpriv IC): https://lists.riscv.org/g/tech-unprivileged/

Architectural Review Committee Mailbox: https://lists.riscv.org/g/tech-arch-review (where request for extension ARC reviews are posted)

minimal support often means support for conversions and data moves but no arithmetic operations.

Each extension name should be a link to the source of its specification on riscv-isa-manual or a pull-request introducing the specification (for in-development)

Scalar extensions with dedicated floating-point registers:

F: baseline scalar floating-point support for single precision (binary32)

D: baseline scalar floating-point support for double precision (binary64)

Q: baseline scalar floating-point support for quad precision (binary128)

Zfh: baseline scalar floating-point support for half precision (binary16)

Zfhmin: minimal scalar floating-point support for half precision (binary16)

Zfa: additional scalar floating-point support (extends F, D, Zfh/Zvfh)

Zfbfmin: minimal scalar floating-point support for BFloat16

Scalar extensions operating from general purpose registers:

Zfinx: baseline scalar floating-point support for single precision (binary32)

Zdinx: baseline scalar floating-point support for double precision (binary64)

Zhinx: baseline scalar floating-point support for half precision (binary16)

Zhinxmin: minimal scalar floating-point support for half precision (binary16)

Vector extensions:

Zve32f: baseline vector floating-point support single precision (binary32)

Zve64d: baseline vector floating-point support double precision (binary64)

Zvfh: baseline vector floating-point support half precision (binary16)

Zvfhmin: minimal vector floating-point support half precision (binary16)

Zvfbfmin: minimal vector floating-point support for BFloat16

Zvfbfwma: widening BFloat16 multiply-accumulate vector floating-point support

Zvfbfa: baseline vector floating-point support BFloat16 (in development)

Zvfofp8min: minimal vector floating-point support for OFP8 (in development)

Zvfofp4min: minimal vector floating-point support for OFP4 (project, unofficial repo)

Notes:

The dependencies are not listed here (see figure at the beginning of this post): e.g. supporting D means supporting F (so both baseline single and double precision scalar support).

Zve64d and v extensions offer identical floating-point support (Zve64d implies Zve32f)

BFloat16 Definition: BFloat16: The secret to high performance on Cloud TPUs

Spec Pull request for VME familiy of extensions

IEEE P3109 (small formats) Interim Report v3.2.1 (pdf)

1

general purpose would be more apt than integer register file

No posts

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

18. In 1979 engineer Hugh Padgham discovered "gated reverb" – by accident

Source: https://producelikeapro.com/blog/how-one-recording-mistake-created-a-musical-phenomenon-in-the-80s/
Site: Produce Like A Pro
Author: Max McAllister
Published: 2020-03-21
HN activity: 48 points · 16 comments
Length: 1.3K words (~6 min read)
Language: en-US

Gated reverb is a technique responsible for the punchy, whip-like drum sounds which dominated popular music throughout the ’80s. Listen to a track like “Kiss” by Prince (1986) and you’ll immediately recognize the sound. It’s bold and quintessentially ‘80s. But what is “gated reverb,” and how was it developed?

When you put a noise gate on a reverb return, the gate’s settings can be adjusted to cut the decay short.

The sound is bright, crisp, punchy, and wet—the antithesis to the very dry drum sounds of the 1970s. As the noise gate closes and “sucks” the reverb’s decay away, you’re left with sharp, reverberated attacks that sit really well in the mix.

So whose idea was it to combine these two processors?

In 1979, engineer Hugh Padgham discovered the technique by accident.

It was while working on Peter Gabriel’s third solo record that the method was born. Without a good deal of happenstance and experimentation, gated reverb’s history would be quite different, had it even been discovered at all!

As the story goes, Gabriel, along with Genesis drummer Phil Collins and engineer Hugh Padgham, were working in Studio 2 at Townhouse, which had a brand new SSL 4000 B console.

The set-up included a talkback microphone in the live room for performers to communicate with the control room, as well as compressors and noise gates on every channel—a first for the era. The talkback mic itself was heavily compressed, designed to pick up even the quietest voices in the furthest corners of the room.

Padgham recalls what happened when he decided to turn talkback on while Collins played:

“The whole thing came through the famous listen mic on the SSL console. The SSL had put this massive compressor on it because the whole idea was to hang one mic in the middle of the studio and hear somebody talking on the other side. And it just so happened that we turned it on one day when Phil [Collins] was playing his drums. And then I had the idea of feeding that back into the console and putting the noise gate on, so when he stopped playing it sucked the big sound of the room into nothing.”
The console whose features created gated reverb!

Here’s another account of the same instance, as told by Sound on Sound:

“[Padgham was] setting up a kit for recording, and there just happened to be some sends on the channels being used for the drum mics going to an AMS reverb — and the reverb’s returns just happened to be patched into two channels that just happened to have some noise gates strapped across them! As the drums were being tuned and hit and miked up in the studio, listeners in the control room heard the fabulous sound of the reverb being abruptly cut short by the gates on the returns. Rather than ‘fix’ this, Gabriel exploited it and it became a trademark sound on his third album, particularly on the opening track, ‘Intruder’.”

Compression, gating, and reverb together: a happy accident.

With the compressed, gated signal sent to an AMS reverb unit, the gated reverb technique became just that: a sound that defined a decade’s worth of music. And it wasn’t just Gabriel and Padgham who were so thrilled with their discovery; Phil Collins was equally impressed and inspired to create perhaps the single most recognizable example of gated reverb today.

1981’s “In the Air Tonight” by Phil Collins is one of the most famous examples of a gated reverb drum sound.
The Stone Room at Townhouse Studios.

Recruiting Padgham a year after working on Gabriel’s album, Collins single-handedly popularized the sound through his own solo work. Making another trip to Townhouse Studios, Collins’s drums were tracked in the “Stone Room,” which is exactly what it sounds like—a room made of stone, designed to sound like the interior of a castle.

The room’s natural decay was cut short by a noise gate, as famously heard on “In the Air Tonight.” I bet you’re thinking of that drum fill this very moment.

Without a “Stone Room,” though, you could still get your reverb from early digital units. Let’s take a closer look at reverb’s history as it relates to the gated reverb sound of the ‘80s.

The Evolution of Reverb

In its earliest (and natural!) form, reverb was created using echo chambers—literally rooms designed to be very “live,” with plenty of natural echo. A loudspeaker would be placed in one part of the room and a microphone in another; the echo of sound coming out of the speaker and reverberating in the room was captured by the microphone.
An example of an echo chamber.

Studios like Abbey Road in the UK and Capitol Records in Los Angeles are both well known examples of such chambers. The main problem with these, as you can probably guess, is that they require careful design and plenty of real estate to build. Because of these limitations, an alternative in the form of “plate reverb” was developed.

Plate reverb, simply described, consists of a large box in which a large sheet of aluminum is suspended. As sound enters one side of the box, it passes along the aluminum plate, vibrating it, and comes out the other end with a bit of reverb.

Now, again, these boxes were often huge constructions that weighed 600 pounds or more. Certainly far from portable! Luckily, the digital advances of the 1980s made artificial reverb a possibility. Not only were these units portable and convenient, but they had a sonic character all their own.

Enter the AMS RMX16.

While not the first digital reverb unit, the Advanced Music Systems RMX16 was the first unit to utilize microprocessors. Built by AMS engineer Mark Crabtree in 1981, the RMX16 came loaded with a remarkable 99 presets, including one in particular that proved to work very well for a gated reverb sound.

The RMX16’s “Nonlinear” reverb preset was purposefully designed to sound artificial. In nature, reverberation decays, getting quieter and quieter until it is eventually inaudible. A nonlinear reverb, on the other hand, actually gets louder as it sustains.

The weirdness of the nonlinear reverb preset was perfect for the experimental sounds of the ’80s!

Building off of Hugh Padgham and Phil Collins’s drum sound, Prince took it a step further.

Needless to say, Prince loved the sound of gated reverb. From about 1982 to 1987, the technique was all over his records! He was also a fan of sampled drums, and famously fed a Linn LM-1 drum machine into the RMX16 reverb unit to create the quintessential ’80s drum sound heard on some of his biggest albums.

At this point, gated reverb was no longer an accident at all—it had become the defining sound of an era. Some of the most popular examples of this drum sound can be heard on “Hounds of Love” by Kate Bush, “Jack and Diane” by John Cougar Mellencamp, “Dance on Your Knees” by Hall and Oates, and “A View to Kill” by Duran Duran.

By the time the ’90s rolled around, musicians tended to favor dry sounding drums again.

But there’s a phrase which says “everything that’s old is new again.” Even though gated reverb fell out of favor for quite some time, it’s made a comeback over the last several years on major pop records.

Projects like “When I Needed You” by Carly Rae Jepsen, Melodrama by Lorde, and the appropriately titled 1989 by Taylor Swift all prominently feature the ’80s drum sound which Hugh Padgham and Phil Collins accidentally created back in 1979.

Today, musicians don’t need LM-1 drum machines fed into AMS RMX16 reverb units to achieve the sound of the ’80s. You can simply download drum sample packs inspired by Phil Collins, Prince, and the countless other artists who helped define the sound of an era!

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

19. Show HN: Typeset sitelen pona and copy a PNG (for toki pona speakers)

Source: https://sitelen.vercel.app/
Site: sitelen.vercel.app
Submitter: vitaly-pavlenko (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-17 16:41 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 3 points · 0 comments
Length: 29 words (~1 min read)
Language: en

lili anu sulimute mute

tenpo+sike mute ale mute wan la jan [_sona_olin_nasin_jan_awen] li lon e toki+pona jan [_sona] li jan+lawa pi+toki+pona jan mute pi++ma ale li toki kepeken ona

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

20. Nostalgic Kits Central (2024)

Source: https://www.nostalgickitscentral.com/
Site: nostalgickitscentral.com
Author: Ken Kaplan
Submitted: 2026-05-17 17:14 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 23 points · 11 comments
Length: 1.8K words (~9 min read)
Language: en-US

The era of electronic kits started (with a few minor exceptions like Stancor) after the end of WWII. In 1947, Heath offered its first kit, a 5 inch oscilloscope. Heath rapidly grew and after a while, other companies embraced the kit business. None were as successful as Heath but they still played an important role in the industry. Perhaps, like me, you built some of those kits. The availability of inexpensive electronic kits and the learning process of building, troubleshooting and using them quite likely encouraged many to pursue a career in electronics. For others, it contributed to a hobby that had a lasting character. For all, there was a common bond of construction brotherhood. It was a wonderful time when we saved our money, bought and then built amazing electronic devices on kitchen or dining room tables, garage or basement workshops or wherever a safe space for all of those beautiful parts could be found. Not every kit worked the first time it was turned on. Many were built by those who had never used a soldering iron before. Evidence of this still exists today in some kits that have been sold on the used market. Some builders lost interest due to a mismatch between kit complexity and builder skills. Many others learned from their mistakes and went on to build many more kits. This website is for all of those builders. Perhaps it will jog a memory. Hopefully a good one. To sort of paraphrase the immortal words of Cuba Gooding Jr. in the movie Jerry Maguire, "show me the kits!".

BTW - Heathkits were not just a U.S. phenomenon. After Heath reached a certain level of success, versions of the Heathkit product line were offered in the U.K. and Europe and there were differences. More about this in a future update. What follows are brief descriptions of the companies represented here.

Heathkit was a well known supplier of electronic kits from 1947 through the early 1990's (although no new kits were developed after 1986). An incredible number of kits were offered including test equipment, amateur and SWL radio, audio, televisions, computers, robotics, automotive and other items difficult to categorize. Not all of their product offerings were kits. In their later years, many items were offered as either kits or assembled. Some items were only available assembled. Further, some products were made by other companies and rebranded as Heathkit. This site will focus just on items available in kit form. For now, the robotics kits are not included. Heathkit is no longer in business. Don Desrochers, the owner, filed for bankrupcy in May of 2012. In their last few years they focused on selling educational products to schools and were known as Heathkit Educational Systems. A decline in funding from federal and state sources had a serious impact on their revenues. An article on the ARRL website discusses this matter in more detail. When discussing electronic kit providers of the 20th century, Heathkit was the big Kahuna and is by far the largest part of this site. The best place to learn about the history of the company is in Chuck Penson's excellent books "Heathkit: A Guide to the Amateur Radio Products" and "Heathkit Test Equipment Products". There are a number of good Internet based information sources as well like WikipediA (see the Heathkit Resources page).

There were others who were perhaps a little less known. Among them were Allied Radio, EICO, EMC, Precise, Paco, Dynaco and Stancor. The goal of this site is to attempt to document the kits produced by all of these companies via product tables containing pictures, specifications, block diagrams, calibration info and clean schematics when available. Where available, the product tables will include links to other off site information resources.

Allied Radio (now known as RS Americas) is a company with a long nine decade history. It was founded in Chicago, IL. in 1928. Its purpose was to distribute radio parts for Columbia Radio Corp. By 1932, Allied was selling electronic parts by catalog. Storefront sales operations were established with the goal of selling to amateur radio operators and electronics experimenters. During WWII, Allied devoted itself to the war effort by handling government contracts and high-priority industrial needs. This was Allied's first real experience in industrial electronics. After the war, Allied continued to sell to the consumer and industrial markets. Sometime around 1962, Allied Electronics was created as a subsidiary of Allied Radio. In 1971, Allied was acquired by Tandy (ultimaely Radio Shack Corp.) and moved its headquarters to Fort Worth, Texas. Around 1981, Spartan Manufacturing acquired the company. In 1997, Avnet took over ownership. In 1999, Allied Electronics was acquired by Electrocomponents plc of the United Kingdom. In 2023 the company became RS Americas. RS Americas continues to sell electronic components by catalog and Internet ordering. Allied Radio produced a line of kits under the Knight label. They were called Knight-Kits. Although not as extensive a line as Heathkit, they had many offerings in test equipment. Amateur radio, SWL, audio, entertainment and educational/experimenter kits rounded out their product line.

EICO, or Electronic Instrument Company, started life around 1945 in Brooklyn New York. Like Allied Radio, most of their kit products were test equipment although audio and some ham and CB products became another important part of their line. Their products were sold direct, through distributors, dealers and even through the Allied catalog. At some point in their history, they dropped out of the electronics business and got into the selling and mortgaging of commercial real estate. According to an article in Business.com, "The shareholders of the company have approved a plan of liquidation on May 28, 1999. The liquidation is expected to be complete by December 31, 2002."

EMC, which stands for Electronic Measurements Corporation, was a supplier of test equipment in both kit and assembled form. They were based in Westbury, L.I., New York. Their products were generally lower end technology with lower prices. Their slogan was "EMC gives more measurement value per dollar". EMC products were marketed through electronics magazines and some electronics stores. Their line was never as extensive as the other kit providers but they did fill a need.

Precise Electronics & Development Corp. was a company that marketed test equipment. At different times they were based in Mineola and Oceanside, N.Y. Their product line was small compared to their competition. In order to differentiate themselves, they added features not commonly found like larger screens on their oscilloscopes. Although I still own a model 630 signal generator, I haven't been able to find much information on this company. Some of their products were listed in the 1962 Allied catalog.

PACO was a division of Precision Apparatus Co. (a subsidiary of Pacotronics). Later they became a division of Dynascan Corp. They were a relatively small player in the kit market. As far as I've been able to determine, they only sold test equipment and Hi-Fi kits. Like EMC, they sold products in both kit and assembled form. They were based at 70-31 84th St., Glendale 27, Long Island, N.Y. If you have any information to share on this company and its products, I'd appreciate it.

Dynaco was a provider of quality audio kits. The company was formed by David Hafler and Ed Laurent in Philadelphia in 1954. It lasted until 1980. In 1990, a British company and affilliate of Panor Corp. called Marlborough Enterprises Ltd, acquired the name. An excellent history of the company is available here. Dynaco products were very good with regards to price/performance.

Stancor was a pre-WWII manufacturer of electronic components. They had an extensive line of transformers and chokes. In addition, they offered a series of amateur transmitter kits. I believe that their kit products were available from the 1930's through the late 1940's. As such, this company predates the other companies listed here. My historical information on this company is sadly lacking. I solicit information on this company.

Conar Instruments Company was part of the National Radio Institute (NRI). NRI was a private correspondence school based in Washington, D.C. The name CONAR is derived from the first letters of "COmpany, NAtional Radio". Their role was to supply test equipment to NRI students and graduates. Their first kit went to market in 1962. The main focus of their offerings was radio and TV service test equipment but they offered other devices as well. They added Ham items over time. NRI ceased operations in 1999.

Unlike Heathkit, Amateur Radio was not a major part of either Allied or Eico. As far as I've been able to determine, EMC and Precise made only test equipment and Dynaco only audio gear. Allied and Eico did offer some historically interesting items for Hams and SWL's, however. Although Heathkit was arguably the most successful kit provider, many EICO products were of comparable or higher quality. It is probably safe to say that most of the knowledgeable kit buyers of the time considered the Knight kits to be somewhat inferior to comparable Heathkit or EICO items. In spite of this, many kits were sold and used. I built my first kit when I was in the 7th grade. It was a Knight-Kit Ocean Hopper receiver followed by an EMC 107A VTVM, Heathkit OM-3 oscilloscope, Precise 630 Signal Generator, Heathkit AA-32 amplifier, Dynaco Stereo 120 power amplifier and a PAT4A preamplifier. They were as much fun to build as they were to use. Unfortunately, the days of building kits like those listed in these pages are gone. Like many others, I miss the opportunity to buy and build a well engineered electronics kit. If I have left out an important kit company, please let me know and I'll do all I can to get it included.

Please note that I do not have any kit material, parts or manuals for sale or trade. There are suppliers of these materials listed in this website. I provide this site as an informational service only. I provide pictures, specifications, schematics, service bulletins, modification docs and other information. If you don't find what you need here, check out the links or do a search using you favorite search site. I will be very happy to receive material for inclusion to this website as my goal is to share the wealth of info available. Please see the Submitting To The Site section.

Speaking of Links, you might be amused and/or informed by visiting my Boatanchors and BABE's site. It has pictures and info on my somewhat rare Hammarlund HQ-215 receiver and other Boat Anchors, a Tektronix 7000 series plugin list, some schematics and attempts at a little humor. Perhaps its most important component is the Boat Anchor Beauty Evaluator or BABE. Using the BABE, you can quantitatively determine the attractiveness of your boatanchors - really. I wouldn't joke about this.

If you have any information you wish to share, or corrections to suggest, please email me. I strive for accuracy but things can go rong. I am happy to give credit for your contributions.

Number of visits:	since 3/14/2002

Latest site update: 7 Mar. 2024

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

21. GitHub is investigating unauthorized access to their internal repositories

Source: https://twitter.com/github/status/2056884788179726685
Redirected to: https://x.com/github/status/2056884788179726685
Site: X (formerly Twitter)
Submitter: splenditer (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-20 00:01 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 452 points · 237 comments
Length: 27 words (~1 min read)
Language: en

Something went wrong, but don’t fret — let’s give it another shot.

Some privacy related extensions may cause issues on x.com. Please disable them and try again.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

22. Minnesota becomes first state to ban prediction markets

Source: https://www.npr.org/2026/05/19/nx-s1-5821265/minnesota-ban-prediction-markets
Site: NPR
Author: Bobby Allyn
Published: 2026-05-19
HN activity: 665 points · 202 comments
Length: 867 words (~4 min read)
Language: en

Minnesota has enacted the most far-reaching crackdown on massively popular services like Kalshi and Polymarket. Steve Karnowski/Associated Press hide caption

toggle caption

Steve Karnowski/Associated Press

Minnesota Gov. Tim Walz has signed the nation's first law banning prediction market sites from operating in the state, and in response, the Trump administration has sued, teeing up a legal battle over the most far-reaching crackdown on popular services like Kalshi and Polymarket.

It comes as states confront a growing standoff with the Trump administration over how to regulate the industry, which allows people to bet on virtually anything.

The new state law makes it a crime to host or advertise a prediction market, which it defines as a system that lets consumers place a wager on a future outcome, like sports, elections, live entertainment, someone's word choice and world affairs.

The prohibition extends to services supporting prediction markets, like virtual private networks, that could allow consumers to disguise their location and get around the ban.

It would force prediction market sites like Kalshi and Polymarket to leave the state, or face possible felony charges. The law takes effect in August.

"We as a state should decide how best and what regulations we think should attach to gambling, to protect public safety, to protect our kids," said Minnesota Rep. Emma Greenman, the Democrat who introduced the measure.

The law has a carve-out for event contracts that serve as an insurance policy in the event of "harm, or loss sustained" and for the purchase of securities and other commodities.

The Commodity Futures Trading Commission's lawsuit seeks to block the law before it starts, arguing the prediction market industry should be exclusively regulated by federal officials.

"This Minnesota law turns lawful operators and participants in prediction markets into felons overnight," said CFTC Chairman Michael Selig. "Minnesota farmers have relied on critical hedging products on weather and crop-related events for decades to mitigate their risks. Governor Walz chose to put special interests first and American farmers and innovators last."

An updated version of the prediction market bill allows trading on weather, an exception that followed pushback from the agricultural industry, which has historically used futures trading on weather as a hedge against storms and other inclement weather that can affect a harvest. Walz is expected to sign it soon.

Besides Minnesota, bills cracking down on the prediction market industry have been introduced in 14 other states, according to the National Conference of State Legislators. Two of those states, Hawaii and North Carolina, have pending bills seeking to ban the industry statewide.

Experts say the cloud of legal uncertainty hanging over prediction markets apps have not slowed their rapid growth.

"The states are using any tactic they can to go after the prediction market companies," said Melinda Roth, a professor at Washington and Lee University's School of Law, who studies the industry. "But they've embarked on a too big to fail strategy and have become quite mainstream," she said. "It will be hard to put that genie back in the bottle."

A legal fight over the Minnesota ban is expected. Questions over whether states or the federal government should oversee the prediction market industry have already triggered more than 20 lawsuits. One of those cases, in Nevada, led to Kalshi pausing its sports betting in the state after a judge found it "indistinguishable" from state-regulated sports gambling.

The Commodity Futures Trading Commission has filed federal lawsuits against five states, including Arizona, Wisconsin and New York, attempting to override state regulators' attempts to rein in the betting sites.

The CFTC has argued it has exclusive jurisdiction over prediction markets, even though former CFTC members and legal experts say bets on football games, words President Trump might say during a press conference and whether Ricky Martin will make an appearance at the Super Bowl are matters far outside its traditional scope.

In a statement to NPR, Kalshi spokeswoman Elisabeth Diana said banning prediction markets is a "blatant violation" of the law.

"Minnesota banning prediction markets is like trying to ban the New York Stock Exchange," said Diana, adding that "this actively harms users because it reduces competition and drives activity offshore."

A Polymarket spokesman told NPR that Minnesota's ban runs counter to the federal government's "established framework" for regulating prediction markets.

Tribal-owned casinos operate in Minnesota, but online gambling and sports betting are not legal in the state.

Prediction markets like Kalshi and Polymarket have given access to sports betting to people in states where the activity is prohibited, since the Trump administration regulates the sites as a type of "event contract," rather than gambling, which typically is overseen by state gaming authorities.

Nonetheless, sports gambling powers the sites. On Kalshi, for instance, more than 85% of trading activity is related to a sporting event, some of those trades being "parlays," high-risk wagers that multiple things, points scored, fouls, passes, will all happen.

Bettors on the sites are making billions of dollars in trades every week, even as questions around insider trading and how the markets can create perverse incentives for people to manipulate real world outcomes continue to vex the companies.

Minnesota Public Radio News reporters Dana Ferguson and Peter Cox contributed reporting to this story.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

23. Enabling Resizable Bar on RTX 3080 Vbios via GitHub

Source: https://github.com/danindiana/rtx3080-rebar-vbios/tree/master
Site: GitHub
Submitter: linux_lorax (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-17 19:26 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 4 points · 3 comments
Length: 2.6K words (~12 min read)
Language: en

Enabling Resizable BAR (8 GB BAR1) on an ASUS TUF-RTX3080-O10G-GAMING under Linux, without Windows, without a GUI flash tool, and without bricking the card.

Table of Contents

Background
System
What Is Resizable BAR and Why Does It Matter?
Prerequisites
Scripts
How the Flash Works
ROM Selection
Lessons Learned — What Went Wrong First
Flash Results
Post-Flash Steps
Recovery Plan
Diagrams
File Inventory
Analysis: ReBAR Speedup Model
Analysis: BAR1 Mechanics

Background

This repo documents a multi-attempt Linux VBIOS flash campaign to enable Resizable BAR on an ASUS TUF RTX 3080 10 GB card in a dual-GPU system that also contains an RTX 5080. The RTX 5080 had ReBAR active out of the box; the 3080 did not because its factory VBIOS lacked the ReBAR capability bit.

ASUS ships VBIOS updates as Windows .exe self-installers. This project extracts the ROM from inside the installer and flashes it directly via the Linux build of nvflash, handling all the complications that come with doing this on a live X11 desktop without a spare recovery machine.

End result: VBIOS updated from 94.02.42.40.65 (AS03) to 94.02.42.40.66 (AS02), flash exit code 0, reboot pending for BAR1 expansion.

System

Component Detail
Machine worlock
OS Xubuntu 22.04.5 LTS, Linux 6.8.12
Motherboard ASRock X570 Taichi
CPU AMD Ryzen 9 5950X (32 threads)
RAM 128 GB DDR4
GPU 0 RTX 5080 — PCIe 0E:00.0 — 16 GB — ReBAR ENABLED (control)
GPU 1 RTX 3080 — PCIe 0F:00.0 — 10 GB GDDR6X — ReBAR target
3080 Subsystem 10DE:2206 / 1043:87B0 (TUF-RTX3080-O10G-GAMING)
Display Connected to GPU 1 (RTX 3080, Disp.A: On)
Driver NVIDIA 580.142 / CUDA 13.0
Display Manager LightDM (Xfce default)
Inference Ollama — both GPUs, CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES=0,1
nvflash 5.867.0 (Linux x64 binary)
Target ROM 94.02.42.40.AS02.rom (V6 package, 2023-10-18)

What Is Resizable BAR and Why Does It Matter?

PCIe devices expose their memory to the CPU through fixed-size windows called Base Address Registers (BARs). GPU BAR1 is the window through which the CPU can directly read and write VRAM. Traditionally, BIOS firmware assigned this window at a fixed 256 MiB regardless of how much VRAM the GPU actually has — a legacy of 32-bit address space constraints.

Resizable BAR (also marketed as AMD Smart Access Memory / SAM) is a PCIe feature that allows the BIOS to negotiate a BAR1 window as large as the GPU's full VRAM. On a 10 GB RTX 3080, a working ReBAR implementation expands BAR1 from 256 MiB to 8192 MiB.

Why 8192 MiB, not 10240 MiB?

PCIe BAR sizes must be powers of two. 8 GiB is the largest power-of-two that fits within 10 GB, so that is what the BIOS assigns. The remaining ~2 GB of VRAM is still accessible by the GPU internally; only the CPU-visible window is bounded by the BAR.

Performance implications for multi-GPU inference (Ollama)

When Ollama loads a model across two GPUs (RTX 5080 + RTX 3080), the runtime may need to move activations, KV-cache entries, and layer state across the PCIe fabric.

ReBAR expands the CPU-addressable window into VRAM from 256 MiB to 8192 MiB, reducing remapping pressure for large transfers. It is not equivalent to CUDA Peer-to-Peer access, which is a separate runtime capability gated on topology, NVLink/PCIe connectivity, and driver negotiation:

cudaDeviceCanAccessPeer(&canAccess, deviceA, deviceB);


ReBAR improves the memory-mapping situation. It does not, by itself, guarantee CUDA P2P.

Prerequisites

Motherboard BIOS (do this first)

These settings must be active before any VBIOS flash will have visible effect:

Above 4G Decoding → Enabled
(ASRock X570 Taichi: Advanced → AMD CBS → NBIO Common Options → SMU Common Options)
Re-Size BAR Support → Enabled
(same submenu; may also appear as "SAM" or "Smart Access Memory")
CSM (Compatibility Support Module) → Disabled
(Boot → CSM → Disabled — ReBAR is a UEFI feature; CSM silently breaks it)

Verify the 5080 (which has ReBAR natively) is already showing a large BAR1 to confirm these settings are active before proceeding:

sudo lspci -vvv -s 0e:00.0 | grep -A5 "Resizable BAR"
# Expected: BAR 1: supported: 64MB 128MB ... 16GB

Kernel parameter

# Check if pci=realloc is active
cat /proc/cmdline | grep -o 'pci=realloc'

# Add it if missing (edit /etc/default/grub):
GRUB_CMDLINE_LINUX_DEFAULT="quiet splash pci=realloc"
sudo update-grub
sudo reboot

Tools required

sudo apt install p7zip-full expect

expect is required because nvflash opens /dev/console directly for confirmation prompts and does not respond to piped yes — a pseudo-TTY is mandatory.

Scripts

Script Purpose Run as
preflight-check.sh Read-only prerequisite check. Safe to run any time. Confirms nvflash, ROM, UEFI mode, current BAR1 state. user
vbios-preflight.sh Stop services, unload drivers, backup VBIOS. Kills X session. root, from TTY
rebar-enable.sh Full end-to-end flash: stop services → unload → backup → flash → reload → restart X. root
vbios-verify.sh Post-reboot verification. Checks VBIOS version, BAR1 size, PCIe capability register, GPU inventory. user

Quick start (if prerequisites are met)

# 1. Sanity check (read-only, safe)
bash ~/vbios-work/preflight-check.sh

# 2. Run the flash (kills X — desktop will go black, then come back)
sudo ~/vbios-work/rebar-enable.sh

# 3. Reboot
sudo reboot

# 4. Verify
bash ~/vbios-work/vbios-verify.sh

How the Flash Works

rebar-enable.sh orchestrates the entire flash in a single run, designed to be launched from an X terminal even though it will kill X partway through (via systemctl stop lightdm). The script is a systemd service in all but name — once LightDM drops, the script keeps running in the background as a child of the shell that launched it.

Step-by-step

[0]  Stop all GPU consumers
     ├── ollama.service        (systemctl stop)
     ├── gpu-watchdog.service  (stop + pkill -9, has Restart=always)
     └── nvidia-persistenced   (MASK first, then stop — mask blocks auto-restart)

[1]  Stop LightDM              ← X session dies here; terminal window closes
     (sleep 4s for Xorg to fully exit)

[2]  Unload NVIDIA kernel modules in dependency order:
     nvidia_uvm → nvidia_drm → nvidia_modeset → nvidia

[3]  nvflash --list            (confirm GPU 1 visible without driver)

[4]  Backup current VBIOS      (skip if 3080-backup-pre-rebar.rom already exists)
     nvflash -i 1 --save backup.rom

[5]  ROM compatibility check   (nvflash --check; proceed regardless)
[5b] Write-protect off         (nvflash --protectoff; expect-driven)

[6]  FLASH                     ← ~30 seconds, EEPROM write
     nvflash -i 1 94.02.42.40.AS02.rom
     (expect drives the y/n confirmation via pseudo-TTY)

[7]  Read-back verification    (nvflash --save /tmp/verify.rom; check non-empty)

[8]  Reload NVIDIA modules     (nvidia → nvidia_modeset → nvidia_drm → nvidia_uvm)
[9]  Restore services          (unmask + start nvidia-persistenced, gpu-watchdog)
[10] Restart LightDM           ← desktop comes back

[11] Report SUCCESS / FAILURE to flash-session.log


See diagram 03 for the full annotated flowchart.

ROM Selection

The ASUS V6 package (2023-10-18, RTX3080_V6.exe, 15 MB) contains four ROM files. Only two are valid for the TUF-RTX3080-10G-GAMING (subsystem 1043:87B0):

ROM Subsystem Version Board Notes
AS02 1043:87B0 94.02.42.40.66 TUF-RTX3080 Use this. Newer build.
AS03 1043:87B0 94.02.42.40.65 TUF-RTX3080 Valid fallback, older build.
AS08 1043:87EB — TURBO-RTX3080 Wrong card. Do not flash.
AS09 1043:87EB — TURBO-RTX3080 Wrong card. Do not flash.

Important: Neither the displayed decimal suffix nor the ASUS ASxx number is globally monotonic across the ROM set.

For this specific 1043:87B0 TUF PCB, AS02 displays as .66 and AS03 displays as .65. AS02 is the preferred V6 target, while AS03 is a valid fallback — but this conclusion comes from the ROM metadata and package comparison table, not from assuming .66 > .65 or AS03 > AS02.

Across the full package, AS08/AS09 have higher AS numbers but belong to the Turbo 1043:87EB branch and must not be flashed to the TUF 87B0 card.

Important

ROM selection invariant

Do not trust the displayed version suffix. Do not trust the AS-series number order. Do not trust ROM filenames or package names.

Trust only:

Subsystem ID: must be 1043:87B0
Power target: must be 340 W, not 320 W
Boost clock: must be 1785 MHz, not 1710 MHz
nvflash --check: must report no subsystem mismatch

The safe comparator is not .65 vs .66, and not AS02 vs AS03. The safe comparator is:

subsystem + board family + power target + boost clock + nvflash check


See diagram 05 for the full decision tree.

Lessons Learned — What Went Wrong First

Three earlier flash attempts failed silently. Here is what happened and why.

Root cause: Windows-only nvflash flags on Linux

The flash script originally used:

nvflash -i 1 --force-subsystem-id --force-board-id rom.rom

These flags do not exist in the Linux build of nvflash 5.867. When the binary encounters unknown flags, it prints Command format not recognized and falls into interactive menu mode instead of aborting.

The expect script was written to handle the direct-flash prompts, but it was now navigating an unexpected interactive menu. It exited with code 5 (nvflash's interactive compatibility check failure code). The EEPROM was written — but via the interactive path, which landed on AS03 (.65) instead of the intended AS02 (.66).

How this was diagnosed:

strings ~/vbios-work/x64/nvflash | grep force
# Output: --forcesub, --forceboard — but those also fail
# The Linux binary simply has no equivalent of the Windows force flags
# for same-subsystem ROMs, because they aren't needed: nvflash accepts
# a matching ROM without any force flag

Correct invocation on Linux:

nvflash -i 1 <rom_file>
# That's it. No force flags. The binary prompts y/n if subsystems match.

Why nvidia-persistenced had to be masked, not just stopped

nvidia-persistenced holds open file descriptors to every NVIDIA device file (/dev/nvidia0, /dev/nvidia1, /dev/nvidiactl, /dev/nvidia-modeset) even when no GPU workload is running. It cannot be simply stopped with systemctl stop if it has Restart=always in its unit file. The solution is to mask the unit first, which prevents systemd from restarting it, then stop it. After the flash, unmask and restart.

systemctl mask nvidia-persistenced
systemctl stop nvidia-persistenced
# ... flash ...
systemctl unmask nvidia-persistenced
systemctl start nvidia-persistenced

Why gpu-watchdog needed pkill -9

gpu-watchdog.service (a thermal monitoring daemon) also has Restart=always. A plain systemctl stop sends SIGTERM and systemd immediately restarts it before the stop completes. The script uses systemctl stop followed by pkill -9 -f gpu_thermal.watchdog to terminate the process before systemd can react, then waits for the unit to reach inactive state.

Why expect is required (not yes | nvflash)

nvflash opens /dev/console directly for confirmation prompts, bypassing stdin. Piping yes into it has no effect. expect spawns a pseudo-TTY that nvflash treats as a real console, allowing the y response to reach the binary.

Flash Results

Flash executed on 2026-05-17 at 11:41 AM CDT.

Pre-flash  VBIOS: 94.02.42.40.65  (AS03 — arrived via interactive flash mishap)
Post-flash VBIOS: 94.02.42.40.66  (AS02 — clean direct flash, exit code 0)
Subsystem:        1043:87B0        (correct — TUF-RTX3080-O10G-GAMING)
Flash duration:   ~40 seconds


nvflash read-back immediately after flash confirmed 94.02.42.40.66 with build GUID 36762E5D66904B30A099C58D53966BF5 and IFR Subsystem ID: 1043-87B0.

BAR1 state immediately after flash (before reboot):

BAR1 Memory Usage
    Total   : 256 MiB       ← expected; UEFI reallocation happens on reboot
    Used    : 19 MiB
    Free    : 237 MiB

BAR 1: current size: 256MB, supported: 64MB 128MB 256MB


A reboot is required for the UEFI firmware to read the new VBIOS's ReBAR capability and assign an expanded BAR1 window.

Post-reboot BAR1 verification

After reboot, the firmware re-reads the updated VBIOS and assigns the larger BAR1 aperture.

Before reboot, immediately after flash (confirmed above):

BAR1 Memory Usage
    Total   : 256 MiB
    Used    : 19 MiB
    Free    : 237 MiB


After reboot (expected):

$ nvidia-smi -q -i 1 | grep -A3 "BAR1 Memory Usage"

BAR1 Memory Usage
    Total   : 8192 MiB
    Used    : <observed> MiB
    Free    : <observed> MiB

$ sudo lspci -vvv -s 0f:00.0 | grep -A5 "Resizable BAR"

BAR 1: current size: 8192MB, supported: 64MB 128MB 256MB ... 8192MB

Capture command to record both at once:

{
  echo "=== nvidia-smi BAR1 ==="
  nvidia-smi -q -i 1 | sed -n '/BAR1 Memory Usage/,+3p'
  echo
  echo "=== lspci Resizable BAR ==="
  sudo lspci -vvv -s 0f:00.0 | grep -A8 "Resizable BAR"
} | tee post-reboot-rebar-verification.txt

Update the <observed> placeholders above with the actual output once the reboot completes.

Post-Flash Steps

# 1. Reboot
sudo reboot

# 2. After reboot, verify BAR1 expanded
nvidia-smi -q -i 1 | grep -A3 "BAR1"
# Expected:
#   Total : 8192 MiB
#   Used  : 0 MiB
#   Free  : 8192 MiB

sudo lspci -vvv -s 0f:00.0 | grep -A5 "Resizable BAR"
# Expected: BAR 1: current size: 8192MB, supported: 64MB 128MB ... 8192MB

# 3. Verify with vbios-verify.sh
bash ~/vbios-work/vbios-verify.sh

# 4. (Optional) Update Ollama service for post-ReBAR tuning
sudo tee /etc/systemd/system/ollama.service.d/override.conf <<'EOF'
[Service]
Environment="CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES=0,1"
Environment="OLLAMA_MAX_LOADED_MODELS=2"
Environment="OLLAMA_GPU_OVERHEAD=0"
EOF
sudo systemctl daemon-reload && sudo systemctl restart ollama

Recovery Plan

If the RTX 3080 does not POST after flashing:

Power off; reseat just the RTX 5080; boot on it alone (connect display to 5080).
Reinstall the RTX 3080 while running — it will appear headless on the PCIe bus.
Re-flash with the backup ROM:

sudo ~/vbios-work/x64/nvflash -i 1 ~/vbios-work/3080-backup-pre-rebar.rom
If nvflash cannot see the card: try --bulldoze (last resort, skips all checks).
The backup was saved before the first flash attempt and contains the original factory VBIOS. Its SHA256 is recorded alongside it.

Diagrams

All diagrams are in the diagrams/ folder as .dot source, .png (150 dpi), and .svg (scalable). Generated with Graphviz 2.43.0.

01 — System Topology

Overview of the dual-GPU system: PCIe topology, BAR1 state before and after, OS/driver stack, and Ollama's relationship to both GPUs.

02 — ReBAR Architecture

How BAR1 expansion works: CPU address space, PCIe fabric, BAR negotiation, and the difference in VRAM visibility before and after. Includes the full list of prerequisites.

03 — Flash Workflow

Complete annotated flowchart of rebar-enable.sh — every step, every decision point, abort paths, and the post-reboot verification path.

04 — Service Dependency Graph

Which services hold GPU device file handles, in what order they must be shut down, why nvidia-persistenced requires masking rather than stopping, and how the systemd execution context keeps the flash running after X dies.

05 — ROM Selection Decision Tree

How to correctly identify which ROM in the V6 package applies to your card, why AS08/AS09 are wrong targets, why AS02 is preferred over AS03, and the history of how the incorrect interactive flash landed on AS03 instead.

06 — BAR1 Window Epochs

Side-by-side comparison of 256 MiB vs 8192 MiB BAR1: how many aperture windows the driver must cycle through to cover the full VRAM working set. 35 epochs for the observed 8778 MiB working set under 256 MiB BAR1; 2 epochs under 8192 MiB BAR1.

07 — Remap Cycle Flow

The serialized remap-flush-transfer sequence that runs 35× under 256 MiB BAR1, annotating the PCIe configuration cycle that cannot be pipelined with the data transfer. Compared against the map-once path under 8192 MiB BAR1.

08 — CPU Overhead Breakdown

The four CPU-side cost components fired on every remap epoch: TLB shootdown, write-combining flush, driver remap lock, and completion fence. Shows how these multiply by ×35 under 256 MiB BAR1 and collapse to ×2 under 8192 MiB BAR1.

File Inventory

~/vbios-work/
├── README.md                       ← this file
├── REBAR_VBIOS_GUIDE.md            ← detailed implementation guide (pre-flash reference)
├── preflight-check.sh              ← read-only prerequisite check (safe to run anytime)
├── vbios-preflight.sh              ← stop services, unload driver, backup VBIOS
├── rebar-enable.sh                 ← end-to-end flash script (kills X, flashes, restores)
├── vbios-verify.sh                 ← post-reboot ReBAR verification
├── flash-session.log               ← captured output from successful flash (2026-05-17)
├── .gitignore                      ← excludes ROM files and nvflash binary from git
│
├── diagrams/
│   ├── 01_system_topology.dot/.png/.svg
│   ├── 02_rebar_architecture.dot/.png/.svg
│   ├── 03_flash_workflow.dot/.png/.svg
│   ├── 04_service_dependency.dot/.png/.svg
│   └── 05_rom_selection.dot/.png/.svg
│
└── (gitignored — kept locally)
    ├── x64/nvflash                 ← nvflash 5.867.0 Linux binary
    ├── 3080-backup-pre-rebar.rom   ← original factory VBIOS backup
    ├── v6-extracted/               ← ASUS V6 package contents
    │   ├── 94.02.42.40.AS02.rom   ← flash target (TUF 87B0, newer build)
    │   └── 94.02.42.40.AS03.rom   ← fallback ROM
    └── nvflash_5.867_linux.zip     ← nvflash source archive


References

TechPowerUp nvflash downloads
TechPowerUp VBIOS database
ASUS TUF-RTX3080-O10G-GAMING support page
PCIe Resizable BAR spec — PCI-SIG
Linux kernel pci=realloc documentation
Graphviz DOT language reference

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

24. Testing MiniMax M2.7 via API on three real ML and coding workflows

Source: https://andlukyane.com//blog/minimax-m27-workflows
Site: artgor
Author: Andrey Lukyanenko
Published: 2026-05-18
HN activity: 23 points · 1 comments
Length: 2.2K words (~10 min read)
Language: en

Testing MiniMax M2.7 via API on three real ML and coding workflows

I recently got access to some MiniMax M2.7 API credits, so I decided to plug this model directly into Claude Code and run it on three workflows I do regularly. The same tasks were run using Claude Opus 4.7 as the comparison baseline.

The three workflows: scaffolding an entry for an active Kaggle competition, drafting and auditing knowledge-base notes for my Obsidian vault, and updating an old PyTorch project that became outdated. I wanted to find out how well M2.7 works inside an agentic loop when the task has clear boundaries. The results were consistent across the three runs: M2.7 was useful when the constraints were explicit, and the output format was concrete. It stumbled when important context was left implicit, though some of the same gaps appeared with Opus 4.7 as well.

For the more open-ended cases, I would still keep a human review pass in the loop.

Setup

I added a claude-mm command that points Claude Code at the MiniMax API and ran M2.7 with thinking set to max in the CC interface. I ran on MiniMax’s Plus tier (High-Speed, $40/month), where the context window and per-day throughput no longer became bottlenecks for multi-step agentic work.

claude-mm() {
  ANTHROPIC_BASE_URL="https://api.minimax.io/anthropic" \
  ANTHROPIC_AUTH_TOKEN="$MINIMAX_API_KEY" \
  ANTHROPIC_MODEL="MiniMax-M2.7" \
  ANTHROPIC_DEFAULT_SONNET_MODEL="MiniMax-M2.7" \
  ANTHROPIC_DEFAULT_OPUS_MODEL="MiniMax-M2.7" \
  ANTHROPIC_DEFAULT_HAIKU_MODEL="MiniMax-M2.7" \
  ANTHROPIC_SMALL_FAST_MODEL="MiniMax-M2.7" \
  API_TIMEOUT_MS="3000000" \
  CLAUDE_CODE_DISABLE_NONESSENTIAL_TRAFFIC="1" \
  claude "$@"
}


In agentic work, the harness can be as important as the model itself. Most of the failures I describe below had similar reasons: the prompt did not explicitly state a constraint the task depended on, and the model filled the gap with a plausible default. In practice, model quality and harness design are hard to separate. A stronger model may infer missing constraints; a better harness may make those constraints explicit. I treated this as a workflow test, not a pure model benchmark.

Refactoring an old PyTorch project

The first workflow was a refactor: my pytorch_tempest repo is a framework for training neural nets using Hydra + PyTorch Lightning. I wanted to update dependencies, modernize the tooling, and clean up the code issues that had accumulated over time. The merged result is PR: refactoring old code and updating dependencies.

The changes:

Updated CI versions and pre-commit hooks.
Replaced black and flake8 with ruff for both linting and formatting.
Enabled fsdp_sharding_strategy in the Lightning trainer config.
Refreshed the documentation.
Added uv for environment management.
Switched to modern Python typing (list[X] over List[X], X | None over Optional[X]).
Removed duplicate code paths.
Fixed a lot of small issues.

I guided M2.7 explicitly: provided step-by-step requirements (“switch black + flake8 to ruff”, “update the pre-commit config”), reviewed each change before moving to the next, and provided feedback when the diff went outside scope. I had enough tests to check whether anything broke after the changes, and rerunning model training took only several minutes. I had some challenges running CI, and the agent helped me fix them one by one.

A lot of engineers I know do not want to give an agent free rein over a codebase they care about; they want to supervise the execution and know every existing line of code. M2.7 fits this approach well. You can write short, narrow-scope prompts, conduct line-level review, and then move to the next step.

Knowledge notes for the Obsidian vault

The second workflow was writing and auditing notes for my Obsidian vault, where I keep around ML reference notes. I write most of them by hand; sometimes I have an LLM draft a parallel version to compare against and take inspiration from.

It is important to remember that different models prefer different prompt styles. A 100-line prompt tuned for Opus 4.7 does not transfer one-to-one to M2.7. To handle that, I did a small bootstrap: I asked both models to generate notes from the same starting prompt, then asked M2.7 to read both notes and propose an improved prompt for itself. The next iteration used the M2.7-tuned prompt.

I used two prompts (a writer command and a critic agent), each around 100 lines. Here is a condensed version of the first one:

Fill one broken-link stub in the DSWoK vault: research the topic, draft the note in DSWoK voice, run draft-critic-mm, save to the right folder.

1. Read context: writing style guide, frontmatter taxonomy, alias rule.
2. Pick the stub.
3. Locate references — Grep for [[<title>]] across the vault.
4. Pick the destination folder based on topical group.
5. Find a structural template from neighbouring notes.
6. Research via 3–5 sources, search-first — don't trust memory for citations, formula conventions, or post-2024 work.
6.5. Verify each cited URL before pasting it. Hard-to-verify URLs are blocking errors.
7. Determine note type and structure.
8. Draft the note with frontmatter taxonomy + style rules.
9. Cross-link inline to adjacent notes.
10. Run draft-critic-mm and address every blocking issue.


The critic agent has a similarly explicit checklist. The point of writing two detailed prompts is to make the evaluation criteria concrete: this means the model needs to make fewer judgment calls and can self-audit its output.

I shared gists with the command and the critic.

I tested both M2.7 and Opus on four notes: Negative Sampling, MAP (Mean Average Precision), Cold Start (a recommender-systems problem), and RMSE.

In the RMSE note, M2.7 got several things right:

It flagged that RMSE “does not decompose into bias and variance” the way MSE does, because the square root is nonlinear.
It cited Hyndman & Koehler 2006 (the canonical forecasting paper introducing MASE and scaled errors) at the right place.
The Properties section used inline mini-headers with bold formatting, as defined in the style guide.
The intro was tighter than Opus’s version.

What needed editing:

Bullet-label bold (**Rating prediction.**, **Not robust to heavy-tailed noise.**) - this is against the style guide, but easily fixed.
Missing Variants section: RMSLE, NRMSE, and weighted RMSE are absent. This wasn’t defined in the prompt, but it would be a very good addition to the text.
The Willmott reference pointed to a 2006 JAM paper (DOI 10.1175/JAM2472.1) rather than the canonical 2005 Climate Research paper that practitioners usually cite.

The other three notes had the same pattern: solid first drafts, accuracy in the technical core, occasional citation mistakes, and occasional ignoring of style rules. Most of these issues (except the hallucinations) are easy to notice and to fix.

One additional experiment: I asked M2.7 to audit my existing notes and find possible problems. The audit was useful: the model found many formatting issues, including incorrect tags, typos, and missing cross-links. One flagged item was funny, though:

Metrics and losses/f1 score.md Only 1 tag (evaluation); missing domain tag (recsys, nlp, or cv)

The F1 score is a general classification metric and does not need a domain tag by my taxonomy. M2.7 inferred a rule by analyzing larger notes, even though such a rule doesn’t exist. The fix was to include the tag hierarchy in the prompt next time, just as I include the writing-style guide for the drafting task.

Across the four notes and the audit run, M2.7 worked well for creating a first draft. It created useful tables and small visualizations, and the technical content was usually right, but references needed checking.

Here are the final versions of the notes after review, adding more ideas and heavy editing:

Negative Sampling
Cold start

Kaggle: ROGII — Wellbore Geology Prediction

The final task was the ROGII Wellbore Geology Prediction competition: predicting geological layer tops along well paths from drilling-time measurements. Quasi-spatial data, anisotropic distances, a handful of wells with target labels, and per-well prediction error as the scoring metric.

I’m a Competition Master and Notebook Grandmaster, and I was curious to see how well an agent could perform in a new competition. I intentionally started with a high-level prompt rather than a fully specified implementation plan, because that is a realistic simulation for a first interaction with Kaggle. I’ve accumulated notes, code, and write-ups from earlier Kaggle competitions over the years; I shared them as context, along with explanations of what Kaggle is, what competitions are, and how to participate. The goal was to create a first submission that could be iterated on.

M2.7 spent a considerable time on the analysis. The first working result was this notebook rogii-wellbore-final-kriging: a 5-fold validation split by well, ~40 features, and training a gradient boosting model. The validation split was not standard:

# 5-fold GroupKFold by well_id
unique_wells = pre_ps_train["well_id"].unique()
well_to_fold = {w: i % 5 for i, w in enumerate(unique_wells)}
fold_assignments = pre_ps_train["well_id"].map(well_to_fold)


The usual approach would be to use GroupKFold from sklearn, but this “cheap” version was fine for a first pass.

There were two issues, both due to Kaggle-specific mechanics rather than the model’s ML reasoning. ROGII is a kernel-only competition: at submission time, the test set you see (three rows with target values exposed) gets swapped out for the real test set (much larger, no target values). This means that models can miss these mechanics unless they are stated in the prompt. As a result, I noticed two problems:

The model assumed the three exposed test rows were the entire test set and hardcoded them.
It treated the exposed target column as a regular feature and used it during feature engineering.

The first submission didn’t succeed: with the target leaked into the feature set, the model trained against a column it would not have at inference, and the submission failed due to hardcoding the three available test samples.

Interestingly, Opus 4.7 also used the exposed target in feature engineering in the same setup. The kernel-only rules are not something either model picks up from “this is a Kaggle competition” — they have to be in the prompt. After I explicitly explained the mechanics, M2.7 fixed both bugs in one pass, and the submission worked.

It then produced a more advanced version: the rogii-idw-lightgbm-residual notebook, with inverse-distance-weighting features and a LightGBM residual model (without leaks) on top, scoring better than the first attempt.

In terms of participating in Kaggle competitions, M2.7 worked well for building a scaffold for future work: setting up basic validation, starting feature engineering, and training a model. After that, it can iteratively improve the solution if you provide strict constraints and specify the direction (e.g., improving a specific metric).

Cost and throughput

I ran this on MiniMax’s $40/month Plus plan and never came close to the rate limits across five days of intensive Claude Code sessions. The subscription dashboard showed that M2.7 processed roughly 91M total tokens, with most of them cache reads. At M2.7’s PAYG rates ($0.30/$1.20 per million input/output, $0.06 per million cache reads), that’s around $8 worth of usage. I didn’t log Opus 4.7’s token usage, but at its rates ($5/$25, $0.50 cache reads), it would cost around 10x.

In terms of speed, M2.7 returned tool calls and completed multi-step plans noticeably faster than Opus 4.7 on the same tasks — subjectively around 2x. I didn’t benchmark rigorously, but the difference was noticeable. Combined with the cost ratio, this means you can run several supervised iterations on M2.7 within the time and budget of one Opus iteration

Where I’d use M2.7 going forward, and where I wouldn’t

Across the ROGII submission, the four Obsidian notes, and the pytorch_tempest refactor, the results are similar. M2.7 works well when the task has clear boundaries, explicit evaluation criteria, and concrete output requirements. The cases where it fell short had a common cause: the prompt left a piece of context unstated, and the model filled the gap with a reasonable but wrong assumption. In some cases, the same prompt produced the same gap in Opus.

I would use M2.7 going forward for:

Supervised refactors with a narrow scope and rapid iteration.
First-draft technical content that I am going to review anyway: knowledge notes, drafts, or boilerplate for new repos.
Audit of existing documents: when I explicitly provide the taxonomy or a list of checks.
Iterating over existing machine learning code to improve the metrics given explicit constraints.

What I would not yet hand to M2.7 unsupervised:

Open-ended ML competition strategy beyond the initial setup. The decisions should be made by humans or by an advanced model. When the direction is split into tasks, M2.7 can start implementing them.
Reference-heavy technical writing without verification. This is not specific to M2.7 — citation hallucinations happen with most models I have tested. The workaround is the same: verify every URL, and treat it as another step in the workflow.

Across the three workflows, M2.7 was the right tool when I could define the constraints. When the task required the model to figure out the constraints itself (what “kernel-only” implies, what taxonomy applies to F1) both M2.7 and Opus failed, and Opus failed less. The trade is roughly 10x in cost per equivalent task. For supervised work with rapid iteration, using M2.7 is worth it.

This post was written in partnership with the MiniMax team. If you are interested in trying MiniMax, you can use this code for 12% discount. blogpost ai llm claude evaluation kaggle pytorch

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

25. The Mercury logic programming system

Source: https://github.com/Mercury-Language/mercury
Site: GitHub
Submitter: Antibabelic (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-18 07:12 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 65 points · 15 comments
Length: 261 words (~2 min read)
Language: en

Mercury is a logic/functional programming language which combines the clarity and the expressiveness of declarative programming with advanced static analysis and error detection features.

More information is available on the website's about pages, in other README files in the source code repository, and in the documentation.

Small sample programs written in Mercury can be found in the samples and extras directories of the source code repository.

README files

The Mercury compiler has two different backends and works on different operating systems. Specific information is contained in individual README files in the Documentation directory:

Bootstrapping discusses how to get Mercury installed.

This is important, as the Mercury compiler is written in Mercury.

C Low-level backend

This backend works well with GCC but also works with:

Clang

High-level backend targets

C
C#
Java

Supported operating systems

Linux (AArch64, PPC, m68k)
macOS
FreeBSD
OpenBSD
AIX
HP-UX
Solaris
Windows (Visual C, MSYS2, Cygwin)

Other platform information

Cross compilation
Docker
x86

Other information

See the current release notes for the latest stable release. The news file lists any recent changes. The files in the Documentation directory whose names start with NEWS are relevant if you want to find out more about the past development of Mercury. The limitations file lists some ways in which the Mercury implementation does not yet meet its goals.

Information for developers

If you are considering contributing to the Mercury project, the website contains some documents that may be helpful. These include a document about contributions in general and specific information about contributing such as coding styles.

Contact

See our contact page.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

26. Simulated Evolution on the PICO-8

Source: https://bumbershootsoft.wordpress.com/2026/05/16/simulated-evolution-on-the-pico-8/
Site: bumbershootsoft.wordpress.com
Submitter: ibobev (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-18 13:12 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 10 points · 0 comments

Scrape failed: fetch: Get "https://bumbershootsoft.wordpress.com/2026/05/16/simulated-evolution-on-the-pico-8/": context deadline exceeded

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

27. I’ve joined Anthropic

Source: https://twitter.com/karpathy/status/2056753169888334312
Redirected to: https://x.com/karpathy/status/2056753169888334312
Site: X (formerly Twitter)
Submitter: dmarcos (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-19 15:07 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 1330 points · 557 comments
Length: 27 words (~1 min read)
Language: en

Something went wrong, but don’t fret — let’s give it another shot.

Some privacy related extensions may cause issues on x.com. Please disable them and try again.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

28. Growing Neural Cellular Automata

Source: https://distill.pub/2020/growing-ca/
Site: Distill
Author: Michael Levin
Submitted: 2026-05-17 19:21 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 112 points · 12 comments
Length: 4.9K words (~22 min read)
Language: en

Contents

Learning to Grow
What persists, exists
Learning to regenerate
Rotating the perceptive field

This article is part of the Differentiable Self-organizing Systems Thread, an experimental format collecting invited short articles delving into differentiable self-organizing systems, interspersed with critical commentary from several experts in adjacent fields. Differentiable Self-organizing Systems Thread Self-classifying MNIST Digits

Most multicellular organisms begin their life as a single egg cell - a single cell whose progeny reliably self-assemble into highly complex anatomies with many organs and tissues in precisely the same arrangement each time. The ability to build their own bodies is probably the most fundamental skill every living creature possesses. Morphogenesis (the process of an organism’s shape development) is one of the most striking examples of a phenomenon called self-organisation. Cells, the tiny building blocks of bodies, communicate with their neighbors to decide the shape of organs and body plans, where to grow each organ, how to interconnect them, and when to eventually stop. Understanding the interplay of the emergence of complex outcomes from simple rules and homeostatic Self-regulatory feedback loops trying maintain the body in a stable state or preserve its correct overall morphology under external perturbations feedback loops is an active area of research . What is clear is that evolution has learned to exploit the laws of physics and computation to implement the highly robust morphogenetic software that runs on genome-encoded cellular hardware.

This process is extremely robust to perturbations. Even when the organism is fully developed, some species still have the capability to repair damage - a process known as regeneration. Some creatures, such as salamanders, can fully regenerate vital organs, limbs, eyes, or even parts of the brain! Morphogenesis is a surprisingly adaptive process. Sometimes even a very atypical development process can result in a viable organism - for example, when an early mammalian embryo is cut in two, each half will form a complete individual - monozygotic twins!

The biggest puzzle in this field is the question of how the cell collective knows what to build and when to stop. The sciences of genomics and stem cell biology are only part of the puzzle, as they explain the distribution of specific components in each cell, and the establishment of different types of cells. While we know of many genes that are required for the process of regeneration, we still do not know the algorithm that is sufficient for cells to know how to build or remodel complex organs to a very specific anatomical end-goal. Thus, one major lynch-pin of future work in biomedicine is the discovery of the process by which large-scale anatomy is specified within cell collectives, and how we can rewrite this information to have rational control of growth and form. It is also becoming clear that the software of life possesses numerous modules or subroutines, such as “build an eye here”, which can be activated with simple signal triggers. Discovery of such subroutines and a mapping out of the developmental logic is a new field at the intersection of developmental biology and computer science. An important next step is to try to formulate computational models of this process, both to enrich the conceptual toolkit of biologists and to help translate the discoveries of biology into better robotics and computational technology.

Imagine if we could design systems of the same plasticity and robustness as biological life: structures and machines that could grow and repair themselves. Such technology would transform the current efforts in regenerative medicine, where scientists and clinicians seek to discover the inputs or stimuli that could cause cells in the body to build structures on demand as needed. To help crack the puzzle of the morphogenetic code, and also exploit the insights of biology to create self-repairing systems in real life, we try to replicate some of the desired properties in an in silico experiment.

Model

Those in engineering disciplines and researchers often use many kinds of simulations incorporating local interaction, including systems of partial derivative equation (PDEs), particle systems, and various kinds of Cellular Automata (CA). We will focus on Cellular Automata models as a roadmap for the effort of identifying cell-level rules which give rise to complex, regenerative behavior of the collective. CAs typically consist of a grid of cells being iteratively updated, with the same set of rules being applied to each cell at every step. The new state of a cell depends only on the states of the few cells in its immediate neighborhood. Despite their apparent simplicity, CAs often demonstrate rich, interesting behaviours, and have a long history of being applied to modeling biological phenomena.

Let’s try to develop a cellular automata update rule that, starting from a single cell, will produce a predefined multicellular pattern on a 2D grid. This is our analogous toy model of organism development. To design the CA, we must specify the possible cell states, and their update function. Typical CA models represent cell states with a set of discrete values, although variants using vectors of continuous values exist. The use of continuous values has the virtue of allowing the update rule to be a differentiable function of the cell’s neighbourhood’s states. The rules that guide individual cell behavior based on the local environment are analogous to the low-level hardware specification encoded by the genome of an organism. Running our model for a set amount of steps from a starting configuration will reveal the patterning behavior that is enabled by such hardware.

So - what is so special about differentiable update rules? They will allow us to use the powerful language of loss functions to express our wishes, and the extensive existing machinery around gradient-based numerical optimization to fulfill them. The art of stacking together differentiable functions, and optimizing their parameters to perform various tasks has a long history. In recent years it has flourished under various names, such as (Deep) Neural Networks, Deep Learning or Differentiable Programming.
A single update step of the model.

Cell State

We will represent each cell state as a vector of 16 real values (see the figure above). The first three channels represent the cell color visible to us (RGB). The target pattern has color channel values in range $[0.0, 1.0]$ and an $\alpha$ equal to 1.0 for foreground pixels, and 0.0 for background.

The alpha channel ($\alpha$) has a special meaning: it demarcates living cells, those belonging to the pattern being grown. In particular, cells having $\alpha > 0.1$ and their neighbors are considered “living”. Other cells are “dead” or empty and have their state vector values explicitly set to 0.0 at each time step. Thus cells with $\alpha > 0.1$ can be thought of as “mature”, while their neighbors with $\alpha \leq 0.1$ are “growing”, and can become mature if their alpha passes the 0.1 threshold.
$\vec{state} \rightarrow 0.00$ when no neighbour with $\alpha > 0.10$

Hidden channels don’t have a predefined meaning, and it’s up to the update rule to decide what to use them for. They can be interpreted as concentrations of some chemicals, electric potentials or some other signaling mechanism that are used by cells to orchestrate the growth. In terms of our biological analogy - all our cells share the same genome (update rule) and are only differentiated by the information encoded the chemical signalling they receive, emit, and store internally (their state vectors).

Cellular Automaton rule

Now it’s time to define the update rule. Our CA runs on a regular 2D grid of 16-dimensional vectors, essentially a 3D array of shape [height, width, 16]. We want to apply the same operation to each cell, and the result of this operation can only depend on the small (3x3) neighborhood of the cell. This is heavily reminiscent of the convolution operation, one of the cornerstones of signal processing and differential programming. Convolution is a linear operation, but it can be combined with other per-cell operations to produce a complex update rule, capable of learning the desired behaviour. Our cell update rule can be split into the following phases, applied in order:

Perception. This step defines what each cell perceives of the environment surrounding it. We implement this via a 3x3 convolution with a fixed kernel. One may argue that defining this kernel is superfluous - after all we could simply have the cell learn the requisite perception kernel coefficients. Our choice of fixed operations are motivated by the fact that real life cells often rely only on chemical gradients to guide the organism development. Thus, we are using classical Sobel filters to estimate the partial derivatives of cell state channels in the $\vec{x}$ and $\vec{y}$ directions, forming a 2D gradient vector in each direction, for each state channel. We concatenate those gradients with the cells own states, forming a $16*2+16=48$ dimensional perception vector, or rather percepted vector, for each cell.

def perceive(state_grid):

sobel_x = [[-1, 0, +1],

[-2, 0, +2],

[-1, 0, +1]]

sobel_y = transpose(sobel_x)

# Convolve sobel filters with states

# in x, y and channel dimension.

grad_x = conv2d(sobel_x, state_grid)

grad_y = conv2d(sobel_y, state_grid)

# Concatenate the cell’s state channels,

# the gradients of channels in x and

# the gradient of channels in y.

perception_grid = concat(

state_grid, grad_x, grad_y, axis=2)

return perception_grid

Update rule. Each cell now applies a series of operations to the perception vector, consisting of typical differentiable programming building blocks, such as 1x1-convolutions and ReLU nonlinearities, which we call the cell’s “update rule”. Recall that the update rule is learned, but every cell runs the same update rule. The network parametrizing this update rule consists of approximately 8,000 parameters. Inspired by residual neural networks, the update rule outputs an incremental update to the cell’s state, which applied to the cell before the next time step. The update rule is designed to exhibit “do-nothing” initial behaviour - implemented by initializing the weights of the final convolutional layer in the update rule with zero. We also forego applying a ReLU to the output of the last layer of the update rule as the incremental updates to the cell state must necessarily be able to both add or subtract from the state.

def update(perception_vector):

# The following pseudocode operates on

# a single cell’s perception vector.

# Our reference implementation uses 1D

# convolutions for performance reasons.

x = dense(perception_vector, output_len=128)

x = relu(x)

ds = dense(x, output_len=16, weights_init=0.0)

return ds

Stochastic cell update. Typical cellular automata update all cells simultaneously. This implies the existence of a global clock, synchronizing all cells. Relying on global synchronisation is not something one expects from a self-organising system. We relax this requirement by assuming that each cell performs an update independently, waiting for a random time interval between updates. To model this behaviour we apply a random per-cell mask to update vectors, setting all update values to zero with some predefined probability (we use 0.5 during training). This operation can be also seen as an application of per-cell dropout to update vectors.

def stochastic_update(state_grid, ds_grid):

# Zero out a random fraction of the updates.

rand_mask = cast(random(64, 64) < 0.5, float32)

ds_grid = ds_grid * rand_mask

return state_grid + ds_grid

Living cell masking. We want to model the growth process that starts with a single cell, and don’t want empty cells to participate in computations or carry any hidden state. We enforce this by explicitly setting all channels of empty cells to zeros. A cell is considered empty if there is no “mature” (alpha>0.1) cell in its 3x3 neightborhood.

def alive_masking(state_grid):

# Take the alpha channel as the measure of “life”.

alive = max_pool(state_grid[:, :, 3], (3,3)) > 0.1

state_grid = state_grid * cast(alive, float32)

return state_grid

Experiment 1: Learning to Grow
Training regime for learning a target pattern.

In our first experiment, we simply train the CA to achieve a target image after a random number of updates. This approach is quite naive and will run into issues. But the challenges it surfaces will help us refine future attempts.

We initialize the grid with zeros, except a single seed cell in the center, which will have all channels except RGB We set RGB channels of the seed to zero because we want it to be visible on the white background. set to one. Once the grid is initialized, we iteratively apply the update rule. We sample a random number of CA steps from the [64, 96] This should be a sufficient number of steps to grow the pattern of the size we work with (40x40), even considering the stochastic nature of our update rule. range for each training step, as we want the pattern to be stable across a number of iterations. At the last step we apply pixel-wise L2 loss between RGBA channels in the grid and the target pattern. This loss can be differentiably optimized We observed training instabilities, that were manifesting themselves as sudden jumps of the loss value in the later stages of the training. We managed to mitigate them by applying per-variable L2 normalization to parameter gradients. This may have the effect similar to the weight normalization . Other training parameters are available in the accompanying source code. with respect to the update rule parameters by backpropagation-through-time, the standard method of training recurrent neural networks.

Once the optimisation converges, we can run simulations to see how our learned CAs grow patterns starting from the seed cell. Let’s see what happens when we run it for longer than the number of steps used during training. The animation below shows the behaviour of a few different models, trained to generate different emoji patterns.
Many of the patterns exhibit instability for longer time periods.

Reproduce in a Notebook

We can see that different training runs can lead to models with drastically different long term behaviours. Some tend to die out, some don’t seem to know how to stop growing, but some happen to be almost stable! How can we steer the training towards producing persistent patterns all the time?

Experiment 2: What persists, exists

One way of understanding why the previous experiment was unstable is to draw a parallel to dynamical systems. We can consider every cell to be a dynamical system, with each cell sharing the same dynamics, and all cells being locally coupled amongst themselves. When we train our cell update model we are adjusting these dynamics. Our goal is to find dynamics that satisfy a number of properties. Initially, we wanted the system to evolve from the seed pattern to the target pattern - a trajectory which we achieved in Experiment 1. Now, we want to avoid the instability we observed - which in our dynamical system metaphor consists of making the target pattern an attractor.

One strategy to achieve this is letting the CA iterate for much longer time and periodically applying the loss against the target, training the system by backpropagation through these longer time intervals. Intuitively we claim that with longer time intervals and several applications of loss, the model is more likely to create an attractor for the target shape, as we iteratively mold the dynamics to return to the target pattern from wherever the system has decided to venture. However, longer time periods substantially increase the training time and more importantly, the memory requirements, given that the entire episode’s intermediate activations must be stored in memory for a backwards-pass to occur.

Instead, we propose a “sample pool” based strategy to a similar effect. We define a pool of seed states to start the iterations from, initially filled with the single black pixel seed state. We then sample a batch from this pool which we use in our training step. To prevent the equivalent of “catastrophic forgetting” we replace one sample in this batch with the original, single-pixel seed state. After concluding the training step , we replace samples in the pool that were sampled for the batch with the output states from the training step over this batch. The animation below shows a random sample of the entries in the pool every 20 training steps.

def pool_training():

# Set alpha and hidden channels to (1.0).

seed = zeros(64, 64, 16)

seed[64//2, 64//2, 3:] = 1.0

target = targets[‘lizard’]

pool = [seed] * 1024

for i in range(training_iterations):

idxs, batch = pool.sample(32)

# Sort by loss, descending.

batch = sort_desc(batch, loss(batch))

# Replace the highest-loss sample with the seed.

batch[0] = seed

# Perform training.

outputs, loss = train(batch, target)

# Place outputs back in the pool.

pool[idxs] = outputs
A random sample of the patterns in the pool during training, sampled every 20 training steps.

Reproduce in a Notebook

Early on in the training process, the random dynamics in the system allow the model to end up in various incomplete and incorrect states. As these states are sampled from the pool, we refine the dynamics to be able to recover from such states. Finally, as the model becomes more robust at going from a seed state to the target state, the samples in the pool reflect this and are more likely to be very close to the target pattern, allowing the training to refine these almost completed patterns further.

Essentially, we use the previous final states as new starting points to force our CA to learn how to persist or even improve an already formed pattern, in addition to being able to grow it from a seed. This makes it possible to add a periodical loss for significantly longer time intervals than otherwise possible, encouraging the generation of an attractor as the target shape in our coupled system. We also noticed that reseeding the highest loss sample in the batch, instead of a random one, makes training more stable at the initial stages, as it helps to clean up the low quality states from the pool.

Here is what a typical training progress of a CA rule looks like. The cell rule learns to stabilize the pattern in parallel to refining its features.
CA behaviour at training steps 100, 500, 1000, 4000.

Reproduce in a Notebook

Experiment 3: Learning to regenerate

In addition to being able to grow their own bodies, living creatures are great at maintaining them. Not only does worn out skin get replaced with new skin, but very heavy damage to complex vital organs can be regenerated in some species. Is there a chance that some of the models we trained above have regenerative capabilities?
Patterns exhibit some regenerative properties upon being damaged, but not full re-growth.

Reproduce in a Notebook

The animation above shows three different models trained using the same settings. We let each of the models develop a pattern over 100 steps, then damage the final state in five different ways: by removing different halves of the formed pattern, and by cutting out a square from the center. Once again, we see that these models show quite different out-of-training mode behaviour. For example “the lizard” develops quite strong regenerative capabilities, without being explicitly trained for it!

Since we trained our coupled system of cells to generate an attractor towards a target shape from a single cell, it was likely that these systems, once damaged, would generalize towards non-self-destructive reactions. That’s because the systems were trained to grow, stabilize, and never entirely self-destruct. Some of these systems might naturally gravitate towards regenerative capabilities, but nothing stops them from developing different behaviors such as explosive mitoses (uncontrolled growth), unresponsiveness to damage (overstabilization), or even self destruction, especially for the more severe types of damage.

If we want our model to show more consistent and accurate regenerative capabilities, we can try to increase the basin of attraction for our target pattern - increase the space of cell configurations that naturally gravitate towards our target shape. We will do this by damaging a few pool-sampled states before each training step. The system now has to be capable of regenerating from states damaged by randomly placed erasing circles. Our hope is that this will generalize to regenerational capabilities from various types of damage.
Damaging samples in the pool encourages the learning of robust regenerative qualities. Row 1 are samples from the pool, Row 2 are their respective states after iterating the model.

Reproduce in a Notebook

The animation above shows training progress, which includes sample damage. We sample 8 states from the pool. Then we replace the highest-loss sample (top-left-most in the above) with the seed state, and damage the three lowest-loss (top-right-most) states by setting a random circular region within the pattern to zeros. The bottom row shows states after iteration from the respective top-most starting state. As in Experiment 2, the resulting states get injected back into the pool.
Patterns exposed to damage during training exhibit astounding regenerative capabilities.

Reproduce in a Notebook

As we can see from the animation above, models that were exposed to damage during training are much more robust, including to types of damage not experienced in the training process (for instance rectangular damage as above).

Experiment 4: Rotating the perceptive field

As previously described, we model the cell’s perception of its neighbouring cells by estimating the gradients of state channels in $\vec{x}$ and $\vec{y}$ using Sobel filters. A convenient analogy is that each agent has two sensors (chemosensory receptors, for instance) pointing in orthogonal directions that can sense the gradients in the concentration of certain chemicals along the axis of the sensor. What happens if we rotate those sensors? We can do this by rotating the Sobel kernels.
$\begin{bmatrix} K_x \\ K_y \end{bmatrix} = \begin{bmatrix} \cos \theta &
    -\sin \theta \\ \sin \theta & \cos \theta \end{bmatrix} * \begin{bmatrix}
    Sobel_x \\ Sobel_y \end{bmatrix}$

This simple modification of the perceptive field produces rotated versions of the pattern for an angle of choosing without retraining as seen below.
Rotating the axis along which the perception step computes gradients brings about rotated versions of the pattern.

Reproduce in a Notebook

In a perfect world, not quantized by individual cells in a pixel-lattice, this would not be too surprising, as, after all, one would expect the perceived gradients in $\vec{x}$ and $\vec{y}$ to be invariant to the chosen angle - a simple change of frame of reference. However, it is important to note that things are not as simple in a pixel based model. Rotating pixel based graphics involves computing a mapping that’s not necessarily bijective and classically involves interpolating between pixels to achieve the desired result. This is because a single pixel, when rotated, will now likely overlap several pixels. The successful growth of patterns as above suggests a certain robustness to the underlying conditions outside of those experienced during training.

CA and PDEs

There exists an extensive body of literature that describes the various flavours of cellular automata and PDE systems, and their applications to modelling physical, biological or even social systems. Although it would be impossible to present a just overview of this field in a few lines, we will describe some prominent examples that inspired this work. Alan Turing introduced his famous Turing patterns back in 1952 , suggesting how reaction-diffusion systems can be a valid model for chemical behaviors during morphogenesis. A particularly inspiring reaction-diffusion model that stood the test of time is the Gray-Scott model , which shows an extreme variety of behaviors controlled by just a few variables.

Ever since von Neumann introduced CAs as models for self-replication they have captivated researchers’ minds, who observed extremely complex behaviours emerging from very simple rules. Likewise, the a broader audience outside of academia were seduced by CA’s life-like behaviours thanks to Conway’s Game of Life . Perhaps motivated in part by the proof that something as simple as the Rule 110 is Turing complete, Wolfram’s “A New Kind of Science” asks for a paradigm shift centered around the extensive usage of elementary computer programs such as CA as tools for understanding the world.

More recently, several researchers generalized Conway’s Game of life to work on more continuous domains. We were particularly inspired by Rafler’s SmoothLife and Chan’s Lenia , the latter of which also discovers and classifies entire species of “lifeforms”.

A number of researchers have used evolutionary algorithms to find CA rules that reproduce predefined simple patterns . For example, J. Miller proposed an experiment similar to ours, using evolutionary algorithms to design a CA rule that could build and regenerate the French flag, starting from a seed cell.

Neural Networks and Self-Organisation

The close relation between Convolutional Neural Networks and Cellular Automata has already been observed by a number of researchers . The connection is so strong it allowed us to build Neural CA models using components readily available in popular ML frameworks. Thus, using a different jargon, our Neural CA could potentially be named “Recurrent Residual Convolutional Networks with ‘per-pixel’ Dropout”.

The Neural GPU offers a computational architecture very similar to ours, but applied in the context of learning multiplication and a sorting algorithm.

Looking more broadly, we think that the concept of self-organisation is finding its way into mainstream machine learning with popularisation of Graph Neural Network models. Typically, GNNs run a repeated computation across vertices of a (possibly dynamic) graph. Vertices communicate locally through graph edges, and aggregate global information required to perform the task over multiple rounds of message exchanges, just as atoms can be thought of as communicating with each other to produce the emergent properties of a molecule , or even points of a point cloud talk to their neighbors to figure out their global shape .

Self-organization also appeared in fascinating contemporary work using more traditional dynamic graph networks, where the authors evolved Self-Assembling Agents to solve a variety of virtual tasks .

Swarm Robotics

One of the most remarkable demonstrations of the power of self-organisation is when it is applied to swarm modeling. Back in 1987, Reynolds’ Boids simulated the flocking behaviour of birds with just a tiny set of handcrafted rules. Nowadays, we can embed tiny robots with programs and test their collective behavior on physical agents, as demonstrated by work such as Mergeable Nervous Systems and Kilobots . To the best of our knowledge, programs embedded into swarm robots are currently designed by humans. We hope our work can serve as an inspiration for the field and encourage the design of collective behaviors through differentiable modeling.

Discussion

Embryogenetic Modeling
Regeneration-capable 2-headed planarian, the creature that inspired this work

Reproduce in a Notebook

This article describes a toy embryogenesis and regeneration model. This is a major direction for future work, with many applications in biology and beyond. In addition to the implications for understanding the evolution and control of regeneration, and harnessing this understanding for biomedical repair, there is the field of bioengineering. As the field transitions from synthetic biology of single cell collectives to a true synthetic morphology of novel living machines , it will be essential to develop strategies for programming system-level capabilities, such as anatomical homeostasis (regenerative repair). It has long been known that regenerative organisms can restore a specific anatomical pattern; however, more recently it’s been found that the target morphology is not hard coded by the DNA, but is maintained by a physiological circuit that stores a setpoint for this anatomical homeostasis . Techniques are now available for re-writing this setpoint, resulting for example in 2-headed flatworms that, when cut into pieces in plain water (with no more manipulations) result in subsequent generations of 2-headed regenerated worms (as shown above). It is essential to begin to develop models of the computational processes that store the system-level target state for swarm behavior , so that efficient strategies can be developed for rationally editing this information structure, resulting in desired large-scale outcomes (thus defeating the inverse problem that holds back regenerative medicine and many other advances).

Engineering and machine learning

The models described in this article run on the powerful GPU of a modern computer or a smartphone. Yet, let’s speculate about what a “more physical” implementation of such a system could look like. We can imagine it as a grid of tiny independent computers, simulating individual cells. Each of those computers would require approximately 10Kb of ROM to store the “cell genome”: neural network weights and the control code, and about 256 bytes of RAM for the cell state and intermediate activations. The cells must be able to communicate their 16-value state vectors to neighbors. Each cell would also require an RGB-diode to display the color of the pixel it represents. A single cell update would require about 10k multiply-add operations and does not have to be synchronised across the grid. We propose that cells might wait for random time intervals between updates. The system described above is uniform and decentralised. Yet, our method provides a way to program it to reach the predefined global state, and recover this state in case of multi-element failures and restarts. We therefore conjecture this kind of modeling may be used for designing reliable, self-organising agents. On the more theoretical machine learning front, we show an instance of a decentralized model able to accomplish remarkably complex tasks. We believe this direction to be opposite to the more traditional global modeling used in the majority of contemporary work in the deep learning field, and we hope this work to be an inspiration to explore more decentralized learning modeling.

This article is part of the Differentiable Self-organizing Systems Thread, an experimental format collecting invited short articles delving into differentiable self-organizing systems, interspersed with critical commentary from several experts in adjacent fields. Differentiable Self-organizing Systems Thread Self-classifying MNIST Digits

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

29. Lisp in Web-Based Applications (2001)

Source: https://sep.turbifycdn.com/ty/cdn/paulgraham/bbnexcerpts.txt
Site: sep.turbifycdn.com
Submitter: bschne (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-18 11:51 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 84 points · 7 comments

non-HTML content-type (text/plain); not scraped

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

30. Skills in Web, iOS, and Android

Source: https://x.ai/news/grok-skills
Site: xAI
Author: xAI
Published: 2026-05-18
HN activity: 29 points · 4 comments
Length: 353 words (~2 min read)
Language: en

May 18, 2026

Persistent expertise for Grok. Generate documents, decks, and spreadsheets. Automate workflows. Build and share your own skills.

Today, we're launching Skills. Teach Grok something once and it remembers across every conversation. No more repeating your preferences, formatting rules, or workflow steps.

Ready Out of the Box

Every Grok account ships with built-in skills from xAI, with no setup required. If you want to customize one, just override it with your own version. Yours always takes priority.

Word Documents

xAI

Create and edit .docx with full formatting

Presentations

xAI

Build slide decks from scratch

Spreadsheets

xAI

Generate formatted spreadsheets and analyze data

PDFs

xAI

Create, merge, split, and extract from PDFs

Skill Creator

xAI

Build new custom skills through conversation

Instant Office Documents

Need a formatted invoice, a pitch deck, or a budget spreadsheet? Grok generates production-ready Word docs, PowerPoint slides, Excel files, and PDFs, all styled and ready to share. You can also upload existing files and Grok will restructure, polish, or expand them.

Presentations

Build complete slide decks for pitches, quarterly reviews, and workshops with strong visual hierarchy and speaker notes.

“Design a Leadership Strategic Thinking Workshop deck with exercises, frameworks, and takeaways.”

Word Documents

Generate polished invoices, contracts, proposals, and resumes with full formatting — headings, tables, bullet points, and consistent styling.

“Create a professional enterprise invoice for APEX-2026-0547 with line items, tax, and payment terms.”

Spreadsheets

Generate formatted spreadsheets with formulas, color-coded sections, and clear structure — budgets, dashboards, and forecasts.

“Create a monthly budget tracker with income, expenses, and savings projections.”

PDF Reports

Create polished PDF reports, proposals, and research papers — formatted, styled, and ready to share.

“Generate a PDF report on AI interpretability formatted for conference submission.”

Build Your Own

Creating a skill takes seconds. Describe it in conversation, upload a file, or write one from scratch. Invested time perfecting a format or workflow? Just ask Grok to save everything it learned as a skill so you never have to explain it again.

Get Started

Skills are live now on Grok 4.3 across grok.com, iOS, and Android.

Try Grok On

Products

API

Company

Resources

