Hacker News Top 30 — 2026-05-16

Generated on 2026-05-16 03:29 UTC

1. Project Gutenberg – keeps getting better

Source: https://www.gutenberg.org/
Site: Project Gutenberg
Submitter: JSeiko (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-15 16:15 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 763 points · 179 comments
Length: 287 words (~2 min read)
Language: en-US

Project Gutenberg is a library of over 75,000 free eBooks

Choose among free epub and Kindle eBooks, download them or read them online. You will find the world's great literature here, with focus on older works for which U.S. copyright has expired. Thousands of volunteers digitized and diligently proofread the eBooks, for you to enjoy.

Find Free eBooks

Frequently Downloaded: Top 100, or ranked by popularity.
Main Categories. The ones you'd find in any large bookstore.
Reading Lists. Hand-curated by volunteers.
Search Options. By author, title, subject, language, type, popularity, and more.
Visit self.gutenberg.org for self-published eBooks at the World Library Foundation.

Project Gutenberg

✓ 100% Free - No fees, no registration, completely free
✓ No Apps Required - only regular Web browsers or eBook readers needed
✓ 50+ Years - Pioneering free eBooks since 1971
✓ Volunteer-based - hundreds of volunteers have contributed over the years
✓ Read about our late CEO, Dr. Greg Newby.
Consider a small donation to help us digitize more books: donate

Get Help

Reading Options & Kindle: How to read and enjoy our ebooks.
Frequently Asked Questions about Project Gutenberg.
Help, How-To and FAQs: In depth information about many topics.

How to Help

Distributed Proofreaders welcomes new volunteers. This is the main source of new Project Gutenberg eBooks. Getting started is easy, and just a page a day will help!
Fix and improve Project Gutenberg by reporting errors, bugs, typos, and suggesting changes.
Record audiobooks with our friends at LibriVox.

Special Areas

About Project Gutenberg.
Donating to Project Gutenberg.
Feeds of new eBooks.
Linking to Project Gutenberg and roboting or crawling the site.
Partners and affiliates.
Permissions, copyright, licensing, and trademark information.
What does free eBook (No Cost or Freedom?) mean?

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

2. I believe there are entire companies right now under AI psychosis

Source: https://twitter.com/mitchellh/status/2055380239711457578
Redirected to: https://x.com/mitchellh/status/2055380239711457578
Site: X (formerly Twitter)
Submitter: reasonableklout (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-15 20:26 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 921 points · 391 comments
Length: 27 words (~1 min read)
Language: en

Something went wrong, but don’t fret — let’s give it another shot.

Some privacy related extensions may cause issues on x.com. Please disable them and try again.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

3. Additive Blending on the Nintendo 64

Source: https://phoboslab.org/log/2026/05/n64-additive-blending
Site: phoboslab.org
Submitter: ibobev (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-15 14:39 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 45 points · 7 comments
Length: 1.1K words (~5 min read)
Language: en

— Monday, May 4th 2026

Did you ever wonder why explosions and other effects looked so much cooler on the original PlayStation than they did on the Nintendo 64?

“Silent Bomber“ for the PSX

“Star Fox 64“ for the N64

The reason is additive blending! Or rather, in the N64 case, the lack thereof. While the N64 actually did support additive blending, it was practically unusable.

PSX

The PSX supports 4 different blend modes (in addition to just overwriting pixels) to control how sprites and geometry are mixed into the existing frame buffer:

0: (src + dst) / 2
1: src + dst
2: dst - src
3: dst + src/4

The one you see here in Silent Bomber is conceptually the simplest one: src + dst. That is, colors are just added to the existing ones in the frame buffer.

                      |   R |   G |   B |
|   src (sprite)      | 171 |  42 | 226 | 
| + dst (framebuffer) |  63 | 141 | 170 | 
| = result            | 234 | 183 | 255 | 

Drawing a sprite over a scene can only ever make it brighter, never darker. Perfect for explosions, plasma beams and magic spells. Importantly, note how the B value in this example adds up to 396, but the PSX GPU helpfully clamps it to the maximum range of 255.

(Aside: the PSX GPU actually only works in 16bit precision with 5bit color components, so values range from 0 .. 31; the math is the same.)

N64

The N64's “Reality Display Processor” (the fixed-function rasterizer, short RDP) has a much more flexible way to control blending: a configurable “Color Combiner”. This is somewhat similar to OpenGL's glBlendFunc().

Libdragon exposes this functionality with the RDPQ_BLENDER((P, A, Q, B)) macro that instructs the RDP to execute (P * A) + (Q * B), where each slot can be one of several inputs.

Setting up additive blending with this is trivial:

RDPQ_BLENDER(( IN_RGB, IN_ALPHA, MEMORY_RGB, ONE ))

The problem is, the RDP doesn't clamp the result.

                      |   R |   G |   B |
|   src (sprite)      | 171 |  42 | 226 | 
| + dst (framebuffer) |  63 | 141 | 170 | 
| = result            | 234 | 183 | 140 | 
                                     ^
                                     wraps around!

The resulting output is less than desirable:

Now, you could of course fall back to draw such effects on the “Reality Signal Processor” (RSP), the vector co-processor of the N64. But that gets complicated quickly if you want to do rotation, scaling or any actual 3D stuff. The RDP is much better suited for this. Displaying is its job!

While the RDP can draw into a 32bit buffer, it was very uncommon for games to do so. Almost all N64 games used a 16bit framebuffer for the final output. But with this in mind, I came up with a different plan:

Let the RDP draw onto a 32bit RGBA 8888 (8 bits per component) buffer, but have all our sprites in the 16bit RGBA 5551 (5 bits per color component, 1 bit alpha) range. I could just pre-process assets by dividing RGB by 8 (or right shifting by 3 bits). This will essentially draw everything way too dark, but in turn gives us lots of headroom for additive blending.

No wrap around when all additive blended sprites result in less than 255

Better yet, we don't have to do this image pre-processing offline. We can just instruct the color combiner to do it for us when drawing. For free!

// Abuse the fog alpha value to draw all colors at 1/8th intensity
rdpq_set_fog_color(RGBA32(0, 0, 0, 256/8));
rdpq_mode_blender(RDPQ_BLENDER(( IN_RGB, FOG_ALPHA, MEMORY_RGB, ONE )));    

So how do we get this back to normal brightness? Simple: use a 16bit frame buffer for displaying and “copy” all the 32bit colors into it. We just have to be careful to clamp all 8bit color components into the 5bit range.

void cpu_rgba_8888_to_5551(uint32_t *rgba32_in, uint16_t *rgba16_out) {
    for (int i = 0; i < 320 * 240; i++) {
        color_t c = color_from_packed32(rgba32_in[i]);
        if (c.r > 31) { c.r = 31; }
        if (c.g > 31) { c.g = 31; }
        if (c.b > 31) { c.b = 31; }
        rgba16_out[i] = (c.r << 11) | (c.g << 6) | (c.b << 1) | 0x1;
    }
}

Doing this on the CPU is of course prohibitively expensive. It takes about 70ms for a 320×240 frame. But this is where the RSP co-processor shines. The problem now became simple enough.

The RSP's 128bit vector instructions can process 8 pixels at a time. With some help from HailToDodongo on the #N64Brew discord optimizing the GPU microcode, this now runs in about 3.1ms for the whole frame!

(Trivia: I'd like to interject for a moment. What is commonly referred to as “GPU microcode” in the context of the N64 is in fact, MIPS/assembly that runs on the RSP, or as I've recently taken to calling it, MIPS plus assembly.)

Modern tooling for N64 development is phenomenal. While it helps to have some understanding of assembly, you don't have to write MIPS assembly by hand anymore. HailToDodongo invented a C-like language called RSPL that directly compiles to it.

So the whole setup looks like this:

// Init the display with a 16bit frame buffer
display_init(RESOLUTION_320x240, DEPTH_16_BPP, 3, GAMMA_NONE, FILTERS_DISABLED);

// Create a secondary 32bit render buffer and set it as render target
surface_t render32 = surface_alloc(FMT_RGBA32, 320, 240);
rdpq_set_color_image(render32);

// Configure the color combiner to draw at 1/8th intensity
rdpq_set_fog_color(RGBA32(0, 0, 0, 256/8));
rdpq_mode_blender(RDPQ_BLENDER((IN_RGB, FOG_ALPHA, MEMORY_RGB, ONE)));

// Draw your scene with lots of additive blended sprites
render_scene();

// Kick of the conversion from the 32bit render buffer to the 
// 16bit frame buffer on the RSP
rsp_rgba_8888_to_5551(render32->buffer, screen->buffer);

// Present the 16bit framebuffer
display_show(screen);

Resulting in lots of gloriously additive blended sprites without any wrap around artifacts.

There was of course a reason that most games used a 16bit frame buffer to begin with: the atrocious memory throughput of the N64. Drawing onto a 32bit buffer takes almost twice the time compared to a 16bit buffer, because the RDP has to shuffle twice the amount of bytes from and back to the frame buffer stored in RDRAM.

Still, this technique worked out better than I expected. It's certainly good enough for some applications.

I can also see further optimization potential by only drawing those sprites that need additive blending to the 32bit buffer – maybe even at a lower resolution — and then combine it with the rest of scene's 16bit buffer on the RSP…

A simple demo project for the above video can be found on github:
github.com/phoboslab/n64_addblend

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

4. The bird eye was pushed to an evolutionary extreme

Source: https://www.quantamagazine.org/how-the-bird-eye-was-pushed-to-an-evolutionary-extreme-20260513/
Site: Quanta Magazine
Author: By Yasemin Saplakoglu May 13, 2026
Published: 2026-05-13
HN activity: 37 points · 3 comments
Length: 2.1K words (~9 min read)
Language: en

The bird retina is one of the most energetically expensive tissues in the animal kingdom, yet it doesn’t use the energy advantage of oxygen. New research finally explains how this is possible.

The eye of a red-and-green macaw, with no blood vessels in sight. How can a bird eye work so well without oxygen?

Leonardo Ramos

Introduction

When an optometrist shines a bright light into your eyes, a vast, branching tree sprouts in your field of vision. This is the shadow of blood vessels. Though we normally can’t perceive them, these vessels always occlude a portion of what we see, and for an important reason. They power the retina, a thin layer of nerve tissue in the back of the eye that communicates light signals to the brain.

The retina is one of the body’s most energetically expensive tissues. Built from complex networks of sometimes more than 100 different types of neurons, retinal tissue consumes two to three times more energy than the same mass of typical brain tissue. That’s why most vertebrate retinas, including our own, are furrowed with dense, branching networks of blood vessels: to deliver oxygen and other ingredients for producing energy.

But there’s a significant exception to this rule. Birds have retinas that mostly lack blood vessels. This may seem especially strange given birds’ exceptional vision. The bird retina is “one of the most metabolically active tissues in the animal kingdom, yet it worked with no apparent blood perfusion,” said Christian Damsgaard, an evolutionary physiologist at Aarhus University. “It was a complete paradox.” For centuries this has puzzled scientists, who figured that the bird retina must obtain oxygen through a unique, undiscovered process.

Damsgaard is the lead author of a study, published in the journal Nature in January 2026, that showed for the first time that bird retinas don’t have some unusual adaptation for acquiring oxygen — they survive without it entirely. Instead, to bring energy to the tissue, they use a process called anaerobic glycolysis that is significantly less efficient than oxygen-powered metabolism but gets the job done.

The evolutionary physiologist Christian Damsgaard measured gas exchange in bird eyes with microsensors. Surprisingly, the inner retina, a highly active tissue, used no oxygen.

Jesper Ekmann

By studying how tissues can survive without oxygen, researchers can potentially develop therapeutics to treat conditions of oxygen deprivation, such as strokes. More fundamentally, they want to understand the limits of evolution.

“What are the extremes of life?” Damsgaard said. “How far can we bend the conditions under which highly metabolically active tissues can actually survive?”

A bird, he learned, can bend them pretty far.

Oxygenated Life

Around 3.4 billion years ago, cyanobacteria invented photosynthesis. Slowly at first, then quickly, their newly evolved method of making energy from sunlight succeeded and spread. The cells pumped so much oxygen, a by-product of photosynthesis, into the atmosphere that it changed the course of life on Earth.

Oxygen molecules make energy production in cells extremely efficient. To extract energy, cells break down a glucose molecule into two pyruvate molecules. This process releases two molecules of ATP (adenosine triphosphate), life’s universal energy currency. A cell lacking oxygen can go only this far. Oxygen, however, enables further biochemical reactions that break down pyruvate and produce another 30 molecules of ATP. In other words, the presence of oxygen makes energy extraction from a single glucose molecule 15 times as efficient, and sometimes more.

Birds, such as this alpine chough (in the crow family), use their exceptional vision to hunt, forage, and migrate. This energetic ability is powered by an inefficient metabolism.

Jean-Paul Wettstein

The energetic advantage of oxygen, through the process of aerobic respiration, was transformative. Once oxygen imbued the atmosphere, evolution selected for organisms that could use it. “We’ve been hooked on 20% [atmospheric] oxygen for millions of years,” said Gary Lewin, a molecular physiologist at the Max Delbrück Center in Berlin. This Great Oxidation Event was followed by mass extinction, as organisms using oxygen outcompeted just about everybody else. While some life forms, such as certain bacteria, are adapted to life without oxygen, all complex, multicellular organisms need that energy advantage to survive.

Humans and most other animals can survive with little or no oxygen for several minutes at most. The mammal with the highest known tolerance for low-oxygen conditions is the naked mole rat, which can survive for up to 18 minutes breathing anoxic air in underground burrows. A few cold-blooded aquatic creatures, including freshwater turtles and goldfish, can persist in low-oxygen conditions at the bottom of a frozen lake for a year or two. But for most animals, a steady supply of oxygen is a must-have.

Without oxygen, a variety of processes shut down — especially in metabolically demanding tissues such as the brain. Without that energy, our cells malfunction and die.

Naked mole rats can survive without oxygen for 18 minutes. To generate energy without oxygen, they use anaerobic glycolysis fueled by fructose.

Javier Ábalos

A Mysterious Structure

All this is why, in 2019, when Damsgaard learned that bird retinas lack blood vessels, he was confused. How could this high-energy tissue survive, let alone perform at the level observed in sharp-sighted bird species, without oxygen?

He pored over the voluminous research on the subject, all of which pointed at a mysterious structure in the bird eye known as the pecten oculi. In the 17th century, anatomists first described the unusual organ: It looked like a radiator, comblike, riveted with blood vessels, and with a large surface area. In the centuries that followed, researchers debated whether it helps deliver oxygen to retinal tissue in bird eyes. Damsgaard read about 30 different theories about the pecten oculi’s function based on anatomy alone.

“Nobody had really done direct physiological measurements on this structure,” he said. “That’s where we came in.”

Mark Belan/Quanta Magazine

In his lab, which studies the exchange of gases such as oxygen and carbon dioxide between vertebrates and their environments, Damsgaard’s team used microsensors to measure oxygen levels in the retinas of zebra finches, pigeons, and chickens. Indeed, in the inner retina, which completely lacks blood vessels, they found no oxygen. (They did measure oxygen in the outer retina, at the back of the eye, which has some blood vessels.)

That was “striking,” Damsgaard said. “Half of the retina lives in a chronic state of anoxia, where there’s no oxygen present at all.”

Using spatial transcriptomics, a method that combines cell imaging with RNA sequencing, the researchers mapped which genes were active in different parts of the retinal tissue. Genes associated with typical aerobic respiration were expressed in the outer retina, where there are blood vessels. In the oxygen-depleted inner retina, only genes associated with anaerobic respiration were active.

To trace the paths of nutrients, Damsgaard and his team worked with cancer scientists who are experts on oxygen-free metabolism (tumor cells often use anaerobic glycolysis to make energy). They found that the inner retina demanded 2.5 times more glucose than other parts of the bird brain.

Then they examined the pecten oculi. Their spatial transcriptomics data showed that the genes for glucose were highly active there. This suggested that the strange structure wasn’t bringing oxygen into the bird’s retina; rather, it was helping to pump glucose in, thereby enabling the less efficient anaerobic process.

As a by-product, anaerobic glycolysis creates lactic acid, which can accumulate and become toxic. The researchers also saw that genes for lactic acid transporters — the molecules that move lactic acid out of tissues — were active in the pecten oculi.

The diversity of bird eyes, lacking blood vessels (left to right). Top: Northern gannet, Eurasian eagle-owl, maguari stork. Center: rooster, rockhopper penguin, parrot (species unknown). Bottom: bald eagle, blue-and-yellow macaw, unknown species.

(Left to right) Top: Chris Hellier, Jiří Dočkal, Annette Lozinski. Center: Mohammed Brzan, Nico Marín, Shyamli Kashyap. Bottom: Ingo Doerrie, David Clode, Hasan Almasi

Their findings provide compelling evidence for the role of the pecten oculi in supporting anaerobic glycolysis, which “has been a mystery for a long time,” said Thomas Baden, a neuroscientist at the University of Sussex who was not involved in the study. “The insight that the retina basically goes oxygen-free, at least in some layers, is surprising. … It really gets properly down to zero.”

This pathway is used by cancer cells and temporarily by our muscles when they’re strained and can’t get enough oxygen — such as when we’re running. But no known vertebrate tissue was known to survive in completely anoxic conditions for a lifetime.

Eyes Like a Hawk

The bird’s retina and its no-oxygen power system are so unusual that they naturally raise questions about how they could have evolved.

This is “a series of beautiful experiments,” said Karthik Shekhar of the University of California, Berkeley, who was not involved in the research. It’s an example of how an animal took the vertebrate eye — a highly conserved structure whose origins go back some 560 million years to a light-sensitive patch on a primitive creature — and tinkered with it to fit its own needs. “Evolution is not really like an inventor; it acts more like a tinkerer,” he said, citing a 1977 essay, “Evolution and Tinkering,” by the French biologist François Jacob. “It takes parts that have existed long before, and it recombines, reinvents, and reshapes.”

The researchers tried to pinpoint when the pecten oculi might have arisen by comparing oxygen levels in the bird retina to those in not-so-distant relatives: two reptile species, Chinese pond turtles and broad-snouted caimans. The reptile retinas had normal oxygen levels and no indication of anaerobic glycolysis. This led Damsgaard’s team to conclude that the oxygen-free tissue likely evolved sometime during the dinosaur era, after the avian lineage had split from crocodiles but hadn’t yet evolved into modern birds. This was around the same time that the retina thickened.

Still, that rough time estimate can’t explain what evolutionary pressure might have selected for the unusual retinal tissue. Researchers can only speculate. “I think the system evolved in theropod dinosaurs in response to selection for sharp vision for tracking prey and identifying mates,” Damsgaard suggested. Then, later, when birds took to the skies, it “served as the physiological basis for maintaining retinal function” during high-altitude flights, when oxygen levels are low, he speculated.

The lack of blood vessels could also offer birds the advantage of better vision. The bird retina is complex and densely packed with more than a hundred cell types that work to render the world in great resolution. Birds use their exceptional visual sense for hunting and foraging — consider an owl tracking a mouse from the sky, an albatross watching for signs of fish on the ocean’s surface, or a hummingbird locating hundreds of flowers every day — as well as for following landmarks across the landscape during migration. Without blood vessels obstructing their view, birds’ retinal cells might be able to take in more visual information.

Could this be an adaptation, or is it a coincidence of evolutionary history? There’s no way to know for sure how birds’ incredible vision evolved. There’s this mystery “that has lingered around us,” Baden said. “What is it about birds that makes their eyes so special?” Their retinal power system seems as if it could explain what makes them so unique. However, Lewin, the physiologist, is cautious about overextending the results and interpretations to every bird, given that the researchers haven’t looked at any migratory species.

The implications stretch well beyond bird adaptations to biomedicine. A common thread in many medical conditions is a drop in oxygen delivery to tissues, which, depending on where it occurs, can lead to scars or brain damage. Human brains can tolerate maybe a minute of total anoxia, Lewin said. That’s what makes strokes, which cut off blood and oxygen supply to parts of the brain, so devastating. By studying low-oxygen conditions in creatures such as naked mole rats and birds, scientists can gain insight into how tissues can tolerate low-oxygen conditions.

“Maybe we can get inspiration for how nature solved these problems by millions of years of natural selection,” Damsgaard said. “There’s so much to be learned from these animals that are able to do something that we cannot do.”

The Quanta Newsletter

Get highlights of the most important news delivered to your email inbox

Also in Biology

Comment on this article

Next article

How Unknowable Math Can Help Hide Secrets

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

5. Naturally Occurring Quasicrystals

Source: https://johncarlosbaez.wordpress.com/2026/05/14/naturally-occurring-quasicrystals/
Site: Azimuth
Submitter: lukeplato (Hacker News)
Published: 2026-05-14
HN activity: 71 points · 5 comments
Length: 873 words (~4 min read)
Language: en

I love quasicrystals—like crystals, but with patterns that never repeat, like Penrose tiles. But they’ve very rare in nature. They’re created only by the most exotic and violent events: a high-speed collision of asteroids, lightning hitting a downed power cable in a sand dune—or an atomic bomb!

Amazingly, the first 3 kinds of naturally occurring quasicrystal were discovered in a single meteorite that landed in Khatyrka, in the far east of Russia. They’ve never been found anywhere else! And this meteorite is highly anomalous: it’s the only meteorite known that contains metallic aluminum—and it seems to have been formed in a ultra-high-velocity collision between asteroids.

The only other quasicrystal I know that may be naturally created came from a bolt of lightning hitting a sand dune near a downed power cable in Nebraska. Then there was one found amid the fused desert sand and copper transmission cable left behind by the first atomic bomb test at Trinity, New Mexico. That’s not quite ‘naturally created’.

And that’s all. As far as I can tell, the rest have been made in labs!

Here are the 3 kinds of quasicrystal found in the Khatyrka meteorite, in order of their discovery:

• Icosahedrite, Al63Cu24Fe13. By the way, these numbers are percentages, since quasicrystals don’t have integer-ratio molecular formulas the way conventional compounds do, due to their aperiodic nature.

Icosahedrite has full three-dimensional icosahedral symmetry and is quasiperiodic in all 3 directions. The easiest way to describe it mathematically is the ‘slice and project’ method. You start with a lattice in 6 dimensions, choose a 3d slice, thicken that up a bit, take the lattice points that lie in this slice, and project them down to 3d space. The lattice in 6 dimensions is called the D6 lattice: it consists of those 6-tuples of integers that sum to an even integer. If we slice along the correct 3d subspace the result has icosahedral symmetry. A lot of math in this mineral!

• Decagonite, Al71Ni24Fe5. This a ‘stacked’ quasicrystal: quasiperiodic with tenfold rotational symmetry in two dimensions, and ordinary periodic stacking in the third direction. We can build the 2d pattern using the slice and project method starting from the A₄ lattice in 4 dimensions. The A₄ lattice, in turn, is gotten by taking 5-tuples of integers, but only those that sum to zero. This quasicrystal looks like this:

• i-Phase II, Al62Cu31Fe7. Like icosahedrite this has full icosahedral symmetry and you get it mathematically using the slice-and-project method starting from the D₆ lattice. But it has a distinctly different composition: more copper and less aluminum. It’s the first quasicrystal composition discovered in nature before being made in the lab.

The Nebraska quasicrystal shows how blurry the concept of ‘natural’ can be. It was found inside a ‘fulgurite’: a rock made when lightning hits sand. They found it in the Sand Hills near Hyannis, Nebraska, near a downed power line during a storm. It’s unclear whether this fulgurite was created by a lightning strike or by the falling power line creating its own arc, so the ‘natural vs manmade’ status is genuinely ambiguous.

What’s more important is it was a new kind of quasicrystal produced by a high-current, high-temperature, rapid-quench event on Earth’s surface! It has a composition of roughly Mn72.3Si15.6Cr9.7Al1.8Ni0.6. Its atomic planes have 12-fold symmetry in a nonrepeating pattern, and these planes are stacked periodically along the perpendicular direction.

Here’s a picture of this quasicrystal:

References

On icosahedrite, the first natural quasicrystal to be found in the meteorite from Khatyrka:

• L. Bindi, J. M. Eiler, Y. Guan, L. S. Hollister, G. MacPherson, P. J. Steinhardt and N. Yao, Evidence for the extraterrestrial origin of a natural quasicrystal, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 31 (2012), 1396-401.

On decagonite, the second to be found:

• I. Buganski and L. Bindi, Insight into the structure of decagonite—the extraterrestrial decagonal quasicrystal, IUCrJ 8 (2021), 87–101.

On i-phase II, which is the provisional designation of the third quasicrystal found in that meteorite:

• L. Bindi, C. Lin, C. Ma and P. J. Steinhardt, Collisions in outer space produced an icosahedral phase in the Khatyrka meteorite never observed previously in the laboratory, Scientific Reports 6 (2016), 38117.

On the dodecagonal quasicrystal found in the dune in Nebraska:

• L. Bindi, M. A. Pasek, C. Ma, J. Hu, G. Cheng, N. Yao, P. D. Asimow, and P. J. Steinhardt, Electrical discharge triggers quasicrystal formation in an eolian dune, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 120 (2023), e2215484119.

On the quasicrystal found at the atomic bomb test site:

• L. Bindi, W. Kolb, G. N. Eby, P. D. Asimow, T. C. Wallace and P. J. Steinhardt, Accidental synthesis of a previously unknown quasicrystal in the first atomic bomb test, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 118 22 (2021), e2101350118.

This has icosahedral symmetry, but it’s quite different than the other quasicrystals I’ve mentioned, since it’s mostly made of silicon! Its formula is Si61Cu30Ca2Fe2.

This entry was posted on Thursday, May 14th, 2026 at 9:40 am and is filed under chemistry, mathematics. You can follow any responses to this entry through the RSS 2.0 feed. You can leave a response, or trackback from your own site.

Post navigation « Previous Post

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

6. The main thing about P2P meth is that there's so much of it (2021)

Source: https://dynomight.net/p2p-meth/
Site: DYNOMIGHT
Author: dynomight
Published: 2021-10-26
HN activity: 61 points · 54 comments
Length: 2.2K words (~10 min read)
Language: en

Sam Quinones was recently on Econtalk and in the Atlantic talking about methamphetamines and homelessness. He points out that “old” meth was made from ephedrine and that “new” meth is made from a chemical called Phenylacetone or P2P. He suggests that new meth might be chemically different in a way that caused people to go crazy, starting around 2017:

Ephedrine meth was like a party drug. […] You could normally kind of more or less hang onto your life. You had a house, you had a job. […] P2P meth was nothing like that. It was a very sinister drug. It brought you inside. You didn’t want to be around other people. You wanted to just kind of be alone with whatever bizarre thoughts your mind was now cooking up, and conspiracies.

I was curious about this. What do we know about the difference between old meth and P2P meth? What evidence is there that these have a chemical difference?

Meth in the US shifted to P2P synthesis between 2009 and 2012.

In the before times, meth was made with ephedrine or pseudoephedrine. However, in 2006, the US banned over-the-counter sales of pseudoephedrine, and in 2008 Mexico banned almost all sales. In response to this, meth makers switched to a synthesis based on P2P, which can be made from many different, widely available, source chemicals.

The Drug Enforcement Agency tests the meth they seize to see how it was made. Here’s their data starting in 2009, where you can see that P2P synthesis (in red) rapidly displaces the older ephedrine-based synthesis (in blue).

How could P2P meth be different? There are two ways: Either it could be a different type of meth, or the meth could be contaminated with some other chemicals.

Let’s talk about different types of meth first.

Isomers

A naive P2P synthesis would produce an even mixture of l-meth and d-meth.

For many complex molecules, you can take the atoms, and “flip” them to get another stable version of the same molecule, called an isomer or (more specifically) an enantiomer. These different versions of the molecule can have very different effects on the body.

Methamphetamine happens to be one of those molecules. The one that produces the effects we call “meth” is d-methamphetamine (d-meth). That’s the one that increases dopamine in the brain, causing euphoria. (It’s also the one that is sold at pharmacies in the US to treat ADHD and obesity.) On the other hand, l-methamphetamine (l-meth) has no effects on dopamine and presumably isn’t nearly as much fun.

Anyway, a synthesis that turns P2P into meth will create an equal mixture of d-meth and l-meth, basically because atoms bouncing around randomly are equally likely to end up in either of two equally low-energy configurations. Older synthesis methods using ephedrine would create only d-meth.

P2P initially had a fair amount of l-meth, but it was almost all gone by 2019.

Here’s data from the DEA again, where “potency” is the percentage of d-meth among all meth. This data is assembled from the National Drug Threat reports from many different years:

Be careful here: Take a sample of meth that’s ¼ d-meth, ¼ l-meth, and ½ other impurities. This would count as 50% potent because 50% of the meth is d-meth. (Other impurities are accounted for with “purity” below.)

The dip in 2014 might be explained by the introduction of a new synthesis method (NTS), which we’ll talk about below.

Unfortunately, I can’t seem to find any data going back further to before when P2P meth was introduced. It’s likely that d-meth was higher before P2P synthesis become popular, though this paper analyzes meth in Australia and finds that, for some reason, ephedrine-based meth often has fair amounts of l-meth, too.

L-meth is in various easy-to-obtain drugs.

Vick’s VapoInhalers contain 50mg of l-meth, which they spell in an unusual way probably to reduce the number of people who notice what’s in there and freak out.

L-meth is also produced as a metabolite of Selegiline, a drug for Parkinson’s and depression.

Contaminants

The purity of meth is now higher than ever.

The DEA has tracked purity in meth that they have seized for a long time. They define purity to be the percentage of meth (d or l) amongst all chemicals in the sample. Here’s a plot of all the data I could find:

Now, the terms “purity” and “potency” as used by the DEA are a bit confusing. A consumer of meth probably cares about the percentage of d-meth amongst all chemicals in the sample. You get this by multiplying the purity and potency:

Modern street meth is higher quality than ever, around 95% d-meth on average.

There are many ways to make P2P meth.

Here’s a figure that shows how P2P might be produced from source chemicals, simplified from this paper:

This shows two routes to make P2P. The top route uses benzaldehyde and nitroethane to produce nitrostyrene (NTS), which is then made into P2P. The bottom route uses ethyl phenylacetate (EtPA) to make phenylacetic acid (PAA), which is again made into P2P. Note that lead acetate (which has been raised as a concern) is only used in the PAA synthesis route.

Synthesis methods for P2P meth have changed repeatedly.

This paper by DEA scientists goes over the profiling of different types of P2P meth. Here’s the history, as far as I can make out:

Starting around 2009, people used EtPA to make PAA.
Around 2014, there was a shift towards using the NTS synthesis.
Around 2018, there was a shift back towards using PAA. (It’s not clear if this PAA was sourced directly, or made from EtPA or what.)

It’s much messier than this implies: The transitions were gradual, and the DEA finds a fair number of “unknown” samples each year that they can’t classify.

On top of these different methods to make P2P, there are different methods to convert P2P into meth, and these have probably changed over time as well. The DEA seems to attribute most impurities to the P2P production step. However, they seem more interested in the meth supply chain than how impurities might affect the health of users.

This history of synthesis methods does not support the theory that lead acetate in meth is causing schizophrenia: Lead acetate was used much less between 2014 and 2018 when NTS synthesis mostly displaced PAA synthesis. This doesn’t correlate with reports of schizophrenia at all.

Quantity

How much meth is used, by how many people? It’s hard to say exactly, given that we’re talking about a black-market supply chain and a product that’s illegal to consume. Still, we have various windows into things.

The amount of meth seized at the border is skyrocketing.

Here’s a figure, modified from the UN’s 2021 World Drug Report.

To some degree, this reflects Mexican-made meth displacing US-made meth, but this isn’t a major factor: Already in 2012, the DEA estimated that 80% of meth in the US was Mexican-made.

Sewage measurements suggest a doubling of usage in Seattle around 2017.

There’s an impressive project in Europe to measure drug use from biomarkers in sewage. They invite participation from cities around the world, which Seattle does. Here are their measurements (extracted from measurements in the 2020 report):

In 2016, Seattle already had the highest levels of any participating city in the world, but these doubled in 2017 and then stayed roughly constant after.

More people now report using meth, especially using a lot of meth.

One way to estimate how much meth people use is to ask them. The US Department of Health and Human Services maintains the Substance Abuse & Mental Health Data Archive with data going back to 2002. I used this data to get two numbers: The percentage of people who used meth at all in the past 30 days, and the percentage of people who used meth every day in the last 30 days. (The latter is only available since 2015). These are proxies for the number of casual users and the number of serious addicts.

The number of people who use meth has increased. However, the real growth is in the number of heavy users, which tripled just between 2015 and 2019.
Here are some details on the data used in the above graph, in case you'd like to play around with similar analyses.

These are the raw cross-tables:

Time since used meth, until 2014
Time since used meth, after 2014
# days used meth in last 30 days

After following one of those links, turn off all table display options except for row %, then click the “Run Crosstab” button.

Meth prices have come down.

If supply is increasing, we would expect prices to come down. Have they? The DEA tracks prices in seized meth going back at least as far as 2005. After cobbling together (sometimes contradictory) numbers on National Drug Threat Assessments, here’s the best series I could find:

The DEA continued to track prices after 2017, but they noticed that lots of researchers found this data useful and therefore stopped publishing it because screw you.

I’m not sure how reliable these numbers are. They vary a lot based on the quantity being bought and the location in the country. The RAND corporation estimates numbers that are 2-3x higher overall, but show a similar relative decrease from 2008 to 2016.

There are also random quotes scattered across the media: The Kansas Bureau of investigations (2017, 2018, 2019, 2020) reports the price of a pound of meth dropping from around $15k in 2014 to around $4k in 2019, and slightly rebounding to $5k in 2020 during the pandemic. (Apparently, the meth supply chain is more robust than that for semiconductors.) A public television station in California in 2019 quotes a law enforcement officer in Fresno as saying a pound of meth had dropped from $6k for a pound a few years before to only $1k per pound now.

Meth overdoses are skyrocketing.

From the National Institute on Drug Abuse, here are the number of overdose deaths per year. This includes other psychostimulants like caffeine and MDMA, but the deaths overwhelmingly come from meth:

This isn’t slowing down. More recent data (not plotted) indicates that that 2020 had 24,076 deaths, and things sped up even more during early 2021. While a lot of these deaths come in combination with opiates like Fentanyl, a lot don’t, too.

We can put these numbers in context with some very rough arithmetic.

Let’s compare to someone who takes amphetamines/Adderall for ADHD, typically prescribed 5-20 mg per dose. Meanwhile, a strong single dose of meth is 40-150 mg, on top of which people say that meth is around 2× as potent as amphetamines. So meth users take roughly 15× as much per dose as the typical Adderall user. Meth addicts often dose several times per day, due to the short half-life, meaning a total of 300-800 mg per day.

That’s a lot, but let’s talk about overdoses. It’s actually pretty hard to overdose on meth. One way to estimate it is to look at animals This paper says that 50% of rats and mice die at a dosage of around 55 mg/kg. This suggests that an 80 kg (175 lb) person would need to take 4400 mg of meth to have a 50% chance of dying. Now, it’s not safe to extrapolate numbers between animals and humans, and there’s a blurry boundary between lethal and non-lethal doses. But there are many reports out there of people taking 500 mg of meth at a time without overdosing. That’s something like 100× a clinical dose of 10mg of Adderall.

That’s an insane amount of stimulants. I find it difficult to understand how anyone would want to do that to themselves. But they do, enough that meth overdoses kill half as many people as die in car accidents, and the numbers are still increasing. I guess drug users use a lot of drugs.

Takeaways

What to make of all this?

First, I think it’s unlikely that l-meth is causing people to go crazy. Modern P2P meth is nearly pure d-meth, and the percentage of l-meth peaked before 2011, before these reports of schizophrenia.

Second, the evidence we have is against the idea of contaminants in P2P meth. Almost all meth was produced using P2P since 2012, before most reports of schizophrenia. And P2P meth synthesis has changed several times in the interim, resulting in higher purity than ever before.

Third, the major impact of P2P synthesis is that a lot more meth is available. We have many sources of evidence for this: Border seizures, sewage measurements, usage surveys, prices, and overdose data. All these indicate that people are using historically large amounts.

Does this rule out the idea of contaminants? No. Even if it’s 97% pure d-meth, there could be something very nasty lurking in that last 3%. But I don’t see the need for such an explanation. We know there are many more heavy users, so there’s no need to go beyond the idea that quantity has a quality all its own.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

7. How to Write to SSDs [pdf]

Source: https://www.vldb.org/pvldb/vol19/p1469-lee.pdf
Site: vldb.org
Submitter: matt_d (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-15 22:23 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 60 points · 6 comments

binary file (.pdf); not scraped

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

8. A 0-click exploit chain for the Pixel 10

Source: https://projectzero.google/2026/05/pixel-10-exploit.html
Site: projectzero.google
Submitter: happyhardcore (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-15 13:39 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 347 points · 159 comments
Length: 1.1K words (~5 min read)
Language: en

We recently published an exploit chain for the Google Pixel 9 that demonstrated it was possible to go from a zero-click context to root on Android in just two exploits. The Dolby 0-click vulnerability existed across all of Android, until it was patched in January 2026. While we had an exploit chain for the Pixel 9, we wanted to see if it was possible to write a similar exploit chain for Pixel 10.

Updating the Dolby Exploit

Altering our exploit for CVE-2025-54957 was fairly straightforward. The majority of needed changes involved updating offsets calculated for the specific version of the library we targeted on the Pixel 9 to similar offsets in the library for Pixel 10. The only challenge (outside of wishing we’d better documented which syncframes contained offsets) was that the Pixel 10 uses RET PAC in the place of -fstack-protector, which meant that __stack_chk_fail wasn’t available to be overwritten by code. After a bit of trial and error, we used dap_cpdp_init, initialization code that can be overwritten without causing functional problems, as it is called once when the decoder is initialized and never again. The updated Dolby UDC exploit is available here. This exploit will only work on unpatched devices (SPL December 2025 or earlier).

Removal of BigWave, Addition of VPU

Porting the local privilege escalation link of the chain to Pixel 10 was not feasible as the BigWave driver does not ship on this device. However, a new driver is visible in the mediacodec SELinux context at /dev/vpu. This driver is used for interacting with the Chips&Media Wave677DV silicon on the Tensor G5 chip meant for accelerating video decoding. Based on the comments within the open-source C files, this driver is developed and maintained by the same set of developers who built the BigWave driver. Working in collaboration with Jann Horn, we spent 2 hours auditing this VPU driver and discovered an exceptional vulnerability.

Unlike the upstream Linux driver for WAVE521C (which is an older Chips&Media chip), the Pixel driver for WAVE677DV does not integrate with V4L2 (the “Video for Linux API”); instead, it directly exposes the chip’s hardware interface to userspace, including letting userspace map the chip’s MMIO register interface. The driver mainly establishes device memory mappings, does power management, and allows userspace to wait for interrupts from the chip.

The Holy Grail of Kernel Vulnerabilities

This bug in particular caught our attention as exceptionally simple to exploit:

static int vpu_mmap(struct file *fp, struct vm_area_struct *vm)
{
	unsigned long pfn;
	struct vpu_core *core =
		container_of(fp->f_inode->i_cdev, struct vpu_core, cdev);

	vm_flags_set(vm, VM_IO | VM_DONTEXPAND | VM_DONTDUMP);
	/* This is a CSRs mapping, use pgprot_device */
	vm->vm_page_prot = pgprot_device(vm->vm_page_prot);
	pfn = core->paddr >> PAGE_SHIFT;

	return remap_pfn_range(vm, vm->vm_start, pfn, vm->vm_end-vm->vm_start, vm->vm_page_prot) ? -EAGAIN : 0;
}


This mmap handler is intended to be used in order to map the MMIO register region of the VPU hardware into the userland virtual address space - a region contained within a certain physical memory address range. In doing so, it makes a call to remap_pfn_range based purely on the size of the VMA and not at all bounded to the size of this register region. This means that, by specifying a size larger than the register region in an mmap syscall, the caller can map as much physical memory as they want into userland, starting at the physical address of the VPU register region. The entirety of the kernel image (including .text, and .data region) is located at a higher physical address than the VPU register region, and can therefore be accessed and modified by userspace with this bug.

At this point, one can simply overwrite any kernel function to gain kernel code execution - or indeed any primitive one might desire. This is rendered even easier by the fact that the kernel is always at the same physical address on Pixel and so the offset between the VPU memory region and the kernel is always a known value. Thus it is not even necessary to scan for the kernel in the mapped physical memory - you simply know exactly where it is relative to the address returned by mmap, presuming you make the VMA length large enough.

Achieving arbitrary read-write on the kernel with this vulnerability required 5 lines of code and writing a full exploit for this issue required less than a day of effort.

Patch Process

I reported this bug on November 24, 2025 and Android VRP rated the issue High severity. This is an improvement, given that the BigWave bug we used for privilege escalation on the Pixel 9 (which had identical security impact) was initially rated as Moderate severity. This represents a meaningful and positive change in posture regarding how these types of bugs are triaged and patched. The vulnerability was patched 71 days after its initial report, in the February Pixel security bulletin. This is notably fast given that this is the first time that an Android driver bug I reported was patched within 90 days of the vendor first learning about the vulnerability.

Conclusion

There are both positives and negatives to take from this research. A key goal of Project Zero is to drive systemic improvements that go beyond individual bug fixes, influencing better development processes and more resilient codebases that lead to improvements in security for end-users. The handling of this VPU vulnerability demonstrates clear progress in Android’s triage pipeline, as this bug had an initial remediation in a much shorter period of time than the previous BigWave issues. Android’s effort to ensure that serious vulnerabilities are patched efficiently will help protect many Android devices.

At the same time, this case underscores the ongoing need for more exhaustively robust and security-aware code in Android drivers. When I reported the bugs in BigWave, I hoped to spur its developers to evaluate their other drivers for obvious security issues, but 5 months later we nevertheless found a serious and extremely shallow vulnerability in their VPU driver that was instantly noticeable with even a cursory audit of the codebase. Strengthening driver security remains a crucial priority for ensuring a safe Android ecosystem, and we continue to strongly encourage vendors to improve software development practices in a proactive effort to prevent these sorts of vulnerabilities from ever reaching end-users.

Security reports often uncover complex issues missed by the product teams but it is important that software vendors take necessary steps to ensure software products, especially security-critical ones, launch in a reasonably vulnerability-free state and that software teams take a proactive approach to software security, code auditing, and vulnerability patching.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

9. California bill would require patches or refunds when online games shut down

Source: https://arstechnica.com/gaming/2026/05/bill-to-keep-online-games-playable-clears-key-hurdle-in-california/
Site: arstechnica.com
Submitter: Lihh27 (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-15 19:48 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 371 points · 224 comments
Language: en

No extractable content.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

10. Show HN: Epiq – Distributed Git based issue tracker TUI

Source: https://ljtn.github.io/epiq/
Site: ljtn.github.io
Submitter: jolaflow (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-16 00:18 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 23 points · 6 comments
Length: 299 words (~2 min read)
Language: en

Issue tracking
for terminal dwellers.

Epiq is a vim-inspired issue tracker that renders as ASCII, stores work as an immutable event log, and synchronizes through Git. No SaaS ceremony. No browser. Just your repo, your editor, and a board that moves at command-line speed.

Repo-nativeissues live with the work

Local-firstinstant edits, sync at will

Event-sourcedimmutable, traceable

MCP-readybuilt for agent workflows

Why Epiq

Bringing devX to project management.

Epiq optimizes for flow: keyboard navigation, command history, filters, autocompletion, and plain Git synchronization.

hjkl

Keyboard centric

Navigate boards, issues, swimlanes, and contexts with vim-like movement. Or cheat with arrow keys.

git

Distributed by default

Epiq uses Git under the hood, with isolated worktrees and state branches, so teams can collaborate without introducing another central service.

log

Traceable state

Changes are appended as events, replayed deterministically, and designed to converge. Inspect what happened yesterday, last week, or one year ago.

The model

Local first. Sync at will. Or automatically.

Create, move, filter, close, reopen, and sync issues without tab-switching. Epiq keeps local interaction instant while allowing you to sync explicitly or automatically.

# inside any Git repo
epiq

# create work
:new issue Add keyboard shortcuts

# narrow the board
:filter tag prio

# synchronize distributed state
:sync

What you get

$1

No account requiredInitialize in a Git repo and keep moving.

$2

Visual ASCII kanban boardsKanban in the terminal, navigated, filtered, and edited quickly.

$3

Conflict-aware collaborationUser-scoped append-only event logs prevents merge pain and converge in memory.

$4

Agent interactionsThe MCP server lets AI tools interact with Epiq in a predictable way.

Issue tracking should be smooth.

- probably someone

Install

Start in two commands.

Install globally, enter any Git repository, and run Epiq. First launch opens an interactive setup wizard.

npm install --global epiq
cd your-existing-repo-with-remote-tracking
epiq

:visit github repository

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

11. ESP-EEG is an affordable 8-channel biosensing board

Source: https://www.autodidacts.io/cerelog-esp-eeg-affordable-openbci-like-board/
Site: The Autodidacts
Author: Curiositry
Published: 2026-01-02
HN activity: 27 points · 7 comments
Length: 519 words (~3 min read)
Language: en

I recently ran across a new open-source (or is it source-available?) EEG board that looks interesting: the Cerelog ESP-EEG.

Cerelog ESP-EEG development board in action

At its heart is the Texas Instruments ADS1299 (24-bit, 8-channel) analog-digital converter, the same chip the OpenBCI Cyton uses.

So what's different or better about the Cerelog? From my perusal of the materials, it seems that the selling point is cleaner signal due to true closed-loop active bias, at a price point close to the price of the OpenBCI when it launched (less than half the price of the Cyton now).

Software support includes a fork of the OpenBCI GUI (via Lab Streaming Layer) and Brainflow.

The project is by former SpaceX hardware engineer Simon Hakimian.

Git repository with firmware and schematic here:

⇒ https://github.com/Cerelog-ESP-EEG/ESP-EEG

Product page:

⇒ https://www.cerelog.com/eeg_researchers.html

Usage guide:

⇒ https://www.cerelog.com/eeg_researchers_guide.html

Socials:

⇒ https://x.com/CerelogOfficial

Announcement post on Reddit r/BCI:

⇒ https://old.reddit.com/r/BCI/comments/1polj4b/i_designed_an_open_source_8channel_eeg_board/

More info about where this is going:

⇒ https://www.cerelog.com/investor_info.html

Cerelog also has a tCDS board available for pre-order:

⇒ https://www.cerelog.com/tdcs_researchers.html

YouTube video:

⇒ https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6XKdIbguI00

Caveats:

It has hardware support for Bluetooth/Wifi, but the firmware isn't ready yet, so for the time being it can only be used with USB, which means it isn't electrically isolated, which means absolutely don't ever use it with a desktop computer or a laptop that is charging.

Some of the promo materials sound like they could have been hallucinated by an LLM; but then, investor-speak has never sounded human to me.

Though the schematics and firmware are open source (MIT Licence, and CC-BY-NC-SA 4.0), the PCB layout files are specifically not available, and the firmware/schematics only allow non-commercial use.

In the guide it says the firmware is not available unless you email; elsewhere it says it's open source under MIT licence. And in some places it says the hardware is CC-BY-NC-SA 4.0, and elsewhere it says it's merely CC-BY-SA 4.0. I'm confused!

Update: Simon has clarified the licencing: “Regarding licensing, sorry about the confusion between my repo init and the docs. I have updated the repo to clarify the distinction: Firmware & Software: MIT License. I want people to build whatever they want on top of the stack. Hardware Schematics: CC-BY-NC-SA (Non-Commercial). Why the split? Since I am a solo bootstrapper, I need to protect the hardware from low-effort commercial clones while I get the business off the ground. But I strongly believe in "Source Available" schematics so researchers and engineers can debug, learn, and modify their own units, hence the CC-BY-NC-SA choice for the board files.”

Questions:

This is so similar to the OpenBCI, why not just fork the OpenBCI hardware and software, and add true closed-loop active bias?

Update: Simon responds: “Why start fresh? It was an architecture decision. The Cyton uses a PIC32 + RFduino stack. I wanted to handle everything natively on the ESP32 for high-bandwidth WiFi streaming, which required a ground-up redesign. I also wanted to add onboard LiPo charging and the ability to experiment with different filter topologies. Building it from scratch helped me uncover a lot of subtle design constraints that aren't obvious until you dig into the layout.”

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

12. Ploopy Bean: a trackpoint for every computer

Source: https://ploopy.co/shop/bean-pointing-stick/
Site: ploopy.co
Submitter: jibcage (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-12 20:39 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 9 points · 6 comments
Length: 724 words (~4 min read)
Language: en-US

$69.99 CAD

The Ploopy Bean Pointing Stick is a 3D-printed, open-source pointing stick mouse. It adds high-precision pointing stick functionality to any setup, and has four Omron D2LS-21 buttons for snappy, responsive clicks. It runs QMK and supports VIA, which allows for quick and portable customization. It’s fully assembled and ready to use immediately.

SKU: PLCMBEAS0001 Category: Bean

Description
Additional information
Shipping & Returns
Warranty Information

Description

Preorder Details

The Bean Pointing Stick is currently in a preorder phase. That means that any orders you place with us that include a Bean Pointing Stick will be shipped out on the basis of availability.

The preorder is split into different tiers:

EARLY ACCESS: Orders from this tier will ship out immediately.
TIER A: Orders from this tier will ship out within 8 weeks of our launch date.
TIER B: Orders from this tier will ship out within 20 weeks of our launch date.

The launch date for the Bean Pointing Stick is 6 May 2026.

Ploopy has a strong history of preorder management. We have released multiple products under these exact preorder conditions, and we have always successfully delivered all units within the promised amount of time.

Included with every Bean Pointing Stick

3D-printed parts (black)

Top
Bottom
Spring

Electronics

Bean Pointing Stick PCB
USB-A to USB-C cable (optional)

Hardware

1x Screw
1x Magnet
4x Friction Pads
1x Friction Nub

You can find full assembly instructions here. But…you don’t need them, since this comes fully-assembled.

Default firmware

The Bean Pointing Stick ships with QMK preloaded. Currently, we’re shipping with our version of QMK.

Want to load new firmware onto your Ploopy device? Loading new firmware is fast and easy, and doesn’t require anything except your computer. Check out our guide here. It includes a full set of instructions on loading new firmware. You can load new firmware with tools like QMK Toolbox or the QMK Configurator.

Modding

Planning on modifying your device? Read through the official Modder’s Guide first for helpful tips!

Checkout page not working?

Sometimes, ad-blocking software will interfere with the checkout process. It’ll result in the checkout page hanging forever after you’ve entered your payment information. If this is happening to you, try temporarily disabling your ad-blockers.

Additional information

Weight .052 kg
Dimensions 8.4 × 6.4 × 1.6 cm

Shipping & Returns

Shipping

We ship packages using Chit Chats, a Canadian logistics provider.
During the checkout process, you will see an estimate for delivery time. THIS IS NOT AN ESTIMATE FOR HOW LONG THE PRODUCT WILL TAKE TO ARRIVE FROM YOUR DATE OF PURCHASE. It is an estimate for how long the package will be in transit.
Orders will be shipped out on the basis of availability.
Ploopy may charge sales tax for sales of Products; Canadian orders will show sales tax (HST or GST) upon checkout, while International orders will have sales tax collected upon import.
If sales tax is not indicated during the checkout process, it will be collected upon import along with all other charges related to customs, duties, and brokerage fees. Ploopy does not receive these funds, nor do we mandate their collection; they are collected by customs as part of international trade agreements.
Shipping costs are not declared on customs forms; only the value of purchased goods is declared.
If a shipping option declares that it is (Untracked), no tracking number for the parcel will be provided.
Our logistics provider does not ship to certain countries. If you are located in a country that our logistics provider does not support, we will not be able to ship orders to you.
If you use a freight forwarding service, we will not be liable for any failed delivery attempts made by said freight forwarding service.

Returns

We offer a 30-day return policy (shipping not included). We cannot accept returns for kit products that have been assembled.

For more details please refer to our General Terms and Conditions of Sale and our Help Center.

Warranty Information

Included with your Ploopy hardware is a limited one (1) year manufacturers warranty from the date of purchase. Note that, among other terms, this warranty is automatically voided if you in any way alter the hardware, software or firmware you receive, including but not limited to flashing new firmware onto hardware you purchase from us.

For more details please refer to our Warranty Information.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

13. The sigmoids won't save you

Source: https://www.astralcodexten.com/p/the-sigmoids-wont-save-you
Site: Astral Codex Ten
Author: Scott Alexander
Published: 2026-05-15
HN activity: 163 points · 171 comments
Length: 1.2K words (~6 min read)
Language: en

“All exponentials eventually become sigmoids” is an annoying AI talking point. If someone presents a graph like this…

….and points out that it seems like AI capabilities could soon reach the level marked “High”, then the height of intelligent debate is to point out that actually, the trend could go like this:

…and then it would never reach the level marked “High”!

In slogan form, this is “all exponentials eventually become sigmoids” (a sigmoid is the s-shape of the second graph, which starts exponential but gradually flattens out). It’s technically true. No process can keep growing forever; eventually it hits physical or practical limits. For example, total cases during an epidemic is classically sigmoid:

They start slow - patient zero infects patient one, and so on. They grow exponentially until most people are infected. Then, as almost everyone is infected and they can only mop up the last few holdouts, they slow down again. Finally, after everyone has been infected, the growth rate is zero.

Technological progress in a given field can also be sigmoid. Here’s airspeed record over time:
Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_flight_airspeed_records

My understanding is that this represents 3-4 “generations” of different technology (propellers, turbojets, etc). Each technology went through normal iterative improvement, then, when it reached its fundamental limits, got replaced by a better technology. The last technology, ramjets, reached its limit at about 3500 km/h, and there wasn’t the economic/regulatory will to develop anything better, so the record stands.

You can imagine something similar happening with AI at some point. Does that mean people are right, and there’s no need to worry that the graph will ever reach the line marked “high”?

Before we come up with a general answer, let’s look at the Sigmoid Misidentification Hall Of Fame.

Third place goes to UN birthrate projections in countries with declining birthrates. These countries’ birthrates keep going down at a constant rate, and the UN keeps predicting they will flatten out and go down at some lesser rate. On this graph, red is the real data, and each blue line is a different UN attempt from a different year to “extrapolate” the “trend”.

It’s true that birth rates must eventually flatten out and become sigmoid (this may have happened last year in South Korea, although Colombia and Chile are still declining), but this doesn’t necessarily happen at the exact moment that forecasters in the UN start feeling like the decline has gone too far.

Second place goes to predictions of solar power deployment, as chronicled by A.E. Hoekstra.

The various WEO lines are World Energy Organization predictions for how quickly solar power will get deployed. Every year, the WEO thinks “Wow, lots of solar power got added last year, probably this year it will level out and people might even back off a little”. Every year, the amount of solar power deployed grows at the same rate.

First place goes to this paper on the METR graph of AI capabilities. In early 2026, when the underlying data looked like this:

…a team from Wharton tried to model different curves and predicted that the likely future trajectory was this:

@Tenobrus ably chronicles what happened next (the green curve is their original; the star marks the next AI model to be released after their analysis):

The moral of the story is that, even though all exponentials eventually become sigmoids, this doesn’t necessarily happen at the exact moment you’re doing your analysis. Sometimes they stay exponential for much longer than that!

How much longer?

The best way to predict this is to fully understand the process generating the trend. For example, you can forecast an epidemic by knowing how quickly it replicates, how likely it is to be cured, and how large the susceptible population is. Even in harder cases like airspeed records, a smart engineer could determine that ramjets max out around 3500 km/h, and a smart economist could predict that no country was incentivized to spend enough money to bring the next paradigm to fruition.

What if you don’t fully understand the process? AI forecasters know some things (like how data centers work and how much it costs to build them). But they’re unsure about other things (researchers keep inventing new paradigms of data generation that get over data walls, but for how long?), and other things are entirely opaque (What is intelligence really? Why do scaling laws work? Might they just stop working at some point?) Is there anything you can do here?

In conditions of true ignorance, the default assumption should be Lindy’s Law: on average, a process will continue about as long as it’s continued already.

To build intuition: suppose you walk past a geyser, and see a sign saying “This geyser last erupted 100,000 years ago”. You know nothing else about geysers. What’s the chance it will erupt in the next hour? It must be very low, right? If it erupted in the next hour, you would have walked past it 99.99999% of the way through its eruption cycle - in other words, your random sample had a higher value than 99.99999% of points. That’s not how random samples usually work! On the other hand, suppose you walk past another geyser, and see a sign saying “This geyser last erupted 10 minutes ago”. What is the chance that this geyser will erupt in the next hour? Pretty high, right? It seems like this geyser’s eruptions occur on a scale of every few minutes. When you calculate it out, your median prediction for the length of time until the next eruption should just be the number on the sign. In the same way, your median prediction for how long it should take before an entirely-mysterious trend changes shape should be the amount of time since the last change.

Applying this to AI: the forecasters who try to get deep understanding of the dynamics of AI progress think that we can keep scaling up AI at the current rate for another few years (by building more data centers, etc), and might or might not be able to scale it up faster after that by leveraging recursive self-improvement. But suppose you don’t trust those people. What should your default be?

AI has been improving dramatically since at least GPT-1 in 2017, although most people sort of arbitrarily date “the scaling era” as 2019 to present. So naively, ignoring everything we know and considering the whole field to be a total mystery, we might expect the trend to continue for, on average, another seven years. Assuming a Pareto distribution (what does this even mean in the case of AI? I don’t know) the chance that it continues for less than another two years is 22%.

It’s cheap and easy to make fun of people who extrapolate trends too far:
(source)

But if someone claims that the trend toward increasing AI capabilities will never reach some particular scary level, then the burden is on them to explain either:

If they’re not treating AI as a black box, and claim to be modeling the dynamics explicitly, then what is their model? Have they calculated the obvious things, like projected data center growth and speed of algorithmic progress? Are they familiar with the modeling work that’s already been done in this field, like the AI Futures Timeline Model? Do they have specific opinions on how the others went wrong, and where their model differs?

If they are treating AI as a black box, why isn’t their default expectation based on Lindy’s Law?

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

14. Erlang/OTP 29.0

Source: https://www.erlang.org/news/188
Site: Erlang.org
Submitter: pyinstallwoes (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-15 23:33 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 129 points · 9 comments
Length: 717 words (~4 min read)
Language: en

Erlang/OTP 29 is a new major release with new features, improvements as well as a few incompatibilities. Some of the new features are highlighted below.

Many thanks to all contributors!

Highlights #

Added support for -unsafe attributes for marking functions as unsafe to use. The compiler will by default now generate warnings for calls to functions in Erlang/OTP known to be always unsafe. Furthermore, xref can now be used to find calls to unsafe functions and functions that lack documentation.

The SSH daemon now defaults to disabled for shell and exec services, implementing the “secure by default” principle. This prevents authenticated users from executing arbitrary Erlang code unless explicitly configured.

The SFTP subsystem is no longer enabled by default when starting an SSH daemon.

In SSL, the post quantum hybrid algorithm x25519mlkem768 is now the most preferred key exchange group in the default configuration.

The module io_ansi allows the user to emit Virtual Terminal Sequences (also known as ANSI sequences) to the terminal in order to add colors/styling to text or to create fully fledged terminal applications.

The new ct_doctest module allows the user to test documentation examples in Erlang module docs and documentation files.

The ignore_xref attribute has been handled as a post-analysis filter by build tools such as Rebar3. In this release, [xref] itself does the filtering, ensuring that all tooling that calls xref for any purpose can rely on these declarations to just work.

General #

In the default code path for the Erlang system, the current working directory (.) is now in the last position instead of the first.

There is no longer a 32-bit Erlang/OTP build for Windows.

New language features #

Native records as described in EEP-79 has been implemented. A native record is a data structure similar to the traditional tuple-based records, except that is a true data type. Native records are considered experimental in Erlang/OTP 29 and possibly also in Erlang/OTP 30.

The new is_integer/3 guard BIF makes it possible to easily verify that a value is both an integer and within a certain range. For example: is_integer(I, 0, 100)

Multi-valued comprehensions according to EEP 78 are now supported. For example, [-I, I || I <- [1, 2, 3]] will produce [-1,1,-2,2,-3,3].

By enabling the compr_assign feature, it is now possible to bind variables in a comprehensions. For example: [H || E <- List, H = erlang:phash2(E), H rem 10 =:= 0]

Compiler and JIT improvements #

In the documentation for the [compile] module, there is now a section with recommendations for implementors of languages running on the BEAM.

The JIT now generates better code for matching or creating binaries with multiple little-endian segments.

The compiler will generate more efficient code for map comprehensions with constant values that don’t depend on the generator. Example: #{K => 42 || K <- List}

Compiler warnings #

There are several new compiler warnings enabled by default. For each such warning, there is an option to disable it.

There will now be a warning when using the catch operator, which has been deprecated for a long time. It is recommended to instead use try…catch but is also possible to disable the warning by using the nowarn_deprecated_catch option.

There will now be a warning when exporting variables out of a subexpression. For example: file:open(File, AllOpts = [write, {encoding,utf8}]). This warning can be disabled using the nowarn_export_var_subexpr compiler option.

The compiler will now warn for uses of the and and or operators. This warning can be disabled using the nowarn_obsolete_bool_op compiler option.

The compiler will now warn for matches such as {a,B} = {X,Y}, which is better written as {a=X,B=Y}. This warning can be disabled using the nowarn_match_alias_pats option.

For a long time, there has been a warning for using the obsolete guard tests (such as list(L) instead of is_list(L). In Erlang/OTP 30, the old guards will be removed from the language.

STDLIB #

There are new functions for randomly permutating a list: rand:shuffle/1 and rand:shuffle_s/2.

SSH #

The default key exchange algorithm is now mlkem768x25519-sha256, a hybrid quantum-resistant algorithm combining ML-KEM-768 with X25519. This provides protection against both classical and quantum computer attacks while maintaining backward compatibility through automatic fallback to other algorithms when peers don’t support it.

For a full list and more details about new features and potential incompatibilities see the README.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

15. I broke AppLovin's mediation cipher protocol

Source: https://www.buchodi.com/i-broke-applovins-mediation-cipher-protocol/
Site: Buchodi's Threat Intel
Author: Buchodi
Published: 2026-05-16
HN activity: 17 points · 3 comments
Length: 1.8K words (~8 min read)
Language: en

15 May 2026

I broke the cipher AppLovin wraps around its ad-mediation traffic and decrypted several thousand real requests captured on my consented mobile-traffic research panel. The conclusion is straightforward: The encrypted bid request carries enough device data to deterministically re-identify the same iPhone across apps from different publishers, even when user denies ATT. That payload reaches AppLovin plus around 12 downstream ad networks on every banner load, every ~30 seconds, for as long as the user is playing. The assumption that ATT is the only way to deterministically identify a user is wrong. Fingerprinting the device works just as well.

The cipher

Every AppLovin mediation request is HTTPS POST sent to ms4.applovin.com/1.0/mediate. Inside the TLS layer, the payload is wrapped in a second cipher AppLovin built. After base64 decoding, the wire envelope is:

2:8a2387b7dbed018e5e485792eac2b56833ce8a3a:T7NreIR729giTKR-thJPcKeT6JXevACogl57SIFzwKp-1BASwpBT6v:<binary>

Three colon-separated fields then ciphertext:

A version tag (2)
A 40-character protocol id,
A 54-character suffix of the publisher's AppLovin SDK key. The SDK key is the shared secret AppLovin issues to each publisher app at signup, stored in plaintext in Info.plist on iOS or AndroidManifest.xml on Android.

The cipher takes two ingredients: a salt and that SDK key. The salt is a 32-byte constant baked into every AppLovin SDK binary, 21 meaningful bytes followed by 11 zero bytes. The bytes are identical across every IPA and APK I checked (Solitaire Associations Journey, Hypermarket3D, Ludo Star, Yik Yak on iOS; Hypermarket3D on Android). The 40-character protocol-id field on the wire is sha1(salt).hex().

The cipher:

salt         = (universal 32-byte constant, baked into the SDK)
sdk_key      = (per-publisher 86-char string, baked into the app bundle)

dk           = SHA-256(salt || sdk_key[:32])     # 32-byte per-publisher derived key
protocol_id  = SHA-1(salt).hex()                 # constant identifying the version

counter      = System.currentTimeMillis()        # 8-byte LE — wall clock at encrypt time
masked_ctr   = counter ⊕ uint64(dk[0:8])         # what appears on the wire

for i in 0..N-1:
    if i % 8 == 0:
        x   = (counter + i)
        x   = (x ⊕ (x >>> 33)) * 0xC2B2AE3D27D4EB4F
        x   = (x ⊕ (x >>> 29)) * 0x85EBCA77C2B2AE63
        ks  = x ⊕ (x >>> 32)
    ciphertext[i] = plaintext[i] ⊕ ((ks >> ((i % 8) * 8)) & 0xFF) ⊕ dk[i % 32]


A few facts about this construction:

The keystream is a SplitMix64 finalizer — Sebastiano Vigna's 2014 PRNG. SplitMix64 is the kind of randomness language standard libraries ship for fast random-number generation in games and simulations. It passes statistical-randomness tests; it does not pass cryptographic-security tests, and it isn't claimed to.
There is no MAC, no AEAD, no authentication at the cipher layer. An attacker can tamper with the ciphertext.
The cipher counter is System.currentTimeMillis(). Every encrypted envelope on the wire leaks the device's wall-clock time at encryption, to the millisecond, before decryption: recover the masked counter, XOR with uint64(dk[0:8]), get the timestamp.
I have successfully decrypted 5,394 envelopes from one app and a few thousand more across five other apps with zero failures.

What gets shipped

The decrypted plaintext is gzip-compressed JSON with about thirty top-level keys. Two of them carry the privacy weight:

device_info — AppLovin's own copy of the device's fingerprint payload. ~50 fields.
signal_data[] — an array of opaque tokens, one per demand-partner ad network installed in the publisher's app.

A real device_info from one ATT-denied request:

Field Value What it is
revision iPhone14,3 Hardware model code (iPhone 13 Pro Max)
os 18.6.2 OS patch version
tm 5918212096 Total RAM in bytes (= 5.51 GB)
ndx × ndy 1284 × 2778 Native pixel screen dimensions
kb en-US,es-ES Installed keyboards
font UICTContentSizeCategoryXXXL Accessibility text size
tz_offset -4 Timezone
volume 40 System audio volume
mute_switch 1 Physical mute switch position
bt_ms_2 1770745989000 Device boot time (ms epoch)
dnt / idfa true / 00000… ATT denied — IDFA zeroed
idfv 81E958C3-…-51DE7CE11819 Per-app-vendor stable id

Plus another 35 fields: screen safe-area insets, free memory, carrier code, country code, locale, orientation, status bar height, monotonic clock, battery flags, secure-connection state. Effectively every system property iOS exposes to third-party code.

The user denied ATT. IDFA is zeroed. Everything else flows.

The mini-envelopes

A typical publisher app has ~18 demand-partner SDKs compiled in: Meta, Google, Mintegral, Vungle, ironSource, Unity, InMobi, BidMachine, Fyber, Moloco, TikTok, Pangle, Chartboost, Verve, MobileFuse, Bigo, Yandex, plus AppLovin's own. When a banner needs filling, the AppLovin SDK calls each of those locally, and asks "prepare a bid signal." Each demand SDK independently constructs an opaque token containing whatever device data its publisher backend wants. The AppLovin SDK bundles them all into signal_data[] and ships the whole thing inside its encrypted envelope. AppLovin's server then forwards each token to that bidder's bid server via server-to-server OpenRTB.

The device makes one outgoing network call. The data reaches a dozen separate ad-tech companies.

In the request I'll quote throughout, twelve of the eighteen adapters returned bid signals, ranging from 29 bytes (Verve, probably just a fetch token) to 14.4 KB (Unity Ads). Of those twelve, four are themselves readable inside the AppLovin envelope; eight are encrypted to the destination bidder, opaque to AppLovin, only decodable on the recipient's bid server.

The four readable ones are the ones worth dwelling on. The InMobi bid signal — 36 URL-encoded key=value pairs, decoded in full:

d-devicemachinehw          = iPhone17,5
os-v                       = 26.2.1
h-user-agent               = Mozilla/5.0 (iPhone; CPU iPhone OS 18_7…)
d-language                 = en-US
d-localization             = en_US
d-key-lang                 = ["en-US"]
d-device-screen-density    = 3
d-device-screen-margins    = {"right":0,"left":0,"bottom":34,"top":47}
d-media-volume             = 15
d-drk-m                    = 1
d-bat-lev                  = 25
d-bat-sav                  = 0
d-bat-chrg                 = 0
d-av-disk                  = 6275 MB
d-tot-disk                 = 116837 MB
u-app-orientations         = 1
u-appbid                   = com.hitappsgames.wordsolitaire
u-appdnm                   = Solitaire Associations: Journey
u-appver                   = 1.9.0
u-tracking-status          = 3
u-age-restricted           = 0
s-skan                     = -1


InMobi's token contains signals AppLovin's own device_info doesn't: available disk space in megabytes (6,275 — varies hour to hour, very high entropy), total disk space, battery level, charging state, dark-mode preference, the model-specific safe-area inset dimensions. The downstream bidder collects more device data than the mediator forwarding it.

BidMachine's signal contains, additionally: the IANA timezone string (America/New_York, more specific than the numeric offset), carrier code, the SKAdNetwork acceptance list, and a separate 36-character UUID that's BidMachine's own per-user identifier. They've built their own persistent cross-app key, stored in their SDK's UserDefaults, shipped alongside Apple's IDFV on every request.

Fyber's signal is the most conservative: User-Agent, bundle, model, OS, IDFA, IDFV, locale, plus a stack of internal A/B test flag names.

Across the four readable mini-envelopes, the device fingerprint reaches four ad-tech companies in four different schemas. The other eight ship comparable payloads to eight more companies, encrypted in ways we can't inspect from outside. The fingerprint fans out on every banner load.

The api_did sentinel

Inside app_info there's an 18-character hex field called api_did. AppLovin's server assigns it on first SDK init — the SDK POSTs the full device_info + app_info to applovin.com/2.0/device once on fresh install, the server returns a device_id, the SDK caches it and echoes it as api_did on every subsequent request. Server-issued, persistent, designed to be cross-app.

Across six distinct physical iPhones I observed with ATT denied — different hardware revisions, different IDFVs, different apps from different publishers — 100% of envelopes had api_did starting with the same eight hex characters: 10badd1d. Read those bytes as ASCII: 0xBADD1D = BADDID = "Bad Device ID." It's a sentinel — AppLovin's server returns the same prefix for every ATT-denied caller, with a random trailing salt per app. For ATT-granted users I observed three different prefixes (1023c..., 10621..., 10ebf...) — one per IDFA, confirming that when ATT is granted, api_did is a deterministic transformation of the IDFA. When ATT is denied, the prefix carries no device-identifying information.

AppLovin's own server-issued cross-app identifier respects ATT cleanly. Credit where due. This is real and worth saying out loud.

The fingerprint, with IDFA and api_did excluded

api_did is one field. IDFA is one more. The encrypted envelope contains ~48 additional device_info fields, plus 12 mini-envelopes each carrying its own copy of the fingerprint. ATT zeroes one identifier. It does not touch:

the hardware model code
the OS patch version
the screen dimensions in points and native pixels
the screen safe-area insets (notch + home-indicator pixels — model-specific)
the total RAM in bytes
the available disk space in megabytes (varies hour-to-hour, very high entropy)
the battery level and charging state
the system audio volume
the system mute switch state
the dark-mode preference
the accessibility text-size setting
the list of installed keyboards
the timezone offset (and, in some bidders' tokens, the IANA timezone string)
the device boot time in epoch milliseconds (stable until reboot)
the IDFV
whatever per-bidder UUID each demand SDK has independently minted in its own storage

I built a SHA-256 fingerprint from nine of those fields — revision + os + tm + ndx + ndy + kb + font + locale + tz_offset — over the ten distinct physical iPhones in my decrypted corpus. Result: ten distinct fingerprints for ten distinct devices. 100% uniqueness in a panel that included multiple iPhones of the same hardware model.

For one ATT-denied user whose device appeared in three different apps from three different publishers, the fingerprint hash was identical across all three apps: 321d60c4d72ddf2a. Different bundle ids. Different IDFVs. Different SDK versions.

That is the privacy argument, made by direct construction: looking only at the device-info payload that flows in every encrypted mediation request, with IDFA zeroed and api_did excluded from consideration, the data is sufficient to deterministically re-identify the same physical iPhone across apps from different publishers, with ATT denied throughout. That payload reaches AppLovin and ~12 demand partners simultaneously, on every banner refresh, every ~30 seconds.

What ATT actually controls

ATT is a control over the Apple-issued cross-app identifier (IDFA). It is honored on the wire, IDFA is genuinely zeroed when the user denies. AppLovin's own server-issued identifier (api_did) is honored too, the BADDID sentinel returns the same value to every denied user. Both of those controls operate at the identifier layer.

The protocol AppLovin and the twelve downstream ad networks chose to send each other doesn't operate at the identifier layer. It operates at the device-fingerprint layer, which iOS does not gate, which Apple has no mechanical control over, and which ATT does not touch. Every encrypted mediation request carries 50 device fields to AppLovin, then 18 different bid signals to 18 different ad networks, then by server-to-server fan-out to those bidders' own downstream DSPs. Each of those parties has its own device fingerprint, its own identifier, its own ability to relink the same physical iPhone across publishers and sessions.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

16. The Zulip Foundation

Source: https://blog.zulip.com/2026/05/15/announcing-zulip-foundation/
Site: The Zulip Blog
Author: Tim Abbott
Submitted: 2026-05-15 18:37 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 235 points · 58 comments
Length: 1.7K words (~8 min read)
Language: en

Announcements
May 15, 2026 • 9 min read

Today marks a major transition for the Zulip open-source project and for Kandra Labs, the company behind it: I’m stepping back from full-time Zulip leadership to join Anthropic, alongside three senior team members, and we’re donating the company to a newly created, independent, nonprofit Zulip Foundation. The new structure provides stability, a renewed commitment to our values, and opportunities for charitable fundraising to support our mission. This blog post explains these changes and why they set Zulip up for greater long-term success.

Zulip is a beloved organized team chat product, used by thousands of companies, open-source projects, and research communities. Zulip is known for its unique topic-based threading model, which makes it easy to have many conversations in parallel without chaos, interruptions, or stress. April’s Zulip 12.0 release included almost 5,500 commits contributed by 160 people from all around the world.

Zulip’s new ownership and governance structure

The Zulip Foundation will be the formal steward of the Zulip project, with a mission of developing the best possible team chat experience, with a particular focus on public-interest organizations and communities.

Kandra Labs, the company that has stewarded Zulip for the last decade, will now be fully and independently owned by the Zulip Foundation, with no other stockholders or debt obligations. Kandra Labs will continue hosting, supporting, and improving Zulip for use across all industries, offering an excellent experience for business customers. We’re committed to being a trustworthy, transparent vendor for our customers, and anticipate no major changes in how we conduct business.

I’m excited that this new structure — similar to governance structures for Mozilla, Signal, and Wikipedia — formalizes our longtime commitment to Zulip’s sustainability and independence.

The foundation’s initial board of directors will be:

Tim Abbott, Zulip’s founder (me).
Greg Price, who has helped me lead Zulip in a cofounder-like role for the last 9 years.
Alya Abbott, Zulip’s product lead, who has also held a cofounder-like role for the last 5 years.
Josh Triplett, a leader in the Rust programming language, experienced in open source, and a major advocate for Zulip.

We also have five incredible people signed on to share their expertise as members of an advisory board:

Andrew Sutherland, mathematician and senior researcher at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and President of the Number Theory Foundation. He is a leading advocate of Zulip for research collaborations, including the L-functions and Modular Forms Database.
Hazel Weakly, a former Director of the Haskell Foundation Board, open source and community advocate, and a Fellow of the Nivenly Foundation.
Jeremy Avigad, a Professor of Philosophy and Mathematical Sciences at Carnegie Mellon University and Director of the NSF Institute for Computer-Aided Reasoning in Mathematics. He is a founding member of the Lean Community organization, for which Zulip has hosted more than two million messages to date.
Nick Bergson-Shilcock, the CEO and cofounder of the Recurse Center, a programming retreat based in New York whose community of 3,000+ alums has run on Zulip since 2013.
Puneeth Chaganti, an OCaml developer working on core ecosystem tooling, and a mentor for Zulip’s Google Summer of Code program since 2018.

I’m incredibly grateful to everyone who has volunteered to help launch the Zulip Foundation. We’re looking to recruit one additional director, and to fill out a larger advisory board. If you or someone you know may be a good fit, please reach out to foundation-jobs@zulip.com to let us know!

If you’d like to follow along, please sign up for occasional email updates from the Zulip Foundation.

Stability during the leadership transition

Zulip’s operations will continue without interruption, including Zulip Cloud; the Mobile Push Notifications Service and support contracts for self-hosted organizations; our Google Summer of Code mentorship program, with 11 participants this summer; and our sponsorships for the thousands of open-source projects and other public-interest organizations that Zulip Cloud hosts free of charge.

Kim Vandiver, an experienced leader and operator, has joined Kandra Labs as Interim President to help ensure a smooth transition. This is not the first time Kim has raised her hand to help a values-focused organization in a time of change: at VaccinateCA, a rapidly evolving COVID-era effort to spread information about vaccines, Kim jumped in to revamp a variety of processes — first as a volunteer, and then as the Director of Operations. I’m extremely grateful to have her here to manage operations and help run a global search for the best possible leadership for Zulip going forward.

Operationally, both Zulip Cloud and the self-hosted experience are the most stable that they have ever been. We’ve always had a relentless focus on eliminating bugs and workflow warts, and have made an especially strong push on this in the past year. I expect there will be a reduction in development velocity over the next quarter as the organization adapts to the leadership change, but it will feel like a small blip when we look back.

A formal commitment to our values, and a new avenue for sustainable funding

There are two main reasons why I’m excited about this change: it allows us to make a permanent, public commitment to the values we’ve long operated by, and it offers a new avenue for Zulip to raise funds without ceding control.

Kandra Labs has always been a mission- and values-focused company. We have a long-running sponsorship program, and have always prioritized features primarily useful for communities alongside features for business users. Kandra Labs has been public about its values for years — including our commitments to protecting customer data privacy, and to keeping our focus on the product, not on whatever’s commercially fashionable. The Zulip Foundation formalizes and makes permanent our values beyond my tenure as CEO.

It’s hard these days to feel confident that a company whose product you love won’t yield to commercial pressure and start selling your data, putting in ads, or otherwise violating your trust. It’s been a challenge to convincingly make the case that this won’t happen to Zulip, especially to folks who might not have time to investigate deeply. The Zulip Foundation, which has the goal of serving the public good, makes this so much easier to communicate clearly.

The new foundation also puts Zulip in a much stronger fundraising position. Over the years, I’ve been reluctant to accept external funding for Zulip, even from angel investors I trust, because fiduciary duties to those investors could eventually generate pressure for us to compromise our values. As a result, the company’s funding has been driven by how much I’m able to personally invest in Zulip above and beyond its subscription revenue.

With the foundation in place, we’ll be able to apply for grants we were previously ineligible for, and receive tax-deductible donations from individual donors. The foundation can also run fundraising campaigns that would not have felt appropriate for an open-source project with a privately owned company behind it.

Why I’m stepping back from full-time Zulip leadership

I’m stepping back from Zulip to join Anthropic because of its remarkable commitment to the responsible development of AI for the long-term benefit of humanity. Three additional members of Zulip’s longtime leadership team are also joining me at Anthropic: Alya Abbott, Greg Price, and Alex Vandiver.

My career choices have always been motivated by a sense of responsibility to use my talents for the public benefit. This motivation is what led me to found Zulip and lead it for a decade with our unusual values-focused approach. I remain committed to Zulip and its mission, and had imagined spending the rest of my career working on it. So what changed?

Over the last few months, I’ve been reflecting deeply on the myriad ways in which AI is changing the world, and how it might change the world in the future. And I came to the conclusion that it’s vitally important that we navigate this strange adolescence of technology well, and that I should contribute to this cause more directly than I ever could as the CEO of Kandra Labs.

My non-negotiable requirement for moving on from Zulip has always been ensuring that Zulip can continue its mission effectively without me. I’m deeply grateful to be in a position to do exactly that by creating the nonprofit Zulip Foundation.

Zulip’s team of professional maintainers

All Kandra Labs team members who are not joining Anthropic will continue working on Zulip. These 12 amazing people have an average of over 4 years of professional experience working on Zulip, and almost 25,000 Zulip commits between them. They have shipped major improvements end-to-end across every facet of the product, and I have full confidence in their ability to move the project forward.

Ultimately, Zulip’s strength is its culture and incredibly disciplined development process. The team has demonstrated the ability to operate and develop Zulip without me during the six months of my parental leave (spread across my three kids). I’ve never shared this so publicly before, but in 2018 I developed a chronic illness that was initially highly debilitating, and continued to impact my work until last year. Yet our wonderful team and community made steady progress even through the worst of it.

Over the coming months, the team will be hiring to fill roles opened by the departures. If you or someone you know may be interested in a leadership or infrastructure role, learn more and reach out!

I personally expect to remain involved with Zulip as a contributor, providing context, history, reviews, and advice as time permits.

Reach out!

While I’m excited for Zulip’s future, I know folks will have lots of questions about what it all means. Our team would love to answer them as transparently as we can. We invite everyone to join us for a live chat Q&A in the Zulip development community on Tuesday, May 19 at 4 PM UTC (9 AM US Pacific / 12 PM US Eastern / 9:30 PM IST).

If you have any questions or concerns as a Zulip customer, please contact support@zulip.com. As always, all are welcome to drop by the Zulip development community — the #general channel is a great place to ask about this transition.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

17. I designed a nibble-oriented CPU in Verilog to build a scientific calculator

Source: https://github.com/gdevic/FPGA-Calculator
Site: GitHub
Submitter: gdevic (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-15 17:15 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 88 points · 29 comments
Length: 507 words (~3 min read)
Language: en

This project implements a fully functional scientific calculator in hardware using an FPGA. It includes a custom soft CPU, microcode firmware, and supporting tools.

For the full story, see the blog.

Try it in a web browser:

Without debugger
With debugger

Project Structure

Folder Description
verilog/ SystemVerilog source files for the CPU, ALU, I/O, and test benches
ucode/ Microcode (firmware) for the soft CPU
quartus/ Quartus project files for FPGA synthesis
modelsim/ ModelSim simulation setup
Qt/ Qt-based simulator and debugger (uses Verilator)
calctest/ Command-line test harness for hardware verification (uses Verilator)
tools/ Assembler and script compiler for the microcode
Pathfinding/ Algorithm research and verification projects

Quick Start

The fastest way to try the calculator is to build the Qt simulator:

# From WSL2
cd /mnt/c/Projects/FPGA-Calculator/verilog
make qt

Then open Qt/Calculator.pro in Qt Creator and build for "Desktop Qt MSVC2022 64 Bit".

See the verilog/ and Qt/ folders for detailed instructions.

Required Tools

Install these tools depending on your target:

Tool Purpose Notes
Verilator Verilog simulation Required for Qt simulator
Qt Desktop/WebAssembly/Android app Version 6.9+
Quartus FPGA synthesis Version 13.0 SP1 for Cyclone II
ModelSim Waveform simulation Optional
Visual Studio 2022 C++ compiler for Qt Community Edition
Python 3 Assembler and tools

Verilator Setup

Verilator runs in WSL2 (Windows Subsystem for Linux). The project source files reside on a Windows partition and are accessed from WSL2.

Target Verilator Version Notes
Desktop (Qt/MSVC) 5.x (latest) Recommended
WebAssembly 4.228 Required (no thread support)

# Install prerequisites
sudo apt-get install build-essential autoconf flex libfl-dev bison

# Clone and build Verilator
git clone https://github.com/verilator/verilator
cd verilator
git checkout v5.042    # For Desktop, or v4.228 for WebAssembly
autoconf
./configure
make -j8
make test

# Set environment (add to .bashrc for persistence)
export VERILATOR_ROOT=$(pwd)

Optionally install GtkWave for viewing waveforms:

sudo apt install gtkwave

Build Targets

Target Command Description
Qt Simulator make qt in verilog/ Build for Qt desktop application
Calctest make calctest in verilog/, then make in calctest/ Command-line test harness
ModelSim make test_self in verilog/ CPU self-test for ModelSim
FPGA Hardware make revB in verilog/ Assemble microcode for RevB board

See the README files in each subfolder for detailed build instructions:

verilog/README.md - Verilator simulation and microcode assembly
calctest/README.md - Command-line test harness for hardware verification
quartus/README.md - FPGA synthesis and programming
ucode/README.md - Microcode source files

Pathfinding Projects

Independent research and verification projects:

Folder Description
Pathfinding/Proto/ BCD arithmetic golden reference for hardware verification (submodule)
Pathfinding/Proof/ Proofs of concept for complex operations using basic arithmetic
Pathfinding/Methods/ C++ implementations of calculator algorithms (deprecated)
Pathfinding/Input/ Numerical input state machine simulation
Pathfinding/Mockup/ Keyboard layout design and user interaction testing

License

This project is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License.

You are free to:

Share - copy and redistribute the material in any medium or format
Adapt - remix, transform, and build upon the material

Under the following terms:

Attribution - You must give appropriate credit and indicate if changes were made
NonCommercial - You may not use the material for commercial purposes
ShareAlike - Contributions must be distributed under the same license

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

18. 'No way to prevent this,' says only package manager where this regularly happens

Source: https://kevinpatel.xyz/posts/no-way-to-prevent-this/
Site: Kevin Patel
Author: Kevin Patel
Published: 2026-05-15
HN activity: 212 points · 80 comments
Length: 289 words (~2 min read)
Language: en-us

SAN FRANCISCO, CA - In the wake of a devastating supply chain attack in the npm registry that left millions of enterprise applications compromised and billions of user records exposed, developers across the JavaScript ecosystem expressed deep sorrow today, lamenting that such a crisis was completely unavoidable.

“It’s a shame, but what can you do? This is just the price of building modern web apps,” said Senior Frontend Engineer Mark Vance, echoing the sentiments of a community that completely relies on a 40-level-deep nested tree of unvetted packages maintained by pseudonymous strangers to capitalize a single string. “There’s absolutely no way to foresee or prevent someone from taking over a long-abandoned utility package and injecting a crypto-miner into every production build in the world. It’s just an act of nature.”

At press time, residents of the Node.js ecosystem stood unified in their belief that the malicious remote-code execution was a completely unpredictable tragedy, offering their thoughts and prayers to the DevOps teams currently scrambling to rotate their corporate AWS keys.

Interestingly, developers in ecosystems like Go, Rust, and those utilizing native Web APIs—where robust standard libraries drastically reduce reliance on third-party code and strict cryptographic verification is built into the core toolchain—reported zero instances of a college dropout’s weekend project wiping out global logistics infrastructure today.

“It’s devastating, but we have to accept that we live in a world where bad actors exist. There are no registry policies or build-sandbox guardrails we could possibly enforce to stop it,” said an npm spokesperson, standing in front of an open-source registry that happily executes arbitrary installation scripts on local machines by default. “Our hearts go out to the victims. Until the next inevitable breach tomorrow morning, we must simply remain resilient.”

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

19. Image-blaster: Creates 3D environments, SFX, and meshes from a single image

Source: https://github.com/neilsonnn/image-blaster
Site: GitHub
Submitter: MattRogish (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-15 15:42 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 139 points · 27 comments
Length: 347 words (~2 min read)
Language: en

Creates 3D environments, SFX, and meshes from a single image using Claude skills, World Labs, and FAL.

Can take you from an image to a fully meshed 3D environment in < 5 minutes, great for jumpstarting 3D work. Go full blast.

Quickstart

Open a Terminal, enter git clone https://github.com/neilsonnn/image-blaster
Enter the directory with cd image-blaster
Run claude (install with curl -fsSL https://claude.ai/install.sh | bash)
Say hello to Claude, and give them your API key for World Labs and FAL.
Put an image into input/ directory and ask Claude to blast it and confirm each step with me.

Description

By default image-blaster will use your input image to create:

3D models (.glb, .obj) of all dynamic objects
Gaussian splat (.spz) of the static environment,
Ambient looping sound and object specific physics SFX (.mp3)

Extensions

You can embed image-blaster under the assets of any game engine, DCC software, or web app.

Unity, Unreal, or Godot game engine
Blender, 3DS Max, or Maya or other DCC software
Three.js web app or Electron app

Advanced

IMAGE-BLASTER uses a few generation models:

marble-1.1 - World Labs Marble model creates the explorable environment.
nano-banana - default image edit preference for source cleanup, clean plates, and object reference images.
gpt-image-2 - alternate image edit provider when the edit skill is asked to prefer it.
hunyuan-3d - Hunyuan 3D model creates 3D object models through FAL.
elevenlabs-sfx - ElevenLabs sound effects model creates ambient and object-specific sounds.

3D model creation supports these Hunyuan parameters:

--face-count <40000-1500000>: target face count. IMAGE-BLASTER defaults to 50000; Hunyuan's API default is 500000.
--enable-pbr true|false: enable PBR material generation. Defaults to true.
--generate-type Normal|LowPoly|Geometry: Normal creates a textured model, LowPoly applies polygon reduction, and Geometry creates a white geometry-only model. Defaults to Normal.
--polygon-type triangle|quadrilateral: polygon type for LowPoly. Defaults to triangle.

Examples

Video game level concepts? IMAGE-BLAST it.
Your childhood bedroom? IMAGE-BLAST it.
Need an environment for a robot? IMAGE-BLAST it.
A film location scout? IMAGE-BLAST it.
An architectural rendering? IMAGE-BLAST it.

Development

remove /app from the .claudeignore file to give Claude the ability to change the React viewer.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

20. I Bought a “Junk” PSP From Japan

Source: https://gardinerbryant.com/i-bought-a-junk-psp-from-japan-heres-how-it-went/
Site: The Bryant Review
Author: dash
Published: 2026-02-19
HN activity: 3 points · 0 comments
Length: 2.7K words (~12 min read)
Language: en

Retro Gaming

Become a Member

Join the thousands who have already subscribed to The Bryant Review! Membership unlocks exclusive articles, a customizable reading experience, and you won't see this message again!

No spam. Unsubscribe anytime.

While I spend most of my time reviewing modern ‘retro’ handhelds (devices built to emulate everything under the sun) I’ve found myself wanting to go back to the roots of everything. The first‑party machines that actually started it all. And for me, that always leads back to Sony’s PSP.

I’ve always loved the PSP. Hardware design sits at the core of what I care about, and Sony absolutely nailed it here. That sleek, slightly futuristic slab still looks modern even today. The curves, the gloss, the proportions, it feels intentional in a way a lot of handhelds don’t. Even now, all these years later, it holds up and looks futuristic.

So instead of just casually picking one up, I decided to turn it into a project. I went hunting online for a cheap ‘fix‑me‑up’ unit, fully expecting to tinker, repair, and eventually jailbreak it myself. And while I was at it, I figured I’d document the whole process. Where I looked, what I paid, what to avoid, and what you can realistically trust in 2026.

Consider this an almost-guide, or just a document of my experiences with how to buy Sony’s PSP in 2026.


Where to Buy:

While you’re no doubt familiar with local options to buy a PSP (eBay, Marketplace, and the like) my top recommendation is Buyee. It’s a forwarding service that lets you access Japanese sites such as JDirectItems Auction, Mercari, Rakuten, Rakuma, and JDirectItems Fleamarket. You make an account, find an item you like, pay a small fee (300 Yen then international shipping), and Buyee handles the purchase and shipping on your behalf.

The seller ships it domestically to Buyee’s warehouse in Japan, and once it arrives, you choose your international shipping method. You can even consolidate multiple purchases into one parcel if you’re buying accessories, games, or spare parts.

The reason this works so well for PSP hunting in 2026 is supply and condition. The PSP sold extremely well in Japan, which means the market is still saturated with units: from pristine boxed examples to cheap “junk” listings perfect for tinkering. Because you’re buying from the original domestic market, prices are often lower, selection is wider, and cosmetic condition tends to be better. Many listings are clearly photographed, accurately described, and graded conservatively. “Used” in Japan often means “genuinely cared for,” not “thrown in a drawer for fifteen years.”

ℹ️

'Junk' items in Japan are not what you'd call junk. This can mean anything from the fact the seller hasn't even got a battery to check an item, never tried turning it on, or has a small blemish somewhere, all the way to...literally junk. Make sure you check each listing carefully!

There’s also something reassuring about the structure of it. You’re not sending money to a random seller overseas and hoping for the best. Buyee sits in the middle. It handles payment, receiving the item first, repackaging it if needed, and then forwarding it on. It adds a small fee, yes, but it removes a lot of uncertainty. For a project console like a PSP, where you’re gambling slightly on age and condition anyway, that buffer makes a difference.

If you’re serious about buying a PSP in 2026, especially a Japanese model, Buyee isn’t just an option. It’s probably the most consistent way to do it right.

Buying my PSP:

I ended up buying my PSP through Mercari via Buyee. One of the big advantages of using Mercari is that most sellers cover domestic postage themselves, which makes the process a lot easier and cheaper. Plus, on Mercari you’re usually dealing with individual sellers rather than established shops. For a project console, this tends to increase your chances of finding a bargain or a slightly quirky unit.

When I was hunting, I sorted listings by “newly listed”. That’s usually the best way to snag a genuine deal at a low price, the ones that haven’t had a chance to be snapped up yet. That’s how I found a PSP 2000 that was explicitly listed as “untested” and junk.”
For that price, I had to buy it!

It was missing the battery door, hadn’t been turned on, and I had no idea if the screen was yellowed or even if it worked at all. The price? $38.43 AUD. Honestly, I bought it knowing full well it could be a gamble, because that’s part of the fun.
"This is a junk item" sure has a different meaning here!

Once I hit purchase, Buyee charged the usual 300 Yen service fee (around $1.95 USD), then the seller shipped the PSP to Buyee’s warehouse. It took two days for domestic shipping to get it there, and another two days for the warehouse to process it and update me in their system. From there, I could choose my international shipping method. I went with ECMS shipping ($17 AUD) and consolidated a few other items into the same package, which meant Buyee bundled them into one larger parcel.
...one of the other items I 'consolidated' was a genuine Sony PSP soft case!

The international leg was impressively fast: just three days to get to Australia. After that, local shipping took over, but there were a few delays thanks to a long national holiday weekend. All told, from clicking “buy” to having the PSP in my hands, it was a little over a week, not bad at all for a device that came from halfway around the world, especially considering it was literally sold as junk.

ℹ️

One thing to note is that you do not want a battery in the listing. Japan has strict policies about shipping batteries overseas, so its best to opt for listings without them. Thankfully, almost all the listings don’t include batteries anyway. My package was incorrectly tagged as having a battery in the box though, which led to some chats with Buyee’s support on Discord before they realized it was a false confirmation!

My PSP
How my PSP was packaged in the box

When my “untested” Japanese PSP-2000 finally showed up, I did what everyone does: gave it a quick clean and checked over the ports. I’d already bought a USB power cable specifically for this moment. My planning was pretty simple. If it didn’t boot from mains power, I wasn’t even going to bother buying a battery until I’d diagnosed and repaired the issue.

The condition it arrived in. Aside from some scratches on the display (there's a few), the rest of it is just needed a (deep) clean, probably the first it has ever had!

Fortunately, it powered on straight away. No drama. No flicker. It even still had the previous owner’s custom theme installed, which is always a strange little time capsule moment. And also...not the theme what I’d opt for myself.
Another interesting little fact was the nickname the previous owner had given this PSP: "Marlboro". Given Japan's penchant for smoking (though the inside of this PSP is quite pristine: no evidence of nicotine!), maybe it was a favorite brand?

Sure enough, under System Information it wasn’t stock firmware at all, it was running 5.50 GEN‑D2, an old custom firmware from the late 2000s created by Team GEN. If you were around during the PSP’s peak modding era, you probably remember the name. GEN was one of the big players after the Team M33 days, and 5.50 GEN‑D2 was their answer to Sony’s firmware updates at the time. It let you run ISO files, homebrew apps, PS1 conversions, plugins...all the usual good stuff, without updating to Sony’s latest official software.

I changed the theme to help with readability here, but you can see the 'Memory Stick' size was filled almost to the brim, and also see some fun examples of old tools here...

...all the way to some of the games the previous owner had installed. From Little Big Planet to The Idolmaster, Project Witch, to Tekken 6 and Persona 3 Portable

Finding that installed in 2026 felt a bit like opening a time capsule. It still works, it still does what custom firmware is supposed to do, but it’s very much from a specific moment in PSP history. Before PRO, before LME, before the “final form” 6.61 setups most people use now.

For me, it wasn’t a selling point or a dealbreaker. It was just…interesting. I bought a cheap PSP, and it arrived already modded, sitting on a pair of tiny microSD cards inside an adapter, running a 2009-era jailbreak like it had never left that year. If you’re buying used PSPs in 2026, this kind of surprise isn’t rare, and honestly, it’s part of the charm.

I held R while booting (since this is how you access recovery mode) and instead of the normal wave animation, it dropped me into a stark black screen filled with plain green white text: Toggle USB. Configuration. Run program. Advanced. CPU Speed...and so on.
GEN Recovery Menu, in its spartan glory!


No branding, no icons, no attempt at polish, just raw options. It felt less like a settings menu and more like I’d stepped behind the curtain. This isn’t some modern, streamlined soft‑mod. This is peak late‑2000s PSP scene energy. The kind of custom firmware you installed from a forum post at 1AM and prayed you didn’t brick your console. In that moment it stopped being “a cheap PSP I bought online” and became something better. A fully flashed 5.50 GEN‑D2 setup, frozen exactly the way someone left it more than a decade and a half ago.

I'd bought my PSP expecting to jailbreak it myself, but seeing as though this one's already had that done (albeit an ancient version of it), I've decided to just leave it as-is. A happy curiosity and bonus!

The Next Step:

With the PSP confirmed working perfectly, the next thing to sort out was the missing battery. After a bit of research, I found that the most consistently recommended third-party option, or at least the one with the best overall feedback, was OSTENT.
My battery bay before I cleaned it!

For the PSP-2000, you can typically choose between a 1200mAh battery (the original standard capacity) and a 1400mAh option, which gives you a little extra runtime. I stuck with one of those two sizes because I wanted the battery to sit flush with the existing shell. Higher-capacity batteries are available, but they require a thicker, extended battery cover. For me, preserving the original slim profile of the PSP mattered more than squeezing out maximum battery life.

I bought the OSTENT for $10 AUD (free shipping) from an eBay seller, and it works perfectly. Definitely a strong recommendation.

The other thing is that battery bay cover, which is missing from my PSP. Aside from keeping an eye on Mercari (and locally on eBay), I just figured the cheap modern replacement parts will do for the time being, just to keep it protected and to be able to play.

This one set me back $4.29 AUD (free shipping), and fits perfectly.

The one downside is that the silver color doesn't match the original Sony paint. It is a flat silver, where Sony's Ice Silver color has beautiful 'sparkles' in the paint. It also feels different under my fingertips. Sony's original efforts feel thick and glossy, and the replacement feels matte and rougher. But it really is a good one to keep things safe and secure for now:
You can see the replacement battery cover (in the foreground here) is flat silver, where the original paint (behind it) has texture under the surface

The Cost:

So, to compile things so far:

Sony PSP was $38.43 AUD
Sony PSP soft case was $4.92 AUD
OSTENT 1400 mAh batter was $10 AUD
Battery door cover was $4.29 AUD
USB PSP charging cable was $4.50 AUD

Total for a complete and working PSP = $62.14 AUD ($43.93 USD).

An argument can be made that the neoprene soft case isn't totally required, so you could subtract that one if you've got a sock handy to use instead! Overall, for a PSP in nice working condition, this feels (to me at least) like a steal!

All Cleaned Up:

My PSP works perfectly. All the buttons, all the functions, the charging port, the 3.5mm headphone jack, the memory card slot, the WLAN slider...everything works as it should.

Tekken 6 in particular (this is the opening cinematic) looks fantastic playing on the PSP

Some things are pretty interesting playing around with this with a modern eye though:

Only having one shoulder button feels super natural of course, since PSP's game library only utilizes the one, but it still feels odd to my fingers reaching for shoulder buttons/trigger and only finding the one!
To be fair though, that single shoulder button is chunky and lovely to press!

The dedicated screen brightness button has only four levels of brightness. Which are fine for the console, but again looking at this from gaming these days, it can seem funny to see so few levels!

The lowest brightness setting on the left, and the highest on the right! This isn't an exact science because of camera pics, but trust me the difference is noticeable in person!

The buttons look and feel beautiful to play on. I love how the icons are inlaid within the face buttons, looking at them always makes me take a moment to enjoy the aesthetics!

Overall, I think something can be said for the camp of people who insist nothing quite matches the feeling of native hardware. Decades of emulation improvements have made the software experience smoother in many ways: sharper screens, save states, fast-forward, filters. But there’s something different about using Sony’s own device, built specifically for these games, with the weight, buttons and proportions designed around them from day one.
Sony PSP-2000 (top), and the Anbernic RG Vita (bottom)

Running a PSP the way Sony intended, but with a modern jailbreak in place, feels like the best of both worlds. You keep the original hardware, the original screen, the original ergonomics, but you reduce the friction. No UMD juggling. No region limitations. No locked-down firmware. Just drag, drop, and play. Once it’s set up properly, adding a game is genuinely a couple of minutes’ work.

And maybe that’s the part that surprised me most. In 2026, this doesn’t feel like hacking something fragile or clinging to outdated tech. It feels practical. A slim little device that still boots instantly, still looks futuristic, still slips into a pocket, and now runs entirely off a silent microSD card. No spinning discs. No moving parts. Just clean, reliable access to a library that defined an era.

There’s convenience in emulation handhelds (after all, I review them constantly) but there’s a different kind of satisfaction in reviving original hardware and giving it a second life. Especially when you pick it up cheap, take a small risk on a “junk” listing, and end up with something that works beautifully.

Just for a quick comparison, we've got Little Big Planet running on my PSP on top, and being emulated in PPSSPP on my Anbernic RG Vita down below!

The PSP isn’t just nostalgia. It’s still a genuinely great handheld. And with the right firmware and a bit of patience, it’s arguably easier to live with now than it was when it first launched. Hopefully some of the tips I picked up while buying mine from Japan help smooth out your own PSP journey, whether you’re hunting for a bargain, fixing one up, or just looking to experience one for the first time.

About the Author:

dash

Dash is 𝘰𝘣𝘴𝘦𝘴𝘴𝘦𝘥 with gaming in all its forms. Opting for FOSS over everything else, you can follow along here for articles on handheld gaming, Android emulation, GOG, gaming retrospectives and the developers keeping open-source gaming alive.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

21. U.S. DOJ demands Apple and Google unmask over 100k users of car-tinkering app

Source: https://macdailynews.com/2026/05/15/u-s-doj-demands-apple-and-google-unmask-over-100000-users-of-popular-car-tinkering-app-in-emissions-crackdown/
Site: MacDailyNews
Author: MacDailyNews Webmaster
Published: 2026-05-15
HN activity: 381 points · 249 comments
Length: 733 words (~4 min read)
Language: en-US

The U.S. Department of Justice is seeking personal data on potentially hundreds of thousands of drivers who downloaded EZ Lynk’s Auto Agent app, escalating a years-long legal battle over vehicle emissions controls. Subpoenas issued to Apple, Google, Amazon, and Walmart request names, addresses, phone numbers, and purchase histories tied to the app and its accompanying hardware.

Background on the Case

The DOJ first sued EZ Lynk in 2021, accusing the Cayman Islands-based company of violating the Clean Air Act by marketing and selling “defeat devices.” These tools allegedly allow users to bypass factory emissions controls on diesel vehicles, primarily through the EZ Lynk Auto Agent app paired with an onboard diagnostic (OBD) hardware dongle.

EZ Lynk strongly denies the allegations, emphasizing that its products serve legitimate purposes: monitoring vehicle performance, applying software updates, and enabling legitimate modifications and diagnostics. The company argues that any emissions-related use is not its primary purpose and falls under user responsibility.

Scope of the Subpoenas

According to a joint court filing earlier this month, the DOJ subpoenaed Apple and Google in March and April 2026 for download and account data on anyone who installed the Auto Agent app. Additional requests went to Amazon and Walmart for buyer information on the physical EZ Lynk hardware. Estimates suggest the total could exceed 100,000 users, Gizmodo reports.

The government says it needs this information to identify and interview witnesses who can testify about how the tools were actually used. It has already submitted forum posts and social media evidence showing some users employing the system to disable emissions controls.

Privacy Concerns and Pushback

EZ Lynk’s lawyers call the requests “overreach,” arguing they go far beyond what’s necessary for the case and raise serious Fourth Amendment issues. “Investigating this claim does not require identifying each person who has used the product,” they wrote. Apple and Google are reportedly preparing to challenge the subpoenas.

Privacy advocates echo these concerns. The Electronic Frontier Foundation (EFF) and Electronic Privacy Information Center (EPIC) have criticized the broad demand for personally identifiable information, noting that most users never read terms of service and may face unintended legal exposure simply for downloading a tool marketed for car diagnostics and tuning.

Car enthusiasts and right-to-repair advocates view the case as part of a broader tension: drivers’ desire to modify their vehicles versus federal environmental regulations. As one expert noted, “People want to modify their cars and always will.”

What Happens Next

The case has already survived an attempt by EZ Lynk to invoke Section 230 immunity (typically used to shield tech platforms from liability for user actions). A judge rejected that defense in 2025, allowing the litigation to continue.

This episode highlights growing government interest in app store data to pursue enforcement actions. Similar but smaller-scale requests have occurred before, such as a 2019 demand for data on users of a gun-scope app. The current scale (potentially 10 times larger)makes it particularly notable.

Apple, Google, and the other companies have not publicly commented. The DOJ also declined to elaborate beyond its court filings. The outcome of any challenges to the subpoenas could set important precedents for digital privacy in regulatory enforcement cases. For car owners using tuning tools, the message is clear: governments are increasingly willing to trace app downloads straight back to individual users.

MacDailyNews Take: The DOJ is overreaching as this would sweep up people who simply used the app to read their vehicle’s trouble codes or for other mundane reasons.

‎
Please help support MacDailyNews — and enjoy subscriber-only articles, comments, chat, and more — by subscribing to our Substack: macdailynews.substack.com. Thank you!

Support MacDailyNews at no extra cost to you by using this link to shop at Amazon.

Tags: Amazon, Apple App Store, Auto Agent, Clean Air Act, Electronic Frontier Foundation, Electronic Privacy Information Center, EZ Lynk, Google Play, U.S. Department of Justice, U.S. DOJ, Walmart

Apple is preparing one of its busiest and most transformative hardware seasons in years. According to a detailed roundup…

In Nasdaq trading today, shares of Apple Inc. rose to hit a new all-time closing high. Apple’s all-time intraday high was also set today…

Apple TV’s new “Widow’s Bay” series is set in a quaint island town 40 miles off the coast of New England. But something lurks beneath…

Apple has launched major discounts on its flagship iPhones in China ahead of the annual 618 shopping festival, signaling that competition…

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

22. Spectre Programming Language

Source: https://spectre-docs.pages.dev
Site: spectre-docs.pages.dev
Submitter: asdkop (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-15 23:14 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 29 points · 3 comments
Length: 389 words (~2 min read)
Language: en-US

Spectre is a programming language meant for safe and contract based low-level systems programming.

It allows for type-level invariants, and function-level preconditions and postconditions, it enables safety through use of immutability by default.

This documentation aims to act as a user guide for the Spectre programming language.

Why? ​

There is a notable lack of contract based programming languages that enforce correctness at a low level.

The idea behind Spectre is that it enables correctness, sane data flow, and immutability by default, such that low level programming is safer, though at the same time prevents interrupting the convenience and DX of the language and its toolchain. Contracts are evaluated at compile-time where possible, however to avoid the complexity of similar systems such as Z3 (the SMT solver), and the inconveniences associated with the compiler being unable to prove some conditions are true, checks that cannot be evaluated at compile-time are automatically executed at runtime instead, though the persistence of the runtime checks in release builds depends on the use of the guarded construct.

Memory is managed manually to preserve low-level control, typically through the use of a standard library allocator (Arena, Stack) or a custom allocator.

The language compiles from high-level code to QBE IR, which then lowers to platform-specific assembly. There are also experimental LLVM and C99 backends. Notably there is a –translate-c feature that allows for C code to be translated to the equivalent Spectre code, which is useful for the migration of existing projects to Spectre.

Getting Started ​

The simple hello world can be achieved via the following:

spectre

val std = use("std")

pub fn main() i32 = {
    trust std.stdio.print("Hello, world: {d}.", {10})
    return 0
}

You will notice the trust keyword here. Any operation (such as IO) that has an underlying unsafe mechanism (such as the @print builtin that std.stdio.print uses), must be explicitly trusted, as it is inherently impure.

This is unless you use the safe wrappers around those functions, that use preconds, invariants, etc…, or if you use simpler functions altogether. There is no need, for example, to "trust" a simple @puts, since, unless there’s a severe OOM error, it won’t fail. Thus, it is marked as safe in the standard library.

Foreword ​

These docs may be out of date and are not guaranteed to reflect the up-to-date Spectre API.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

23. Show HN: Watch a neural net learn to play Snake

Source: https://ppo.gradexp.xyz/
Site: Gradient Explorer
Submitter: c1b (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-14 15:35 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 128 points · 31 comments
Length: 36 words (~1 min read)
Language: en

Environment Sample

idle

Trained-policy roll-outs

0 · trained 0

grid delay 40 ms

parameter live updates waiting for first snapshot…

Initializing 3D renderer…

step # —

no tensor loaded

Configure runs

preset

idle

no runs yet

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

24. O(x)Caml in Space

Source: https://gazagnaire.org/blog/2026-05-14-borealis.html
Site: gazagnaire.org
Author: Thomas Gazagnaire
Submitted: 2026-05-15 10:55 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 230 points · 51 comments
Length: 2.2K words (~10 min read)
Language: en

On 23 April, our pure-OCaml CCSDS protocol stack booted up in low Earth orbit! The project, codename Borealis, is running inside DPhi Space's ClusterGate-2 payload module on the host satellite, with end-to-end-encrypted command and control and post-quantum key rotation, all implemented in safe OCaml.

Why does OCaml matter here? Untrusted code running on a satellite is a huge security risk, and OCaml is an ideal safe language to run in space. In his ICFP 2022 keynote, KC Sivaramakrishnan looked back on the decade-long engineering effort that produced OCaml 5, the release that put safe and performant multi-threading into the OCaml runtime.

KC ended his talk speculating that OCaml 5.0 would go to the moon, due to its language features that would deliver C/Rust-like performance on demand while keeping the mathematical rigour of classic ML. Here at Parsimoni, we took his words a bit too literally :-)

The host satellite circles the Earth every ninety minutes or so. A few months after Virgile Robles and I hacked on this over Christmas, we (virtually) jumped around when we saw this:

2026-04-23 18:48:06  SpaceOS/Borealis (BPv7, BPSec, OTAR) by Parsimoni
2026-04-23 18:48:06  ClusterGate-2 proxy [single iteration]
2026-04-23 18:48:06  Config: scid=100, tm_vcid=0, tc_vcid=4, tm_spi=1, tc_spi=2, tm_frame_len=1115
2026-04-23 18:48:06  Session keys: EK=0x0100 AK=0x0101 active
2026-04-23 18:48:09  Telemetry health: { ... "status": "healthy" }


What is actually running

Borealis is a daemon. On both the ground and the satellite it speaks a normal client-server protocol (telemetry queries, commands and responses, OTAR rekey requests), the same shape as any production server. What is unusual is the wire underneath.

The protocol stack is a pure-OCaml implementation of CCSDS, the protocol family that links spacecraft to the ground. It covers every layer from radio framing up through Bundle Protocol and the security extensions on top; the binary formats are described as ocaml-wire codecs.

On ClusterGate-2, only the upper layers of that stack are exercised. The satellite has no network connectivity from outside. The only ground link is filesystem upload and download via DPhi's API: a file written to the uplink directory is forwarded by DPhi on the next pass, and downlink works the same way. Borealis treats that filesystem as a delay-tolerant network. Every command, response, telemetry sample and image chunk is serialised into a BPv7 bundle and written to disk; DPhi forwards the file as opaque bytes.

BPSec wraps each bundle in two extension blocks: one encrypts the payload, the other authenticates it. Sequence numbers reject replays, and the pre-shared keys (rotated by OTAR, below) keep the routing path out of the trust path. The satellite operator sees only opaque bundle bytes; nothing in the routing path can read, modify, forge or substitute the contents.

This matters because we are tenants on someone else's hardware. On a hosted-payload satellite multiple tenants share a single bus, and container isolation alone would not suffice. A shared Linux kernel means kernel-level CVEs regularly break the tenant boundary, and the same primitives keep resurfacing in new forms: Dirty Frag (a universal Linux LPE published this year), Fragnesia (a close cousin in the same family), and "Copy Fail", a Linux kernel privilege escalation disclosed in late April that hit every major distribution at once. Earlier rounds (Dirty Pipe in 2022, the nf_tables use-after-free exploited for container escape in 2024) suggest there will be more. On a ground server you can run the package manager and reboot; in orbit, kernel patching is its own delivery problem with its own delay, and is sometimes not possible at all. The cryptographic envelope around each bundle is the only durable guarantee.

Beyond confidentiality and authenticity, the long-mission threat model needs key rotation. Borealis supports OTAR (Over-The-Air Rekeying) for its post-quantum signing keys (ML-DSA-65). Those keys live for the life of the satellite (ten to fifteen years), which is why NASA's Space System Protection Standard (NASA-STD-1006A) treats post-quantum command authentication as a requirement rather than a future option. OTAR lets us rotate the post-quantum keys without re-flashing the satellite. To our knowledge this will be the first public in-orbit demonstration of post-quantum OTAR; we plan to exercise the rotation on a later pass.

Borealis runs as a guest on DPhi's hosted-payload module: an Arm SoC (four Cortex-A53 cores, 4 GB RAM) running Linux. The flight binary is 5-10 MB, statically linked, shipped as a FROM scratch Docker image. It polls the bus for telemetry (angle, speed, position) and an onboard camera (a low-quality fish-eye, good for demos only). The core of the satellite-side loop looks like this:

let send_telemetry t ~prefix payload =
  let bundle =
    make_bundle t ~source:Eid.sat_telem
      ~destination:Eid.ground_telem ~payload
  in
  match protect_bundle t bundle with
  | Ok protected ->
      ignore (write_bundle t ~dir:(downlink_dir t.config) ~prefix protected)
  | Error _ -> log t "Failed to protect telemetry bundle"


protect_bundle applies BPSec with keys from the SDLS Security Association, the cryptographic parameters ground and satellite agreed on at provisioning. If any of that fails, no bundle leaves the satellite.

The uplink path mirrors the downlink path. The satellite reads bundles from /data/uplink/, unprotects each with BPSec, and routes by destination at the bundle layer:

if dest = Eid.sat_cmd  then handle_command t payload
else if dest = Eid.sat_otar then handle_otar t payload
else log t "Unknown destination"


Text commands are short UTF-8 strings parsed into an ADT; the typechecker enforces exhaustive dispatch:

type cmd = Ping | Check | Capture | Halt

let dispatch t = function
  | Ping    -> send_response t ~prefix:"pong" "PONG"
  | Check   -> run_self_check t
  | Capture -> capture_and_send t
  | Halt    -> t.shutdown_requested <- true


Adding a new command means adding a constructor; the compiler then flags every place it is not yet handled.

OTAR rekey messages take the other branch. The payload is binary rather than text, encrypted under a master key that was loaded onto the satellite at integration time and lives in process memory on the module (the module has no TPM or secure element, because building a radiation-tolerant one is still an open hardware problem). The satellite decrypts the new keys, holds them in a staging slot, and activates them. The current flight loop activates on receipt; the protocol also supports a separate ground-driven activation step where the operator verifies the install before committing, and switching to that path is a flight-loop change, not new code.

The master key itself has no rotation path. It was installed on the payload before the satellite was mated to the launcher, and there is no more-trusted channel to deliver a new one once the spacecraft is in orbit. If the master key is lost, this stack is unreachable. That is the honest failure mode for a long mission with no hardware-backed key storage.

What is coming next: OxCaml

OxCaml is Jane Street's compiler branch on top of OCaml. Its mode system matters on the satellite hot path. Locality lets us mark allocations stack-bound, so they never reach the heap and never reach the GC. Uniqueness and capabilities track shared mutable state in the type system, turning data races into compile-time errors on the parallel parts of the stack.

The hot path on the hosted-payload module is CCSDS dispatch: every CFDP segment, every COP-1 frame, every camera packet flows through a Space Packet header decode and an APID-based routing step before the payload reaches the application logic. Real-time on-board dispatch with hard scheduling deadlines on every pass is exactly the workload the EU ORCHIDE Horizon Europe project was set up to address (the consortium where this on-board work first started inside Tarides, and which eventually led us to spin Parsimoni out as a dedicated space-software company).
Per-packet latency on the CCSDS dispatch hot path: decoding a Space Packet primary header into a 3-field record and routing by APID. Stock OCaml versus OxCaml with the same code annotated exclave_ stack_. Measured on a laptop, not the flight module.

Switching to OxCaml with exclave_ stack_ annotations drops p99.9 latency from 29 ns to 9 ns per packet on the dispatch hot path, and removes GC pressure entirely (394 minor GCs to zero over 25 million packets). Throughput is comparable; the win is jitter, and on a hosted-payload module with hundreds of microseconds of jitter budget, that is the whole game.

The recipe is mechanical: turn a per-iteration heap allocation ({ apid; seq_count; data_len }) into a stack-allocated one (exclave_ stack_ { apid; seq_count; data_len }), and require the consumer to take it @ local. The type system proves the record cannot escape the dispatch scope; the compiler emits no heap traffic; the GC has nothing to collect.

Setup. Apple M5 Max, macOS 25.4. Stock OCaml 5.3.0 versus 5.2.0+ox (Jane Street's OxCaml fork). Workload: 100 000 batches of 256 CCSDS Space Packet header dispatches each (about 25.6 M packets total), each routed through an [@inline never] handler so the record genuinely escapes. Median of 10 runs.

Why OCaml

Around 70% of severe CVEs in C/C++ codebases trace to memory corruption (buffer overflows, use-after-free, integer overflows), based on Microsoft's MSRC analysis (2019) and Chromium's 2020 study. Our security extensions (SDLS, BPSec, and OTAR) all handle ciphertexts and key material, which is exactly where memory bugs hurt most. The C-based incumbent in this domain, NASA CryptoLib, has had its own such bugs: for instance, a heap buffer overflow in the TC frame parser, triggered by an integer underflow on a crafted frame. An OCaml implementation removes that class of attack surface from the application logic by construction. The runtime, the kernel underneath, and the bootloader are still C and still in the TCB: memory safety helps where it helps, and is not a substitute for a trusted compute base audit.

Beyond what OCaml gives us today, the language itself keeps advancing. Jane Street maintains OxCaml, an experimental branch of OCaml. Its design goal is safe, predictable control over the performance-critical parts of a program, opt-in only where you need it, and still in OCaml: every valid OCaml program is also a valid OxCaml program. OxCaml Labs (Anil Madhavapeddy's group at Cambridge) and FP Launchpad (KC Sivaramakrishnan's lab at IIT Madras) are pushing OCaml forward; Tarides upstreams the pieces that are ready into the mainline.

I somehow focused on the moon :-) Going to orbit first meant prioritising correctness over performance, because protocol bugs in orbit are expensive to fix. The defence runs through every layer of the stack: type checking, formally verified cryptographic primitives (libcrux, fiat-crypto), interop testing, and dependency audits.

Take three of those layers as concrete examples. The wire-format codecs are generated from a typed schema, reject malformed bytes at decode time, and feed Microsoft's EverParse parser generator, which produces C validators formally verified in F*. The protocol state machines are encoded as GADTs, so the typechecker rejects invalid transitions at compile time. An interop pipeline runs against existing reference implementations, catching what the type system cannot express and surfacing defects in upstream libraries along the way.

Beyond what these layers catch, the functional core lets us ship the same code as flight software, ground software, and test oracle. The protect_bundle above is the same function in all three roles. We feed recorded traffic from one role to the others and compare outputs byte-for-byte. The OCaml code is also the reference implementation that other implementations are validated against. This is the nqsb-TLS approach (Kaloper-Mersinjak, Mehnert, Madhavapeddy and Sewell, USENIX Security 2015), and it has held up in TLS for a decade. Nitrokey's NetHSM runs the same OCaml TLS stack in shipping hardware security modules today.

Borealis is no exception. It might look like we wrote a full CCSDS protocol stack from zero to in-orbit demonstration in a couple of months. That is not what happened. The core libraries come from MirageOS, and have been running in production on the ground for the last decade. A library operating system is, by definition, a large toolset where you pick the pieces you need.

The ASPLOS 2013 unikernels paper asked whether sealed, single-purpose images could improve cloud infrastructure. A decade later, the same libraries run in Docker Desktop on hundreds of millions of laptops. Now they run in space, on ClusterGate-2, doing the system-level plumbing as a Linux process rather than a unikernel, in places I did not predict when we first designed them.

Borealis is one binary in orbit. The next problem is scale: deploying and managing a fleet of specialised payload binaries across many satellites with the same one-command ease that Docker brought to Linux on the ground. The harder half is doing that safely: signed updates from the ground, isolation between payloads, and attestation of what is actually running. Getting hardware to orbit is becoming routine; the interesting problems are increasingly in the software that runs on it, a familiar shift from cloud computing, where the stack on top of the servers ended up mattering more than the servers. That is what we are building next at Parsimoni, with collaborators at Cambridge and beyond. I sketched the wider question in Is Running Untrusted Code on a Satellite a Good Idea?.

If you are building payload software, considering hosted payloads on your bus, or want to compare notes on OCaml in flight, talk to me or write to the Parsimoni team.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

25. ABC News has taken all FiveThirtyEight articles offline

Source: https://twitter.com/baseballot/status/2055309076209492208
Redirected to: https://x.com/baseballot/status/2055309076209492208
Site: X (formerly Twitter)
Submitter: cmsparks (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-15 19:07 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 271 points · 128 comments
Length: 27 words (~1 min read)
Language: en

Something went wrong, but don’t fret — let’s give it another shot.

Some privacy related extensions may cause issues on x.com. Please disable them and try again.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

26. Waymo updates 3,800 robotaxis after they 'drive into standing water'

Source: https://www.cnbc.com/2026/05/12/waymo-recalls-3800-robotaxis-after-able-drive-into-standing-water.html
Site: CNBC
Author: Lora Kolodny
Published: 2026-05-12
HN activity: 168 points · 162 comments
Length: 394 words (~2 min read)
Language: en

A Waymo vehicle exits a charging lot on Jan. 15, 2026 in Austin, Texas.

Brandon Bell | Getty Images

Waymo is recalling about 3,800 robotaxis in the U.S. to fix software issues that could allow them to "drive onto a flooded roadway," according to a letter on the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration's website.

The voluntary recall is for Waymo vehicles that use the company's fifth and sixth generation automated driving systems (or ADS), the U.S. auto safety regulator said in the letter posted Tuesday.

Waymo autonomous vehicles in Austin, Texas were recently seen on camera driving onto a flooded street and stalling, requiring other drivers to navigate around them. Similar incidents have occurred in other locations, the latest safety-related issues for the Alphabet-owned AV unit that's rapidly bolstering its fleet of vehicles and entering new U.S. markets.

Waymo has drawn criticism for its vehicles failing to yield to school buses in Austin, and for the performance of its vehicles during widespread power outages in San Francisco in December, when robotaxis halted in traffic, causing gridlock.

The company said in a statement on Tuesday that it's "identified an area of improvement regarding untraversable flooded lanes specific to higher-speed roadways," and opted to file a "voluntary software recall" with the NHTSA.

"Waymo provides over half a million trips every week in some of the most challenging driving environments across the U.S., and safety is our primary priority," the company said.

Waymo added that it's working on "additional software safeguards" and has put "mitigations" in place, limiting where its robotaxis operate during extreme weather, so that they avoid "areas where flash flooding might occur" in periods of intense rain.

The company currently operates a commercial robotaxi service in 11 U.S. markets, with broad public access in cities including San Francisco, Los Angeles, Phoenix, Austin and Miami. In a few markets, the service is available to select riders.

Waymo also told CNBC on Tuesday that its robotaxi service in San Antonio, Texas, remains temporarily suspended.

On April 20, a Waymo AV in San Antonio entered a flooded road and was swept away into a creek with no passengers on board, kicking off a NHTSA probe and leading to the latest voluntary recall.

The company said it is "readying operations to resume public rides" in San Antonio.

WATCH: Waymo launches new autonomous system in Chinese-made vehicle

watch now

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

27. Hightouch (YC S19) Is Hiring

Source: https://hightouch.com/careers
Site: hightouch.com
Submitter: joshwget (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-15 17:01 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 1 points · 0 comments
Length: 1.0K words (~5 min read)
Language: en

We are a small team of kind and talented people

Let’s grow together

At Hightouch, we’re committed to helping our customers, business, and employees grow. As a series D startup backed by top investors, we are determined to continuously raise the bar and provide the best product in the market. Grow your career in a fast paced environment that values creative thinking and innovation.

Our values

01

Forever hungry

We are hungry and ambitious. We celebrate our accomplishments, but we’re never fully satisfied. We’re always figuring out how to collectively push ourselves further and do more.If we think we can grow the company 5x this year, the first question should be “why not 10x?”

02

Kindness

We want to create an environment where people feel actively welcomed, encouraged, and supported. People who aren’t kind aren’t tolerated — it’s just not worth it.We intrinsically believe in a deeper kindness as a core value, aside from its obvious benefits to the business

03

Efficient execution

Speed matters. We don’t have time for endless deliberation — most decisions are two-way doors. Move fast, adapt quickly.We take inspiration from others and don’t innovate where we don’t need to. We communicate clearly because time is precious. We parallelize to the greatest extent possible.

04

Compassion

We listen to everyone and try to put ourselves in their shoes, regardless of our initial reaction to what they say.This applies to everyone — customers, prospects, partners, peers, etc.

05

Impact driven

Everyone should be intrinsically motivated by business impact. We minimize distractions and prioritize our time based on what’s actually impactful to the business.We value people at all levels based on their impact above anything else.

06

Raising the bar

We have high expectations for performance and believe in having exceptional talent in every position. We understand the value of great people.We look deeper than credentials, prioritize slope over y-intercept, and put in the hard work to find those that truly raise the bar.

07

Humility

We are humble. Listening is mission critical — we are open to others’ perspectives and ideas. No work is beneath us. We also believe that humility leads to foresight.If we are not grounded and open minded, we blind ourselves from key opportunities and risks in every aspect of business.

Benefits

Competitive compensation

We offer competitive compensation and meaningful equity. We also offer 401k for our US employees and retirement plans for our international employees.

Hub & Remote friendly

Global Team. Flexible by Design: We’re a remote-friendly company with 5+ offices across San Francisco, NYC, London, and more. For those in an office, enjoy free lunch Monday - Friday.

Commuter

We support employees who work from an office with a $150 monthly commuter benefit.

Core benefits

We offer high-quality health benefits for employees and their families—covering 100% of employee premiums and 80% for dependents in the US—plus a $100/month wellness stipend and support for home office setup, connectivity, and professional development.

Flexible PTO

We believe people do their best work when they have agency over their time. Take the time you need to rest, recharge, and prioritize what matters outside of work—we’ve built our flexible PTO to support that.

Parental leave

We value and support the family planning process. We offer family-forming benefits, along with up to 16 weeks of leave for birthing parents and 12 weeks for non-birthing parents in the US.

Open positions

AI Strategy Consultant

Remote (North America)

AI Operations, GTM

Remote, United States

AI Creative Designer, Ads

Remote, United States

Technical Account Manager

Remote (North America)

Technical Account Manager - EMEA

London, UK/ Paris, France/ Remote (EMEA Region)

Head of Technical Account Management, West

San Francisco

Customer Success Engineer

Remote (North America)

Implementation Manager

Remote (North America)

Customer Success Engineer

Remote (Europe)

Implementation Manager, EMEA

Remote (Europe)

Manager, Implementation Management

Remote (US)

Technical Account Manager

Remote (Singapore, India, Japan)

Full Stack Product Engineer

Remote (North America)

Software Engineer, Distributed Systems

Remote (North America)

Software Engineer, AI Agents

Remote (North America)

Developer Productivity Engineer

Remote (North America)

Forward Deployed Marketing Data Scientist

Remote (North America)

Web Engineer

Remote (North America)

Engineering Manager, Head of Machine Learning

Remote (North America)

Engineering Manager, Destinations

Remote (North America)

Application Security Lead

Remote (North America)

Software Engineer, Customer Studio Backend

Remote (North America)

Principal Engineer, Streaming Systems

Remote (North America)

Software Engineer, Streaming Systems

Remote (North America)

Software Engineer, Control Plane

Remote (North America)

Head of Revenue Operations

New York, New York

Product Marketing Manager, AdTech

Remote (North America)

Brand Designer

Remote (North America)

Enterprise Growth Marketer

Remote (North America)

Senior Copywriter

Remote (North America)

Partner Solutions Engineer

Remote (North America)

Administrative Assistant

New York City, New York

Lead Product Manager, Agentic Personalization

SF, NY, Remote

Lead Product Manager, Agentic Ads Platform

SF, NY, Remote

Solutions Engineer, Enterprise East (Pre-Sales)

East and Central Timezones (North America)

Enterprise Account Executive - West

Remote (West Coast)

Account Executive, Mid-Market West

San Francisco, CA

Mid-Market Account Executive, EMEA

Europe

RVP, Enterprise Sales

New York, New York/ Boston, Massachusetts

Solutions Engineer, Enterprise West (Pre-Sales)

West and Mountain Timezones (North America)

Solutions Engineer, Mid-Market (Pre-Sales)

Remote (North America)

RVP, Mid-Market Sales

San Francisco or New York

Enterprise Account Executive - MENA

Dubai

Enterprise Account Executive -Mountain West

Remote (Mountain West)

Manager, Solutions Engineering

Remote

Enterprise Account Executive - East

Remote (Northeast)

Enterprise Account Executive - East

Remote (Southeast)

Founding Sales Development Representative, APAC

Sydney or Melbourne

Sales Development Representative, West

Denver, CO / San Francisco, CA

Enterprise Account Executive, DACH

Europe - Austria/Switzerland/Netherlands/UKI

Enterprise Account Executive, APAC (Japan)

Australia/Singapore

Enterprise Account Executive, APAC (India)

Singapore/India

Solutions Engineer, Senior Enterprise, New York (Pre-Sales)

New York, NY

Sales Development Representative, EMEA (France)

Paris

Solutions Engineer EMEA (German speaking)

EMEA

Manager, Sales Development

New York City, New York/ Denver, Colorado

Account Executive, Mid-Market - Mountain West

Remote-Mountain West

Solutions Engineer - EMEA

EMEA

Senior Technical Recruiter

Remote US / San Francisco, CA / New York, NY

Senior Technical Sourcer

Remote US / San Francisco, CA / New York, NY

Hightouch has been named one of America’s best startup employers by Forbes

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

28. ASCII by Jason Scott

Source: https://ascii.textfiles.com/
Site: ASCII by Jason Scott
Submitter: bookofjoe (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-15 14:02 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 159 points · 21 comments
Length: 13.2K words (~58 min read)
Language: en-US

Manuals Plus: The Wrap-Up — May 10, 2026

Just a little over ten years ago, I was notified about a big warehouse of manuals that was going to be discarded in a few days. Bursting with energy, I drove down, discussed things with the owner, and, soliciting and ringing a very loud bell, assembled dozens of people and tens of thousands of dollars over the course of saving this collection from being discarded. Naturally, the next step would simply be to digitize them all.

That took longer.

As of a short time ago, a collection of 13,000 manuals now lives on the Internet Archive. It is, essentially, all the manuals that will be digitized or could be digitized, sans sets I’ll explain about shortly.

In other words, the loop is now complete. Saved, stored, moved, now online for anyone to read.

If somehow you missed this apparently core event of what people think of when they think of me, there’s so many weblog posts it’s almost weird to list them all:

In Realtime: Saving 25,000 Manuals
In Realtime: Prepping for the Transfer of 25,000 Manuals
In Realtime: We are Barely Halfway Done
In Realtime: Day 2 Felt Like Week 4
In Realtime: It is Done (Done physically saving the manuals, anyway)
A Small Dark Detour
In Realtime: Post-Mortem
A Little Bit of the Manuals
In Realtime: Some Initial Sorting and the Power of Two
The Manual Rescue: A High and Low Day
The Manual Rescue: Take Two, and Please Help
In Realtime: Digital Heaven (And a Call for Donations)

That last one really felt like the end (dated February 2024), but in fact it took a little longer to finish it all off. And that happened this year.

For anyone who doesn’t want to scroll through a dozen long-winded and repetitive posts about the process (aka “I ain’t reading all that – I’m sorry, or congratulations”), I’ll summarize it as:

Was told about a warehouse of manuals being thrown out. Came down to discuss the situation. Negotiated a week hold. Got dozens of people to show up, thousands of dollars to pack it all up and move it and store it, moved it from one storage unit to another location (closed coffeehouse in a mall), moved it all to California, got volunteers to sort the hell out of it, ended up with dozens of pallets, determined some not to be scanned, a group covered it being scanned, we’re done.

Only took eleven years and one tiny heart attack.

And there we are: a collection of 13,000 manuals.

Let’s go quickly down some frequently-yelled questions from the crowd, and what’s next.

First, what do you mean there are some unscanned manuals?

Well, funny story. Two companies still have manuals as a product and as part of their product line and are preferring to go through them, as well as that, in the event they make them public, their scans will be much better and thorough than the pile in this collection. Those companies are HP (now Agilent Technologies and Keysight) and Tektronix. So, it made no sense to scan those pallets. We still have everything, and if it came down to it, manuals truly lost could be found, but the cost to speculatively scan them would have doubled everything, at least. So we have the manuals, just not digital forms.

Next, who ended up covering for all this scanning?

Money was really the reason this all took so long. Scanning thousands of manuals, some of them hundreds of pages long, is an expensive project unless you truly think you can just make Steven and His Epson Perfection scanner do this on the weekends. (You can’t.)

A round of soliciting general folks was beneficial to the tune of thousands, and that helped cover it. But the biggest boost came from the Digitial Library of Amateur Radio Communications (DLARC), a funded group whose mission for a few years has been to gather as much Amateur Radio history as possible. A signficant percentage of the manuals were radio-oriented, DLARC paid for the general scanning, and it all slid over the finish line as a result. Thank you, DLARC.

Do You Have Your Usual Buffet of Random Thoughts?

Always do.

Certainly, the whole of the project was a success, but along the scale of human time and effort, it was difficult. That was a lot of lifting, a lot of driving, a ton of money and a ton of emotional aspects far outweighing what one would expect for piles of paper. Of course, they’re not just piles of paper – they’re entire outlooks of how technology works, how to teach users to do their own maintenance and process to take care of equipment, and they’re evidence as well as celebration of the wonder of engineering. They have value on multiple levels to the contemporary space, and just the graphic design and typography alone could consume a summer.

The largest hold-up was neither will nor the effort – it was money and funding. Yes, you can get a few volunteers to do work, and if there was some sort of golden fifty manuals that everyone absolutely needed online, those could have been done – but doing hundreds of thousands of scanning of pages in an orderly, tracked and quality-assured methodology just takes funding. There’s an entire discussion in whether any volunteer effort should be used at all, and I can assure you that I did get contacted by or was shown individuals in the professional space who believed it better that the manuals go into a trash compactor than any volunteer labor be used, but that’s how it always is in life regarding what resources go where. If money had not been the object, this whole thing would have been done in months.

For when people inevitably say they were sure a different manual was available and it wasn’t HP or Tektronix and yet it appears not to be scanned, that means it was sold off before my team arrived, or it was lost before we arrived, or it was in some way basically jammed somewhere strange. Those volunteers were brutally intense going through that warehouse. The warehouse shots look bigger because there were sometimes a dozen copies per unique manual.

Everything else I ever wanted to say was in those dozen entries listed above, so if you want to settle back and enjoy those, go for it.

Also, I wish to shout out the heroic efforts of the Bitsavers Project, a completely-separate-from-me entirely independent effort to scan manuals, digital artifacts and more. They’ve done so much more, for so longer, and so consistently.

What’s Left?

These manuals have very basic metadata. If people see a manual needs more description, or better description, or they want to just note bad entries and so on, leave a review under the item and I’ll integrate it in. You can always do a full-text search across the manuals and you’ll see text you’re looking for (it’s the “search text contents” option under the collection search). All are welcome to contribute that as it strikes them.

1 Comment

In Which My Situation is Discussed. — December 23, 2025

Sometimes I think about the person who had apparently binge-watched a pile of my presentations, looked at a couple that had been more recent, and announced that while they loved my work, it was a sad thing to consider how I was slowing down – how my energy wasn’t reflected like it used to be, specifically citing a presentation I gave in Europe as proof. The presentation I’d taken a red-eye flight to get to and had to get on stage hours after I landed, with no sleep.

There’s a wide gap, in many facets, of the presentation of myself that I put online and the life I live and have lived day to day. My hope is the most interesting aspects are seen by a public that enjoys my company, and not seen by people who find me a grating somnambulance in an online life they’re just trying to get by in.

But regardless, mythology continues to rule the day.

At some point in the green days of Twitter as the world’s chatroom, I was mentioned and, because my handle found its way into searches, a collection of people I’d blocked over years discovered they all shared this trait. They began talking amongst themselves, trying to discern why I’d done such a drastic thing. While they never quite stumbled onto the beach of the actual obvious reasons I had, they did in fact swim about and cook up a fascinating answer: I was beginning to develop a mental breakdown and possibly one of the degenerative brain diseases, and in doing so my personality had changed, and I wasn’t there anymore. This conclusion worked gangbusters for me, because then the trash takes itself out. I’ve got Hackerzeimers. Go with that.

It’s not difficult to get relatively known for something, if you do it a lot, and talk about it. If you’re both lucky and persistent, it might grow to something beyond that. It is odd for an outsider cataloguer and enraged librarian to gain anything resembling a following of sizeable mass, and if the fan mail is any indication, a warm spotlight of affection as I drift in and out of peoples’ awareness. I’ve been lucky or damned.

All this to say that, while I’ve certainly benefitted from an elevated profile for what would otherwise be a series of simple and repetitive vocations and hobbies, the road to glory has not been devoid of bumps and bruises. Most of these have been minor, a few clearly not. As my records show I’ve written essays on this weblog less than a dozen times in the last few years, whereas I once tried doing them nearly daily and at least weekly, and the result is that for some people, devoid of knowlege of me personally, might assume my star has fallen or I’m lying on my side on a day bed asking the staff to play my greatest hits on a screen nearby.

This, fundamentally, is a direct cause of how exactly people are keeping tabs on me. I can assure everyone of several basic facts, some of which I can expand on, but which might stretch the level of your interest in knowing:

I continue to be extremely healthy in a cardiac way – my prescription regimen and no longer having a propensity to make tuna melts an unveering pillar in my diet, along with generally seeing doctors at the beginning instead of towards the end of a condition, have kept me quite fine.
I do a podcast episode every single week and I’m officially at 350 episodes. The Patreon is where you will hear them and I eventually get around to syndicating them to the general public; but the Patreon gets them first. By a rough back-of-calculator-app estimation, I have nearly 3 full days of audio of me talking about myself, issues and the general state of the past and current world.
Early next year I will celebrate 15 years at the Internet Archive, making it my longest single run of employment. I do not truly have a saying in the matter but I would not mind a world where it was my last job altogether. I read this article and I am inspired.
I have been to a sizeable amount of locations both domestic and international and I’ve attended hundreds of movies, concerts and events, preventing any sort of regretful wail from where Montressor has chained me.
This past year, I acquired a persistent stalker, harmless but ambiently entertaining, and, in a plot twist, an entirely different person attempted to get multiple family members and myself killed. They were, ultimately, unsuccessful.

In short, there’s nothing too much to worry about.

The rest of this entry is neither announcement nor attack. It’s mostly me talking about a really wonderful outcome in terms of working space, and the financial lean it’s causing.

Some time ago, I cleaved my spaces in twain. I continued to live in a series of apartments, but the part of me that desires sleep, meals and a pleasant desktop machine and doesn’t want to be surrounded by the detrius of a thousand conversations would keep said apartment – but the part of me that does want to be the Willy Wonka of Crap began renting a small office.

And I do mean small – 90 square feet, although with some camera trickery I could make it seem like more. Photos from this space range from sadly quiet to artistically fun.

It was exactly what I needed. Near my apartment (a walk, really). Confined only to the worlds of digitization, livestreaming at loud volumes, and getting on with it as regards my archive work. And, relatively, it was inexpensive.

That said, inexpensive is not zero expense, and I was lucky enough to be subsidized by a number of people, most notably the awesome FaxZero company. Between all of this, my costs were notable but quite under control. A lot of work was done in this office – thousands of items digitized, thousands of mails answered, interviews and presentations conducted.

Over time, the management company behind this small office, who also provided a meeting room set (which I only used twice) and appliances (which I wandered out to occasionally) would raise the rent here and there. Still – in general, I felt very safe, especially what with the threats and the occasional demands to meet me in person to Settle Things. I could walk in past a security guard setup, go up a few floors, and go into my favorite type of world – a windowless room. It turns out I really like working inside a dark box, and while more expensive offices provided windows and outward facing doors, my love of a tiny alcove with minimal light worked out for me – for a few years.

As is often the case, this management company raised its rent, usually a small amount, occasionally a leap, until the cost they were charging for my little box was past $100 a square foot. I had to decline a renewal of the lease, and move onwards.

As is also often the case, this seeming upheaval instead provided a truly wonderful opportunity.

Casting around for a new place to rent, I decided to go for it and just pursue industrial listings and spaces. The differences between this, and, say, simple rooms or professional shared office space deals, is that you can get some absolutely whacky listings: unfinished warehouses, empty storefronts, buildings with strange and unusual tenants and somewhere deep inside, a room with your shingle on the door.

That’s how I found my current space – looking for unfinished warehouse space with the rough plan of pitching an industrial canvas tent inside and having my materials inside like a warped meth lab, I instead took a really engaging tour with an absolutely charming and fair-dealing landlord. We looked at more reasonable options and came to terms almost immediately.

Here is what comes of not settling and taking a leap into the unknown.

I hope it’s obvious what a truly revolutionary situation this is for me. The reason there’s so much more in this room is because I was able to 100% clear out every single paid-for storage unit and home-based pile of anything related to my archiving and digitizing work. It’s all in one room. That alone is a major relief.

It’s lit like a nightclub because I like indirect colored lights, and I can go wild in there.

And within this location, I livestream my archiving/working days, go through long-dormant promises and plans, and have been aggressively digitizing or disposing of “what next” items I’ve had with me forever.

Dozens of boxes have left this room. Every photo, including the one above, is out of date within a few days of taking it, as items are processed, repackaged, cleared out, and sent away.

It is, in many ways, a culmination, a heavenly moment, a true beloved space.

This should be the end of it, of course – just a note that I’ve moved, like a basic birthday announcement or a declaration that we made it, folks. I should be spending my hours a day digitizing and getting materials up by the terabyte to the Internet Archive and other destinations, moving this backlog out at the major speeds I’m currently achieving.

But.

After the initial year, my rent went up for Bank Reasons. My landlord walked me through the entire financial reason, including an anchor tenant moving elsewhere, and an audit by the financial instituion that is co-owner of the property, and my rent now stands for the next few years at $1000 a month.

I have a solid income. I absolutely can continue to pay this unabated and will do so.

But over time, various folks have thrown me funds to help with this burden (as well as costs of hosting, and other aspects of what I suppose constitutes my public life). There have been months I’ve borne the whole cost of these various recurrent debts, and months I’ve not paid anything. The uncertainty is beginning to have a toll.

So I’ll say:

There are a variety of ways to support this space that sends out so much material, ranging from sponsorship of the livestream, sending money to me via the paypal or venmo services, or signing up for the Patreon. If you have means and wish to help contribute towards that, it would be very welcome. My e-mail and other points of contact are open.

Otherwise, and I seriously have to stress this:

Nothing will change. If you’ve given me funds and support in the past, nothing is going behind a new paywall (and I thank you profusely for that past help). Nothing is going to be stopped, nothing is going to end. I’ll continue what I’m doing to cobble together the budget, and it inspires me every day I go to the office to make the absolute most of that space and use the equipment and tools within it to work at the top speed I can.

It’s been a wild ride to get here, and it will continue. See you on the stream.

4 Comments

I No Longer Attend Vintage Computer Festivals. (But You Probably Should.) — July 29, 2025

I attended INIT HELLO over the past weekend, and had a very good time. Located near Baltimore and spanning 2 days, the event was an Apple II themed potluck and contained about 50 people using said machines, doing workshops and giving a smattering of presentations. I ran the streaming/recording machine and even got a chance to give a little speech at the end. An excellent repast all around.

Why INIT HELLO even happened is a subject for another time. Today’s subject is also not specifically about the building where it was held, but now’s a good time as any to tell you about it if you’ve never heard of System Source.

System Source is a business sort of business that handles training and IT and does all that office sort of stuff, but it also contains a computer museum, which itself is composed of multiple other museums. It’s like a fun museum turducken.

INIT HELLO was organized rather quickly, months to be specific, and it’s a miracle it all came together so well. This was, in part, not only the effort of the organizers, the folks who dropped some cash to float the costs, and a lot of volunteer labor throwing in – it’s also because the owner of System Source opened doors for an odd, unproven, lumpy event to take place.

That kindness led to a fun little conversation at some point when it turned out the owner of System Source was also on the board of the Vintage Computer Festival, which I’d written about semi-recently.

He and I chatted a little about this and that related to the VCF organization, my interactions with it, and the law of unintended consequences.

Thus, here we are.

While I continue to not attend Vintage Computer Festivals, and my interactions along various lines tells me the inter-organizational structure of the place is prone to misunderstandings and confusion, you shouldn’t punish the attending exhibitors, who do some of the finest work in retrocomputing and have no say or agency in matters beyond their table space.

For many people who harbor love of old machines and concepts, and who are filled with a wish to share their knowledge or collections with a sympathetic and engaged audience, the Vintage Computer Festivals held throughout the United States (and soon Canada) are often their sole opportunity to connect with old (and new) fans of their efforts.

Some of my finest interactions with people who have gone above and beyond to maintain and present technology have happened at VCF-related events – and while I won’t drag them into a sort of paradoxical Jason Scott-attention Devil’s Bargain by mentioning them, I’ll say that I’ve enjoyed their smiles and their conversations. Solid, good people, doing good things: A brimming joy and wonder about these expensive machines converted to toys and educational entertainment about the world they came from.

A good display of computer history doesn’t just happen – it can represent years of careful collecting, precision layout of signs and wiring and explanatory diagrams, and then hauling (at great distance, personal expense, and time) into a waiting empty space at various venues. VCF is not the only place that offers this, of course; but even as one of a fabric of opportunities, it is a not insignificant percentage of the chances these exhibitors have in a given year to meet future fans and collaborators.

Interpersonal conflict is my personal candy, and while it’s a delightful jaunt when the gears turn just so and a truly well-crafted flaming arrow can be directed into unsuspecting machinery, I’ve been led to believe that my essays far exceeded their mark and have caused financial distress. Without diving too deep into research for that claim, I’ll simply say that it would truly make me sad to have some of these families and individuals, just trying to show their home-baked technological wares, be left standing in an underattended hallway or chamber hoping for an audience that seems less populated each passing year.

Comments Off on I No Longer Attend Vintage Computer Festivals. (But You Probably Should.)

Bodaciously True and Totally Awesome — March 14, 2025

This first paragraph is a paradox. I want you to go to a funding campaign and click on a button and support a project. But the project is one that expects you to be the kind of person who loves reading. I personally think there might be a slight amount of people who don’t have much time to read but respect the idea of someone making a nine book series and helping them to promote it. For those people, click here. Otherwise, keep reading.

When we want to amuse ourselves, Chris Orcutt and I calculate out how long we’ve been friends, because the number is massive by most standards and it’s one of our little consistencies through our individual, chaotic lives. The number as of this writing is 43 years.

We are no-holds-barred fans of each other, and of our divergent goals and efforts in our paths. The bias is deep-seated and profound, palpable really. If you’re building up a court case against one of us, the other will not join you, and in fact you may find yourself with a spoon in your neck before the proposal gets out of your mouth. We are bonded and we back each other up.

This round, it’s my turn.

After being literally across the street from the World Trade Center on 9/11/2001, Chris recalibrated his life and career away from (very good) copywriting for businesses and CEOs, and took his previous years as a journalist, and became a full-time novelist, which was always his dream. He’s been doing it ever since.

And not just doing it – excelling at it. His books have sold very well, and it is possible to grab them immediately. That is, a significant amount of times, he has set off on a book writing project, spent the years doing the drafts, refining, editing, and then publishing it where others can enjoy it. His books exist. The ratings are excellent. The boy can write.

In his 40s, he found himself at a bit of a crossroads.

He’d written some solid mystery novels, a number of anthologies, and more. And while writing is everything from frustrating to solid-state euphoria, and creating books was his heart and soul, he didn’t want to go into the ground having made “a bunch of books”.

He wanted to make something substantial. Something you could have an opinion on, but that opinion couldn’t include the words “slight” or “okay”. A piece of work you had to at least take off your hat for a moment and mutter “mother of god” before either reaching for it, or backing away. An accomplishment.

Ten years later, he’s there.

This is ten years of no nights out, scant visits to family and friends and events, and long walks with Dashiell the Dog in parks and trails working out the endless puzzles of a nine-part novel series.

Nine parts! Nearly two million words! I struggle to give context to this sort of dedication to the project. Chris has estimated he’s spent at least 30,000 hours over the decade writing the novel, but we all know you have to count all the time considering possibilities, discarding approaches, suddenly realizing you’ve been swimming laps but were deep in a scene.

I prefer percentages: Chris has spent 20 percent of his life on this project.

If nothing else, acknowledge the effort. Coming to the end of a project this massive, this involved, this concentrated diamond of goal, stands among very few who set off on such a journey. He fuckin’ did it.

I will refrain from describing the depths Chris went to in making his novel, which takes place in the 1980s, as accurately as possible. But one small overlap with me naturally sticks in my mind:

In the book, his main character Avery Craig writes a letter on his Macintosh. Chris wanted the feel of the keyboard and the experience of a real Mac to guide his words, so he asked me, and I arranged, to have a vintage Mac, carrying case and all, available to use to make it authentic:

I respect the relentless hustle to do right by his project, to take the full walk around, to not guess but research and find out the true and real world he’s bringing together in this monument of printed pages.

Now, like Chris, you stand at a crossroads.

The nine-volume series begins to come out in 2026, with additional books to come out across a timeline. You can close this window and probably hear about the books coming out then, and buy the first one, fall in love with the tale and tell a friend, or just enjoy them however you enjoy your books.

or.

You can help an author of authentic skill, who redirected his laser-like abilities away from churning out noir after romance after adventure tale, who worked on a truly gigantic project, what very well seems to be the first teen epic, properly promote and prepare this series for a proper literary lifespan.

You see, books suffer.

Not from being able to get somewhere after being printed, to sell some copies after being put on shelves or online, to get a bit of an audience after being out there….

…they suffer because they need promotion and support and a hundred little costs to break through the membrane of life’s distractions and cacaphony to gain a foothold in universal awareness.

This novel series is coming out – that’s not a question. It’s done, getting the kind of polish as it goes to printers and gets distributed through various platforms. It’s going to happen. That’s not what Chris and his family and I are asking of you.

We’re asking for people to contribute support to the campaign and efforts to give this book series the respect and treatment it deserves.

The goal is simple: NO CHEAPING OUT.

No using clip art and basic fonts for the covers. No relying on a couple notes here and there to let people know about the project. No avoiding spending money on talented people in the field of promotion and awareness. The plan, evocatively described on their fundraising page, and the result of years of planning, is to put the same sweat equity into the promotion and sale of this project as was put into its creation, year in and year out, up to this point. The plan, taking up a whole wall of a hallway in their home, is to spend five years on this, half of what it took to make the series in the first place.

And to do that, they need funding. People who are looking to drop not just a few bucks expecting a printed series in their mailbox or inbox in a year or so…. but people who go to the page the Orcutts set up, read the pitch and plan, and said “OK, now this is quality.” People who will, impulsively or after great amounts of thought, put serious coin in the Orcutts’ hands with the understanding they are using this money to bring the all-important promotion of this life’s work to the greatest audience they can find.

The Orcutts will be doing this, what they promise on their page. I will personally refund your money if they don’t. That’s how much I believe in them.

They’ve described the whole project in detail. They’ve laid out the plan. They’ve set out all the good silverware and they’re inviting you in to see what they’re going to do. You either will go “well, uh, see you when it’s out” or you understand, from a person who himself has spent years and years on projects, that now is the time to be shockingly generous. Your contribution will have great ramifications for what this series can do to bring attention to what it is.

Here’s the link.

Just do it. Tell them I sent you.

2 Comments

The Dying Computer Museum — August 19, 2024

One can choose to focus on the car crash, or the lessons learned from the car crash.

Let’s do a little of both.

The proposition of the Living Computer Museum was initially simple, and rather amusing in a Slashdot-baity sort of way: You could apply to get an account on a real, actual ancient Mainframe hooked up to the Internet, which meant you could literally connect into real, actual ancient hardware. I assure you that to a segment of the population, this is an irresistible proposition. It’s also, ultimately, one that even the most ardent fans of “how it was” will leaf away from, because mainframes are their own wacky old world, like using a taffy-pull hook, and appeal on a day-to-day basis to a relative handful of die-hards.

But in 2011, the Living Computer Museum announced itself with the kind of slick webpage that promised computer history buffs a new wonderland.

There’s a lot to take in with this verbiage, but let’s keep going, for now.

In 2012, the Living Computer Museum opened its actual, physical doors to the public in Seattle. A year later, I visited. It was rather nice. I got a grand and lovely tour by some very polite and friendly people, some of whom I’d known for years. The rooms, well appointed, well-lit, and in the case of the machine rooms, done to a sparkling arrangement, clamored for my attention and approval.

There were computer museums for years, decades before Living Computer Museum, scattered among the United States and the world. I’ve been to many of them – sometimes as an honored guest and backstage VIP, and sometimes just because I hastily read my “find me weirdo geek stuff” Google Maps results and negotiated public transit to walk into the door and walk around like a strutting mayor to see what’s what. In that pantheon, I would put LCM in the realm of “very well appointed, especially the mainframes” but not in the realm of “nobody, ever, has ever tried anything like this”. Just off the top of my head, the Computer History Museum in Mountain View has brought not just mainframes and historical computers back from oblivion, but hosted events in which their maintainers and figures have gotten a chance to get their stories on record.

Still, one couldn’t argue with it – the LCM was a solid new outpost in Telling Computer History, and it was on my shortlist of potential homes for materials I might donate in the future. I had a lovely conversation with a member of management about how they maintained functionality and also what their contingencies were for any sort of “endgame” that might befall the endeavor. He assured me they had storage aplenty, in the extremely unlikely event they had to face a closure. Ultimately I didn’t donate my materials there, simply because I found nearer geographic or mission-aligning homes.

My next, and it turns out last, major visit to the Living Computer Museum (outside of a few drive-bys) came in 2018, when I spoke at an event being held there. This gifted me with a chance to see how things had changed in 5 years, and how they had.

Here, then, was something approaching a dream. We had the display cases of technology and the clean carpets and cathedral ceilings of available space, filled not just with computers on desks but entire computer-related environments: classroom, arcade, basement, that showed youngsters what sort of context these computers had lived in. I met Cynde Moya, who had been described to me years earlier as a hard-nosed disciplined caretaker of the materials, and who turned out to be everything they said except hard-nosed – a truly dear overseer of things physical within these walls.

This was April 2018. I lived in the world I live all the time: full of hope, equally full of expectation of doom. But hope was winning.

In October of 2018, Paul Allen was dead.

I suppose everyone has opinions on billionaries, their position in the world, what they represent, and maybe almost everyone has, spoken or unspoken, an awareness that the level of money billions represents disengages you, whether you think so or not, from humanity.

I mean, sure, they cry, laugh, stub their toe, wonder if that’s rain coming, get surprised when the killer’s revealed in a well-done noir thriller. But there’s this cloud of wealth that is ever-present and depending on how it is maintained, or manifested, it slowly bleaches out the edges of living until you realize there is a shocking serenity in their countenance, a noise-cancelling blur that surrounds them, because there are always people whose job is to be aware of them and whose job is to ensure the serenity is maintained.

And there’s the sheer spending power of a billion. I’m sure I could toss out a hundred funny examples of the sheer numerical force of a billion dollars. For example, you could have someone buy a 2025 Subaru Outback, itself the rough amount on the lower end (nationally) of a Domino’s Pizza General Manager’s yearly salary before taxes, and push it into a lake. Taking Christmas and the pusher’s birthday off, to run through a billion dollars of Subaru Outbacks would take you 61 solid years.

But that’s not even very accurate. During that 61 years of pushing Subaru Outbacks into a lake (in Neutral, of course, I’m not a monster), the remaining amount of the money not being spent to purchase lake-bound outbacks would actually be MORE. THAN. A. BILLION. You would actually be richer than you started, if you invested it in even the most brain-dead obvious multi-percent-a-year funds, or left it in any bank. That’s because time and space warp around money.

So do people.

In 2018, after getting cancer in 2009 and 1982, Allen got it again, and this third (public) bout with it ended him, at age 65. His net worth at the time of his demise is the kind that publications who make it their business to will guess at, and the guess sat around $20 billion. Everyone has kind of accepted that, but it’s not really important if it’s $50, $15 or $5 billion. It’s a lot of money.

With his billions, over the decades, Allen owned or partly owned three sports teams, at least 10 companies ranging from airplanes, scientific research, media, and space flight. He owned massive real estate, a movie theater, threw buckets of cash at schools, the arts, and ultimately, a few museums.

To manage it all, he had a company whose purpose was to manage the money, because he wasn’t going to do it himself. The company’s name is Vulcan, Inc. Even after divestment and shutdown after Allen’s death, it has 700 employees. It is one of the largest trusts in the world. It is also now called Vale Group, but I’m going to keep calling it Vulcan.

Vulcan, a company whose job is to manage money and where that goes, is still quite intensely active as an entity, even with Paul Allen’s death. His sister, Jody Allen, chairs the organization she co-founded with her brother in 1986. This company is absolutely gargantuan in its scope and range, and remember, it is a company that just manages a ton of money – that’s the company’s entire purpose.

I wish to take a short moment to not demonize Jody Allen. As the remaining sibling in charge of this company, functionally working through her brother’s holdings, many of which she clearly had no interest or extant position in, and doing so for six years and counting, can’t be anything else than the strangest mixture of pain and endless complication. The $20 billion she’s now in charge of might soften the blow, but likely not by much.

And I apologize for the whiplash here. I’m not overly interested in going down the paths of describing what Jody should be doing, or what her responsibilities are. I am not privy to whatever deep law and lore and functions buried within Vulcan’s iron heart she and her army of people are dealing with, that six years later they are still slowly divesting organizations. I know she has personally called for cullings but I am not informed about the deepest depths of how the aspects of these billions function.

I want to refocus to the fact that Vulcan is divesting itself of the Living Computer Museum.

I want to refocus to the fact that the Living Computer Museum was never a museum.

Look, don’t jump down my throat about this. I’m as shocked as you are.

I didn’t get some inkling from the phone call I had a decade before about potentially donating to Living Computer Museum. I don’t have some spidey-sense about failure or darkness – I just see it everywhere in everything and I treat every day like it’s the one before they find a lump.

If, before it closed, you had made me stand in the center of the LCM and answer whether it was a museum, I’d have happily held up my top hot and shouted “Why yes! One of the finest in all the realms!”

And for all I’d know, it was a museum. There’s no laws on what a thing can call itself regarding being a museum, exhibition, tour, or display. It’s against the law to take money to attend the museum and you get led to an empty lot, sure. But if something has the vestements and affectation of a museum, and you see the big sign saying Museum out front and you go in and there’s displays and staff and events and meetings, you would certainly think it was a museum.

Turns out it wasn’t.

The auction house Christie’s announced it was doing an auction of some of the best portions of Paul Allen’s estate, first with art, and now it would be selling off technology. To fans and studiers of the Living Computer Museum, these items seemed familiar – some of them were on display in the museum.

I found out that some of these to-be-auctioned items would be on display near where I live, so I hopped in my car, parked grandiosely illegally in front of the building, and let myself in.

On display were all sorts of computer history of the “early major days” variety, ranging from a Xerox Star to an Englebart Mouse and even a Pac-Man machine. All had descriptions, all were held out where you could get very near them assuming the guard wasn’t watching too closely, and all of it with a starry-eyed disco-ball aesthetic indicating you were in a space lounge.

So yes, items from the museum were now going to be sold to the highest bidder in a few months. These were some of them, and likely there would be more.

And then, among the relics, I found Stephen Jones.

Stephen Jones and I go a long way back. He was interviewed by me for the BBS Documentary in 2003. So that’s 20 years I’ve known the guy. At our interview session, he showed me his PXL-2000 and his Delorean, both of which I can assure you are high-end geek possessions of the time. And I found his conversation style charming, and his passion for technical subjects perfect for my film.

Stephen’s primary non-profit endeavor, the SDF Public Access UNIX system, was in full swing back then, and is still around now. “Do cool computer things, but don’t try to turn everything into a financial instrument” is not the motto, but it should be. It represents, to me, a lovely ideal of a truly living computer community, incorporating new technology as it expresses itself being something neat, or worth bringing in. Laptop Amish, if you’re stretching around for an anology, which you shouldn’t be. It’s a computer club. And he’s a big part of it.

He was also my initial “in” for the dish on the now-not-so-Living Computer Museum. We’d gone a long way, and here we were, in Christie’s in New York City, standing among offered-for-auction pieces of a gone billionaire’s museum, and maybe we needed to talk in detail, so we did. And I grilled him.

Let’s go back to that initial 2011 announcement page on the Living Computers Museum website, before it was officially an open building.

In the light of its piecemeal disassembly, a lot of this writing hits different. Here’s what I’ve picked up, from Stephen and others, and which I assume for some readers will be new information.

First, this was always intended to be an actual, non-profit, independent/independent-subsidiary museum. It never became that. It is not that. At best, the Living Computer Museum was a billionaire’s (sorry, multi-billionaire’s) collection of computers and technology.

Think of it another way: Jay Leno has a very famous garage that has many wonderful cars and vehicles in it. It is currently, as of this writing, run by a very competent manager named Bernard Juchli, who has been keeping the collection in line for over 20 years. That is, to say, that Leno has a massive collection of cars, competent staff to take care of it, facilities to show them (he has had a number of documentaries and television shows about the garage) and he could probably even open it to the public for an admission price. But you would be hard pressed to call it a “museum” in any sense beyond “it is a display people see videos about”.

As per the request in that 2011 webpage grab, people donated many computers and pieces of history to go into the museum. They expected, no doubt, that they and their children and their childen’s children could stop by displays and point and talk about the family connection to these items.

That was a mirage, a misunderstanding.

This was Paul’s collection of computers, aided by friends and fans. It was always that. The Living Computer Museum, it turns out, cost millions, over ten million a year, to operate as it was set up, and it never came close to making that amount of income from door sales and t-shirts. It never came close to even figuring out how it would.

It’s perhaps not surprising this misunderstanding could happen, and with what felt like all the time in the world, a mere five years and change of being open to the public might have seemed like a mere revving up for the grand plan of what would come next. But nothing came next. It was a collection you could walk through in a really, really nice display case.

And now it’s time to sell the collection.

Before I end up on a huge rant about what it means to be a museum, let me at least give you some relative good news.

The current rough plan is that the big-ticket items, like this Apple I, will be sold at auction. They’ll make beaucoup bucks, go into private collections or maybe even other institutions, and that’s that for the headliners. But that leaves a lot of other stuff.

SDF has a rough plan to raise funds and digitize software, documentation and other related items that are not part of these big-ticket sales (which will be relatively few) so that unique bits of history that are not headline-grabbing trinkets will, potentially, have a chance at being shared with the public.

And I’ve stepped into it. I’ve offered to take software and documentation and store it at the Internet Archive, and of course to work with SDF on ways to digitize/rip/scan materials and, also, host them at the Internet Archive.

It’s all preliminary, but my card is in the hat. Things are not going to be discarded, if I have anything to do with it. A lot can change, and we’ve already seen expectation vs. outcome with this whole experience, but rest assured, I’ve at least tried to provide one last safety net for the kind of history that easily finds itself gone because nobody steps forward. Internet Archive has stepped forward. Stay tuned to see how that works out.

But you know, what did we learn here? What did we actually come away with in the realm of lessons or teachings about what issues this whole mishegaas has churned up?

I have found, perhaps not to my surprise, that a few people in my orbit are displeased I have punched the dead billionaire, ostensibly about all the good the dead billionaire did. But I wish to point out the dead billionaire did give away all that money and yet still had 20 billion dollars at the end, money that went off and did not do as many nice things as the money given away. So much contributed, tax-free, and yet there’s even more. Perhaps this is not the best place to point out that every billionaire is, in many ways, a failure of society, but maybe we can put a pin in it when we have our first trillionaire, assuming that criticizing a trillionaire is not made illegal at that soonish juncture.

I did have some people say, in not so many words, that of course the Living Computer Museum would collapse once its Master of the House was no longer in charge, and I would take this time to point out that Gordon Bell, co-founder of the Computer History Museum, passed on in May of 2024 and yet the Computer History Museum lives and breathes in his absence. It wasn’t a hard problem.

It’s easy to call me ungrateful, but my ungratefulness comes from the narrative people weave near the power of money, like those myths formed around gods and devils, to explain why things are how they are. I appreciate life and its little whorls and eddies that capture us by surprise and we sink or swim. I do not appreciate acting like someone spending a lot of money on something that slightly amuses them earns them the greatest respect. Especially when, as I do now, I walk among a literal army of people working to clean up the mess left behind, after their march to oblivion.

16 Comments

The Most Interesting Uninteresting Thing — May 22, 2024

Imagine, if you will, a vast river.

It flows fast, so fast that when you look away and look back it’s in many ways an entirely different river, not just a slightly different one. It used to be blue with an occasional brown or black. Nowadays, it’s basically brown and black and a signficant amount of it lets off a slow-moving steam that you’re positive causes cancer in 99% of living things. You used to swim in this river, but now you generally don’t, and by “generally don’t” you mean “never”.

Instead your interactions are thus:

You have an occasional cinderblock you wouldn’t feel comfortable throwing in the tiny lagoon you mostly hang out in, or the notably smaller (and cleaner, and calmer) rivers you swim in these days.

So, you walk down to the bank of the river of lost dreams and sulfuric nightmares and throw that cinderblock as far as you can to see what sort of massive splash it causes, and what horrors lurking underneath its surface will temporarily breach to snap and bite and thrash until it goes back to a flowing, nauseating shit-river.

Anyway, that’s how I tweet.

I wrote up this massive framing entry to prepare to write a meaningful weblog entry about what we’re all calling AI but is just “throwing so many GPUs at the problem that our inherent need to find fellow souls in the darkness does the rest”. I call it “Algorithmic Intensity” and started the journey of writing a contextual entry to give my thoughts considering 40 plus years with computers, hype cycles and expectations of technology.

I ended up not doing it, primarily because a lot of the same effort that took writing weblog material and doing presentations is mostly taken up by The Podcast. The amount of paying subscribers has dwindled over the six (!) years it’s been recording, but those folks do help with my medical bills and other costs, so they’re kind of getting the best of me, and definitely the best of my efforts. I mean, don’t worry, I like you too, errant reader from beyond the screen – but those folks keep my office rented, my doctors’ visits stress-from-bills-free and allow me not play Old Yeller with my domains.

This balancing act, of doing free and by some definitions altruistic sharing of information with the nitty gritty costs of material goods and services and vendors is the absolute classic conundrum, and lies at the heart of many an Internet Presence. One of my credoes when I’m talking to people who want to do some sort of endeavor is that Every Person Is At Least Five People when it regards to ongoing concerns that produce work on a persistent basis. Someone blasting out an epic every half-decade or so aside, if you find a “person” doing “a lot”, the chances are that that person has other people, friends or collaborators or employees, who are doing some of the lifting. To consider those people lone wolves is usually a fallacy, and therefore there are somewhat-hidden costs or measures of contribution that are leading to the thing you just … get to have.

I’ll save some comments on AI for the end. Let’s get to why I’m writing this at all.

The cinderblock I threw into the Twitter crap-stream was a comment that Google had made yet another user interface/experience shift, and in my opinion, this took a number of skirmishes the company has been waging against the idea of the world wide web and moved, intentionally or not, into outright war.

The actual content of the thread is sort of irrelevant to me; but just to satisfy curiousity, I was essentially indicating this: Google forcing, by default, to a majority of users over time to see a generated summary of the output of the aggregate browsed sets of material out on the internet, especially at the low-quality they’re doing it, is a fundamental shift in the implied social contract that allowed search engines to gain the utility they have. I did it in a handful of crappy tweets and was literally in between some Gyoza and my Sushi lunch and when I noticed sometime later that I was getting tons of notifications (I don’t have twitter as a client on my phone anymore, so I didn’t get buzzing or beeps or anything) and when I ran the analytics that the account has, the numbers were fucking ridiculous:

“My child has been kidnapped; if you see a grey Toyota with red stripes, call the police” deserves those kinds of numbers. So does “I, person responsible for ten years for this beloved product or franchise, was just summarily fired for unknown reasons”.

“I think Google made a boo-boo” absolutely does not.

But justice doesn’t exist for this sort of lottery, and I watched the flaming pyre of attention gain millions of (partial) humans and tens of thousands of “Engagements”, and I have a general rule about all this.

All this to say that once we’re up to this level of froth, whatever’s coming out of it has the stretched-almost-transparent feel of an already flimsy nylon sock over a 55-gallon drum of toxic waste. Twitter used to be amusingly knockabout in the variance of Opinion Tourists who would stop by for a quick hit; now it’s just a series of either “didn’t read” or “I am stopping by because the only way I feel anymore is the resistance from sticking a blade against your rib cage”.

On my cold read of the actual responses with actual words, they are best summarized as:

You say AI-generated summaries are a step too far from Google. I do not like previous Google steps.
It’s actually all great and you are old. (Someone called me a Boomer, but heaven’s sakes, I’m Gen X)
Everything is terrible and this is terrible and you are terrible
Herp Derp Dorp Duh (Rough translation)

Let’s waste the time with what I was bringing up, in a slightly cogent fashion:

For sure, Google has both innovated some amazing accesses to realms of information (Maps) and often provided a (usually bought from someone else) product that many might find useful (Mail) and has done services which take advantage of their well-funded technology to provide a nominal benefit to the world (the 8.8.8.8 DNS server). They’ve also, in their quest to make the web “better”, leveraged their near-monopoly on browser engines and search engines to create “programs” and “policies” that are little more than “make it better for Google” (AMP comes to mind, there’s many more).

Google’s constantly manipulation of web standards to suit their needs does not make them special; they’re just the assholes with a hand on the steering wheel for now. And like previous holders of this title, they’ve poisoned, cajoled, forced, ignored and ripped their way through standards, potential competitors and independent voices and figures along the way.

Picking out any specific sin (or “hustle”, as shallow techbros like to call it) is usually a Sisyphean task, but in the actual thing I was referring to in my tweet cinderblock, it was a program that Google implemented where an AI “summary” is showing up in a growing set of mobile and desktop instances (customers), completely choking off anything one might point to. I called this a declared war against the web. It is not the only war. It is not only warfare against the web. Picking it apart reveals chains linking to a thousand points of contention. I’d hoped to avoid AI discussion for some time but here we go.

I have lived through a variety of “revolutions” and hype cycles of said revolutions, and the fallout and resultant traces of same. I did a documentary about one. I enjoyed living through the others, although with time it’s been a case that I was often not old enough or given enough perspective to truly look down the sights of what was going on and derive a proper horror/entertainment from the various ups and downs.

And now, one version of a type of software that has been around for a long time is suddenly on everyone’s minds. It’s being used to make a variety of toys. A number of people are hooking those toys up to heart machines and bombs. And I’m fifty years old and I get to watch it all with a pleasant cola in my hand.

I’m profoundly cynical but I’m not generally apocalyptic. For me, what’s being called “Artificial Intelligence” and all the more reasonable non-anthropomorphizing terms is just a new nutty set of batch scripts, except this time folks are actually praying to them. That’s high comedy.

Also, my eyelids are growing heavy and I literally have to caffienate myself to keep talking about it. Fundamentally, there’s as much excitement for me in the “potential” of everything AI as there was for double-sided floppies, sub-$500 flatscreen televisions, console emulators, USB sticks, MiniDV cameras, and discount airflight. All of them enact change. All of them are logical innovation. All of them stayed, morphed, went. At no point in any of them did I have apoplexy or spiraling mental breakdowns. Life went on.

Regarding of “something should be done”, the point of my original planned weblog entry was to refer to the Aboveground as something some AI companies were doing – straddling that balance of “we are too new to be regulated or guided” and “it’s too late, we’re basically ungovernable”. My attitude is that Algorithmic Intensity should be punched in the crib, given a solid going over. I had a conversation with one AI person that “farm to table” tracing of the source material being trained on would be a must and that companies should be devising ways to provide that information. He said it was impossible. It is not impossible.

When I mess with this stuff (and I have accounts on a bunch of these services, that I mess around with), I have a fantastic time. I am doing all sorts of experiments and try-outs of the tech to see if it has uses for what I deal in, which is scads of information. My response continues to be, as it always has for something new, that setting the old stuff on fire to “force innovation” is a sign you are a world-class huckleberry. The main change in this particular round is I can’t remember a time we had so many people showing their whole and entire ass by saying “I can’t wait to fire ______ because this MAKESHITUP.BAT file is producing reasonably full sentences”. What a lovely tell. In my middle age, being able to have something go “beep” when a time-wasting numbnut has entered the chat is a golden algorithm, and the speed at which companies and individuals have been willing to throw everything out, reputation-wise, is a glorious moment.

Which brings me, again, to this specific Google situation.

There’s just no way the high-fructose syrup of the kind of answers these “smart agent” responses are giving in search engines will last. A number of people on Twitter told me that if a site could be summarized in 200 characters by this, they never deserved to exist anyway. Problem is, the 200 characters are NOT summarizing the site. It’s not even often good! It might get “better” but ultimately companies like this do not have the ability or skill to generate new creations or do helpful works – they can only remix and re-offer, buying out the same collections or licensing access. And if those terms are not good, they’re going to lose a lot of money buying back trust.

I don’t like writing about non-timeless things, but we are in a phase right now and that phase is both fleeting and extraordinarily entertaining to me. As I said to a friend recently,

“We get to be 50 and watching this all go down! Front row seats!”

How this all shakes out, what parts stick around and what snaps in half, is for luck and spite and challenge and response to decide. If the best people always won, our world would look and feel a lot different. But while the fireworks and trumpet blasts echo through the landscape, I’ll save a seat for you.

7 Comments

A Never-Ending Block Party — April 21, 2024

Kerfuffles are Kerfuffles. Causing one recently, with its particularly low-stakes aspects (what’s done is done, no actions appear to be planned, I’m already doing things differently, etc.) allowed me to at least re-visit a policy I’ve been somewhat silently instituting for years.

I block. I block frequently, quickly, and across every single medium that consitutes “communication” in the contemporary era.

I’ve been doing it for well over a decade, but somewhere after my heart attack I upped the frequency and dropped the level at which the “block” action gets enacted. It is very, very easy to find yourself unable to directly communicate with me via the method I blocked you.

Why anyone would possibly care that I do this (beyond the people I block) is not entirely my responsibility, but I think there’s a point, so let’s keep going.

First, I’m rather easy to find and communicate with. I have many channels of ingress, from phone numbers and e-mails to social media and streaming. I do this mostly because I’m trying to be there when people have materials to donate to Internet Archive, or if they’re in distress and need to reach out to someone. Both these situations happen more than one might think. I appreciate both when they do, and do my best under the circumstances.

But the downside is that people can reach me very easily and all your instincts that there are spectacular counts of truly damaged individuals who have effortlessly acquired internet access and spray their damage around the world like some urine-filled lawn sprinker are, as I can personally attest, correct.

At some point, depending on how far back you have persisted online, there was this unspoken contract that you gave someone multiple bites of the apple to show how awful they were, under the theory that the first interaction was an inadvertently bad impression. That contract is no longer in effect. That’s a large contingency of folks gone; the masters of showing up in the middle of a conversation or communication, unbidden and unwanted, and dropping absolute bile into the stream. One strike and they’re out.

Occasionally, I even pre-block. I block people who, when I see them interacting with others, I have no overly powerful urge to envision ever being a part of their online lives. I suppose there’s some fundamental Fear of Missing Out that could be ginned up regarding them, that they might end up saying or doing something that I should know about, but I’ll let others tell me. There are a non-zero amount of times I’ve seen people say “Foobatz69 has a point” and I go look them up and I’ve blocked Foobatz69. Maybe I’ll peek in. I probably won’t.

Less obviously, it goes the other way too. In a notable amount of situations, I’ve blocked people because I recognize that I’m going to be the problem, that what I do and how I approach things are exactly the sort of activity that makes a given person or account go ballistic or switch to attack mode, so I save us both the trouble. I occasionally hear they’re confused. I do not seek to explain why. They continue to live a normal and happy life, and I continue along with mine.

So, why bring this all up?

Well, first, occasional this-and-that publicity has provided me with the ability to see discussions about myself in which a small number of blocked folks commiserated about the whole “Jason blocked me” situation and of course many have taken the Imagination Express to Injustice Town to describe a situation where I could possibly have come to the decision to block, and the general consensus will be some variation of a degredation of my mental health.

It’s quite the opposite. My mental health has never been better.

Outside of absolute buzzbomb cornhusks dropping corossive misery at every opportunity, there were a range of folks who I truly admired and respected who, upon my looking back retrospectively at our interactions across years, totally lacked warmth and friendliness from their position. Literally every response a vicious insult and somehow, I’d considered this a pleasant and comfortable dish to be served down the front of my tuxedo on common occasions. Their blockage is literally medication, a salve, an ointment. I’m free of my delusion that they are friends.

And again, there are folks who, I find, are going to be nothing but negative energy in my life, at a time when I am growing older and don’t see much need to throw my body and life into a deep dark well of irrelevant free-floating rage, never to be recovered or rewarded.

And you know? On at least a half-dozen occasions, which is more than any reasonable person should experience, I’ve had individuals who, upon being blocked and clearly indicated their presence and communication were unwelcome, proceed to track down and find every single communication channel still open to them and begin upping the energetic demands I explain myself. I’m talking chat systems, phone calls, e-mails from various addresses, and asking friends of mine who might still have contact with me to “put in a word” to “set the record straight”. In other words, I have entirely too many examples where people I had a bad feeling about have gone absolute full stalker mode, in a way that they would never imagine themselves as such, but absolutely are. On two of those six occasions, it happened physically.

None of those half-dozen are being unblocked. That was not the solution to the percieved issue.

I’m sharing this not for some sort of support plea, or to indicate I have a hard life. I have the mathematical opposite of a hard life.

I’m sharing it on the off-chance that someone reads this, realizes their relationship with someone or someones online is actually a massive negative energy drain, or rife with abuse, or simply a case of not realizing you’ve left a pathway to lightweight harassment that can do nothing but increase. If that’s the case, trust me. Block, block, block. Report and block. Mute and block. You will feel parts of your soul unclench that you didn’t previously understand were balled into tights fist of stress and simmering disaster. I’m involved in dozens, sometimes hundreds of interactions in a given week, and I do it. You should consider this your license to do it as well.

If this helps two people, it was worth it to discuss. And it’s already helped one, and that one is me.

5 Comments

I Continue To No Longer Attend Vintage Computer Festivals — April 12, 2024

As should be expected, a number of individuals have come forward with responses to the initial blog post. While I do not expect everyone to take even a passing interest in the rabbit-hole of the situation or the context, I figured it was worth writing a few quick addendums.

Naturally, as is the case when you post anything anywhere in public, I am called a liar. I’ll simply say that everything I describe in the blog entry happened. I contacted a VCF administrator and was told it was all disposed of, and that they kept the bins. I am fine with people claiming that disposal was not what happened, but this is what I was told, directly, in human words. The fact that I am seeing contradictory and confusing descriptions of what happened is not a checkmark destined for the Win column.

A few people have rushed to indicate that I need to be more careful describing “which” VCF entity is at fault. I am sad to report to them all that the Byzantine VCF structure of name licensing, geographic branding, and internal corporate entity is meaningless to anyone six inches away. You all know each other and you all interchangeably use nomenclature. If you are part of an organization that calls itself some form of “VCF” and need an opportunity to write a statement about how your organization in a solitary/separate entity and should be considered more worthy or ethical than others, feel absolutely free.

A small sliver of people were concerned I was saying that I was never going to go to any computer history conference or event again. I am a free person with the freedom to attend whatever is open to the public. As it stood, however, VCF East was the easiest event for me to attend, so it was where I saw people the most. A minor point is that I considered attendance a form of endorsement, but that is my own personal choice. The chances of me attending other events is, like death by cow, low but never zero.

The rest of the discussions I have seen from the blog entry, raging in the usual stages of social media and posting forums, have failed to require any further response or thought from me personally.

Finally, this is all relatively minor in terms of the work I do and projects I focus on, an event that brought me some fury but which has mostly played the part of filed under “life lessons”. I just got tired of having quiet inward emotion when I was reminded of the event, specifically when VCF announcements would pass by my screen, followed by nice folks asking if they would be seeing me at the event. Now I have made a statement, and rather than the beginning of a saga, I consider it the end of one. My conversations with people and organizations I shift materials to are much longer, much more involved, and with much more contingencies as a result of this event, and things are better for it.

18 Comments

I Am No Longer Attending Vintage Computer Festivals — April 11, 2024

I spent some time trying to figure out when to make this announcement in a way that didn’t seem like direct sabotage; the day before the VCF East event seems about right.

Years ago, clearing out the Information Cube, I donated its contents to roughly 10 organizations, carefully splitting things up for the best home, as I’d been entrusted with these materials by many great folks who believed I’d make the right choices. Videogames went to the Museum of Art and Digital Entertainment, books and many printed materials to the Internet Archive, piles of game-related magazines went to the Strong Museum of Play, multiple sets of Wired magazine went to a scanning group, and so on. This was a shipping container worth of material, so we are talking dozens and dozens of crates, received by trustworthy and great folks across the entire country.

Among these donations were a set of publications, mostly IEEE-related but with a few other sets of titles, to the Vintage Computer Federation, based in New Jersey. The donation was roughly this:

To make this donation, I paid for the containers, filled them, put many issues in bags, and then rented a truck to drive them the roughly 70 miles to the VCF headquarters in Wall, NJ. There I dropped them off and went home. This was roughly 2017.

A number of years later, I contacted the Vintage Computer Federation to ask how the magazines were doing, if they were part of a project, or if I needed to transfer them elsewhere.

I was told they tossed them out. Every one.

However, I was told, they had decided to keep the plastic boxes, and were making use of them.

As a result, I’ll state clearly: I have no intention of attending the Vintage Computer Festival or doing any sort of interaction with the VCF team again.

I’m mentioning this because I went to so many of the festivals, I know people would be expecting me to go, and I get mail every year looking forward to my attendance. I have indicated I would not be there, but not totally explained why. Now I have. I consider attendance to be an endorsement of this action, and I am fundamentally uninterested in whatever clumped-together set of words they might consider an apology. The concern is dead to me.

I also want to take this moment to clearly state that Evan Koblentz, the director of the Vintage Computer Federation for many years, who took the original donation, had absolutely no say or part in this pulping of historical magazines, having been driven out of the organization years before. Evan has always been a steel beam of dependable honesty and directness in all the years I’ve known him, which is bordering on decades at this point.

There’s not much else to say. Go if you want, but I won’t be there. Hopefully I will see some of the nice folks I know from the event in other contexts. Otherwise, it has been quite real, and they’re memories I won’t trash for their containers.

36 Comments

In Realtime: Digital Heaven (And a Call for Donations) — February 2, 2024

Imagine an epic of nine years having a happy ending.

I’ve written so much about what is now called the Manuals Plus Collection. Let’s go find those:

In Realtime: Saving 25,000 Manuals
In Realtime: Prepping for the Transfer of 25,000 Manuals
In Realtime: It Is Almost Halfway Done
In Realtime: Day 2 Felt Like Week 4
In Realtime: It Is Done
A Small Dark Detour
In Realtime: Post-Mortem
A Little Bit of the Manuals

If you don’t want to walk those, I’ll make it simple: I got word in 2015 of a collection of manuals inside a business that was getting out of the business, and while a lot of well-meaning people talked a good game, they wanted to cherry-pick (people getting rid of stuff hate cherry-pickers), and I drove down to show I was serious, and after a week of work with MANY volunteers and contributors, we ended up with pallets of documentation inside boxes, numbering something like 50,000-60,000 manuals. (A rough estimate.)

Then they were stored in a storage unit. Then they were stored in a closed coffee house. Then they were transported to California. Then they were stored until last year, 2023.

Last year, a group called DLARC, doing digitizing and indexing projects around ham radio and radio technology, worked with me and the archive to sort out a few pallets of the manuals for products related to the history of radio/network technology, and off they went overseas to be scanned. And as of this month, the evaluated, professionally-scanned and available-to-the-world manuals are beginning to show up in this collection:

The Manuals Plus Collection

Like, it’s happening! It’s happening. It’s happening!

Like anything else open at Internet Archive, you can search the text contents (which are being automatically OCR-ed). You can download the original unformatted jp2 files in a zip. You can download a PDF generated from the jp2 files. You can read it online.

Either this is the first time you’ve heard of all this going on, or you’ve known about it and wondered whatever happened to that mass of manuals.

They’ve been kept in safekeeping, awaiting their moment. We reboxed them, and in fact, transporting them from MD to CA was the last major project I did before my heart attack. It might have been the last thing I ever did for the Archive! That would have been a pretty good way to go out.

But here, in 2024, the final stretch is going on.

And now, the pitch.

The group doing the digitizing does lots of digitizing for the Internet Archive. They are well-paid and legitimate professional contractors who are sent the items, and who do careful scanning to the best of the materials’ ability to provide access to the information, and then do quality checks, and then upload them. When they’re humming, they’re processing a pallet every couple of weeks (with lots of mitigating factors). They’re going to get through the four pallets sent to them from the DLARC sorting very quickly, in other words.

I’ve negotiated a situation where, if money is sent in, the remaining pallets that should be scanned can just be sent along without sorting them for DLARC funds, DLARC will fund any that happen to overlap with their mission, and the rest will just be done.

That’s if money is sent in.

How much money? We’re still working that number out. It’s going to be somewhere in the range of tens of thousands of dollars. So I’m looking for both big-ticket supporters (who can mail me at jason@textfiles.com) or individuals. In all cases, you’re just going to donate to the Internet Archive itself, which is at https://archive.org/donate and your donations are tax-deductible. Telling them you’re donating to support this project will help keep the project funded. (There’s a way to leave a comment, and if not, send me a note you did it and how much).

We’ve already sorted these things into pallets, and we know a subset of these (HP and Tektronix) are scanned elsewhere and don’t need to be specifically done this way. This leaves just the historically vital and informationally wonderful manuals dating from the 1940s through the 2000s. As they’re popping up, each one is a gift.

If we make less than we need to scan them all, then we’ll only scan up to where it’s paid for. I believe we can close it out, but if the interest/money isn’t there, then it isn’t there – fair enough. Browse the collection as it grows into thousands of manuals as it is and consider if you want to be part of all that. That’s definitely happening.

But what a happy ending it would be to push all these manuals through the process, and close it up. That’s why I’m popping up to talk about it, and why I hope you would consider contributing towards it, for a non-profit that deserves your support generally.

Meanwhile: It’s happening! It’s happening. It’s happening!!

2 Comments

< Older Entries

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

29. Steve Jobs in Exile – New book on his years at NeXT Computer

Source: https://spectrum.ieee.org/steve-jobs-next-computer
Site: IEEE Spectrum
Author: Gwendolyn Rak
Published: 2026-05-14
HN activity: 194 points · 156 comments
Length: 1.9K words (~9 min read)
Language: en

Whenever you read about Steve Jobs, odds are the words “Apple CEO” follow closely behind. The mythic cofounder of one of today’s biggest tech companies is strongly associated with the role, but his tenure as CEO was shorter than many of us realize.

In fact, when Jobs was exiled from Apple in the 1980s and ’90s, he spent almost as much time leading another computer company that has largely been forgotten: NeXT Computer. In his forthcoming book Steve Jobs in Exile, journalist and author Geoffrey Cain tells the story of Jobs’s years at NeXT Computer from 1985 to 1997.

It’s a story worth remembering, with Apple, now 50 years old, in the midst of another CEO transition. John Ternus, previously the senior vice president of hardware, is set to take over the reins from Tim Cook this September. Looking back at Jobs’s NeXT years reveals what he had to learn for Apple to succeed.

Cain spoke with IEEE Spectrum about his book, Jobs’s legacy, and Apple today. Steve Jobs in Exile comes out 19 May 2026.

Why did you choose to focus on this period of Jobs’s life?

The story we always hear about Steve Jobs is that he founded Apple version 1.0, and he was brilliant there. And then he was fired, and he went into the wilderness for a short while. He returned and created Apple version 2.0, which was the iPod, the iPhone, and the iPad, turning Apple into the $4 trillion company that it is today. That’s the popular narrative we hear.

But that’s not an accurate story. That’s the legend, but it’s not what actually happened.

I was a tech writer for a long time, and I had been diving into the history of these major tech figures. In my reporting, I went around the world, and everywhere I went, people were talking about Steve Jobs. It was sort of like, “let’s study the life of Steve Jobs and try to extract school lessons from it.” That’s what a lot of young entrepreneurs and engineers were telling me.

I quickly realized from interviewing former colleagues of Steve Jobs that only half the story was being told, and it glossed over these entire middle 12 years in the legacy of Steve Jobs. He died when he was [56] years old. That’s a third of his adult life, and he spent it at this company called NeXT Computer.

[NeXT] was the source of major advancements in software, especially, but also in hardware, and it had been completely forgotten by history. Not only was this a significant company historically, but today it’s the foundation for all the operating systems that Apple has developed since then. When you look at an Apple device today, in a way you’re looking at NeXT Computer.

NeXT and Apple were both startups that were spearheaded by Jobs. Why were their fates so different?

Their fates were different, but their fates merged. So why were their fates different? Well, Apple version one was a failure in many ways, and we tend to forget that the Macintosh itself was not a commercial success. And so Apple version one, not a success, and NeXT Computer, not a success at first. The reason is, in part, because Steve Jobs was not ready.

Today we mythologize him as the great visionary of our era, the king of entrepreneurs. But he was immature, egotistical, and brash. He made a lot of decisions at both Apple and NeXT that damaged the company and the careers of people who were working for him.

Yes, Steve Jobs was always talented. He was a visionary, but he had to learn the craft of discipline. He had to learn to apply his talents to the limits of the markets, what people were willing to buy.

But to go back to your question, why did NeXT fail? Steve Jobs was making bad decisions, and the hardware division shut down. They laid off more than half of the company’s employees. Why did Apple succeed? In the end, it’s because Steve Jobs was more circumspect and mature by the time he returned. He was able to bring these people together and build the Apple Renaissance, starting with the iPod, or maybe the iMac if you want to go back further. With those products in the late ’90s and early 2000s, that’s where he made his mark, and that’s why we remember him today.

Jobs’s Vision: Perfect Integration of Hardware and Software

You make the point in the book that software engineers were Jobs’s “favored inner circle.” But Apple is well known for building hardware and software together. How did his priorities affect the company’s trajectory?

Steve Jobs’s vision for Apple was always the perfect integration of hardware and software. From the beginning, he saw the value in controlling the whole experience, end-to-end, for the user. But the question that not many people have asked is: How did he actually build that? A lot of startup founders want to create a seamless ecosystem, but you can only achieve that vision if you have a lot of scale and leverage over the market. That’s what he had to learn during his NeXT Computer years.

His customers for NeXT Computer were universities, laboratories, intelligence agencies, people who were buying high-end computers that could do the most advanced data analysis and software applications of the time. It took him a long time to realize that his customers actually wanted the software, which was built on a real revolution at the time called “object oriented programming.”

Computers in the 1980s were really difficult to program. He discovered at NeXT Computer that he could build beautiful software using what are called “objects”—items that, essentially, are pre-programmed in a library. This is how apps are made today, and Steve Jobs was doing this in 1988. As a result, the first ever app store appeared on a NeXT computer.

Steve Jobs in Exile: The Untold Story of NeXT and the Remaking of an American Visionary is out 19 May. Portfolio/Penguin Random House

This is fairly common usage today, but at the time it was comparable to the transformation happening now, from the app stores of the past era to AI agents and generative AI. He was on the cusp of a transformation, and he had to realize that that transformation was what mattered.

Software was his priority, and it became an even greater priority over time. But there’s a lesson here, specifically for engineers and scientists, that sometimes it’s not clear what the significance is of something you’re working on right now. Often there are elements within a project that are actually the real gold mine, and we just don’t see it yet.

That’s what makes me really interested in the big transformations now happening with AI. I often wonder, if Steve Jobs were still alive, what he would be doing now. The moment that we live in now would really be a Steve Jobs moment.

Jobs also purchased Pixar during this period. How does that compare to his experience with NeXT?

The story of Pixar is different from NeXT. Pixar was struggling. It used to make something called the image computer, and it cost more than [US] $100,000. They were using it in sci-fi movies back in the ’80s, but Hollywood studios weren’t really adopting it. And in the end, some of its main customers were the CIA and the National [Security] Agency.

Similar to NeXT computer, Steve bet wrong on hardware once again at the beginning. And so he had to close the hardware division at Pixar, and he focused on making software called RenderMan. RenderMan was their main product, and it was used to make Toy Story and the other great films of Pixar.

The difference from NeXT, though, is that Pixar did become a success, even though the hardware division closed. [Pixar cofounder] Ed Catmull and [founding employee, later chief creative officer] John Lasseter told Steve, when he bought it from George Lucas, that he had to stay out of creative meetings. That was the deal, and Steve respected it. They were able to make Toy Story, and it was just a [huge] success. It was the IPO that made Steve Jobs a billionaire.

Pixar was the company that he became more focused on in the later years of this wilderness. He focused on the dealmaking, the relationship with Disney—the side of being a business executive. That’s where he excelled, and that’s where he was able to make Pixar shine.

What Does New Apple CEO Ternus Need to Do?

John Ternus will be taking over as Apple CEO in September. What was your reaction to the announcement?

There are people out there who are saying that John Ternus needs to invent the new iPhone. I understand where they’re coming from, but I just don’t agree with the conclusions.

You have to remember that the masterpiece age of Apple was only about seven years. It lasted from 2001 to 2008 when they released their main products. The historical conditions and the leadership team that were able to create those massive successes just doesn’t exist anymore.

Apple has matured into a $4 trillion corporation. Tim Cook was a supply chain expert and built it into the giant it is. And really, what John Ternus has to do now is maintain the success. He’s not here to build the one blowout product. Apple is a company that’s become so successful that their products are integrated into everyday life. So that’s a success that John Ternus is, I think, being appointed to maintain, and it’s not by any means a Steve Jobs story.

What do you think it will mean for Apple to be run by someone who’s coming from the hardware engineering side of things?

Apple has admitted that it’s behind on AI. They signed a big partnership with Google, and now they’re reworking the entire foundation of Siri to be on top of Google AI, which is a big shift in software, because Apple’s always been tightly controlling things in-house.

Geoffrey Cain is a bestselling author of books on technology and business, including Samsung Rising and The Perfect Police State. Beowulf Sheehan

So I actually see their future more like a hardware company. I think they’re still going to make great [software]. It’s just not going to be the cutting-edge anymore. That ground is moving over towards OpenAI and Google and software-oriented companies. Apple’s strength is absolutely hardware, and they’re going to continue to focus on that, because that’s what they do best.

In the next few years, AI is going to very quickly get integrated into everyday life. I think that, especially at Apple, they’re going to release AI, but it’s not going to be in your face. It’s more like the AI is running in the background, and it’s doing what it needs to do. If Apple can master that, I think that’s going to help them a lot. If they can release another iPhone that’s really well built for AI, but you don’t see the AI, people are going to buy Apple.

Anything else you’d like to say about Apple or your book?

The history that I was writing about was the transition from hardware to software that happened in the 1990s, and I think the story is very relevant, in a way. We’re now entering the next big transition, and we’re entering a wilderness ourselves. And so this is the kind of story that we can go back to, and we can see what Steve Jobs and his people were doing at the time to try to understand the times that we live in now.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

30. A SQL-Inspired Query Language Designed for Event Sourcing (2025)

Source: https://yoeight.github.io/blog/2025/12/21/EventQL_A_SQL_Inspired_Query_Language_Designed_For_Event_Sourcing.html
Site: The Normandy’s Code
Submitter: goloroden (Hacker News)
Published: 2025-12-21
HN activity: 23 points · 2 comments
Length: 1.1K words (~5 min read)
Language: en-US

The Normandy's Code

My personal blog

Project maintained by YoEight Hosted on GitHub Pages — Theme by mattgraham

Event sourcing has become an increasingly popular architectural pattern, but querying event streams efficiently has remained a challenge. While events are append-only and immutable, finding specific events or analyzing patterns across thousands or millions of events requires thoughtful query design. This is where EventQL shines.

The Problem with Querying Events

When working with event-sourced systems, you’re dealing with fundamentally different data structures than traditional databases:

Events have rich metadata: type, subject, timestamp, data payload
Events are organized hierarchically through subjects (e.g., /books/42, /users/123/orders/456)
You need to filter, aggregate, and transform streams of events
Performance depends heavily on leveraging the right indexes

Traditional NoSQL query interfaces often fall short because they weren’t designed with these event-specific characteristics in mind.

Enter EventQL

EventQL is a query language originally designed for EventSourcingDB by The Native Web. What makes it special is how well it captures the essence of event querying while maintaining SQL’s familiar expressiveness.

Here’s a simple example:

FROM e IN events
WHERE e.type == "io.eventsourcingdb.library.book-acquired"
  AND e.data.price > 20
PROJECT INTO {
  id: e.id,
  title: e.data.title,
  price: e.data.price
}


If you’ve written SQL, this feels immediately familiar. But notice how it’s tailored for events: we’re filtering by event type, accessing nested data payloads, and reshaping the output.

Why EventQL’s Design Matters

1. First-Class Event Properties

EventQL treats event metadata as first-class citizens in the query language:

e.type - Filter by event type
e.subject - Query by subject hierarchy
e.id - Reference specific events
e.time - Time-based sorting and filtering
e.data.* - Deep access into event payloads

Each of these properties represents an indexing opportunity. A well-designed event store can create indexes on types, subjects, and timestamps, making these queries blazingly fast.

2. Subject Hierarchies Enable Smart Scoping

One of EventQL’s most powerful features is subject pattern matching:

FROM e IN events
WHERE e.subject == "/books/42"
ORDER BY e.time DESC
TOP 100
PROJECT INTO e


Subject hierarchies like /books/42 or /users/123/orders/456 are natural in event sourcing. They represent aggregate boundaries and allow you to:

Scope queries to specific aggregates
Create subject-based indexes for rapid lookups
Build hierarchy-aware queries (though not shown in basic examples)

This makes browsing event data intuitive: “Show me all events for this book” or “What happened to this user’s orders?”

3. SQL-Like Expressiveness

EventQL borrows SQL’s proven patterns:

WHERE clauses with full boolean logic (AND, OR, NOT)
ORDER BY for sorting with ASC/DESC
GROUP BY for aggregations
TOP/SKIP for pagination
Nested subqueries for complex transformations

This means you can express intricate queries precisely:

FROM e IN (
  FROM e IN events
  WHERE e.type == "order-placed"
  PROJECT INTO {
    orderId: e.id,
    total: e.data.total
  }
)
WHERE e.total > 100
ORDER BY e.total DESC
PROJECT INTO e


4. Projection as a First-Class Concept

Unlike SQL’s optional SELECT, EventQL requires explicit projection with PROJECT INTO. This design choice makes sense for event queries where you often want to:

Reshape nested event data
Extract specific fields from payloads
Build aggregates or computed values

FROM e IN events
WHERE e.type == "book-acquired"
PROJECT INTO {
  year: YEAR(e.time),
  revenue: SUM(e.data.price)
}


The projection syntax supports arbitrary object construction, making it easy to build exactly the output shape you need.

Index-Friendly by Design

What I particularly appreciate about EventQL is how naturally it guides you toward indexable queries. Consider the common properties used in WHERE clauses:

Event type - Almost always indexed
Subject - Natural partition key
Timestamp - Essential for time-range queries
Data fields - Can be indexed selectively

A query like this:

FROM e IN events
WHERE e.type == "user-registered"
  AND e.time > "2025-01-01"
  AND e.subject == "/users"
ORDER BY e.time DESC
TOP 1000
PROJECT INTO e


Maps beautifully to a composite index on (type, time, subject). The language’s structure makes it obvious where indexes will help.

Making the Parser Production-Ready

I originally wrote a parser for EventQL while working on my GethDB database project. It worked, but it was tightly coupled to that specific use case. Recently, I decided to make it production-ready as a standalone library.

The result is a robust Rust parser that:

Provides detailed error messages with line and column numbers
Builds a strongly-typed AST suitable for query optimization
Supports the full EventQL grammar
Includes comprehensive test coverage
Can be embedded in any Rust-based event store

Type Inference: Coming Soon

The GethDB version included a type inference system that I plan to port to this library as well. The type inferencer collects as much type information as possible from the query and catches inconsistencies early.

For example, it would reject queries like this:

FROM e IN events
WHERE e.data.price == "expensive"  -- price treated as string
  AND e.data.price > 100           -- price treated as number
PROJECT INTO e


By tracking how fields are used throughout the query, the type inferencer can rule out nonsensical queries before they ever reach the database. This provides better error messages and prevents runtime failures from type mismatches.

You can find the parser on GitHub: eventql-parser

Why This Matters

Event sourcing is powerful, but it needs good tooling. A well-designed query language makes the difference between an event store that’s painful to use and one that’s a joy to work with.

EventQL gets the fundamentals right:

It’s familiar (SQL-like syntax)
It’s expressive (complex queries are possible)
It’s event-aware (designed around event properties)
It’s index-friendly (natural optimization opportunities)

If you’re building an event-sourced system, you need a way to query your events effectively. EventQL shows how to do it right.

Try It Yourself

The parser is available as a Rust crate. Here’s how to get started:

use event_query_lang::parse_query;

let query = r#"
    FROM e IN events
    WHERE e.type == "order-placed"
    ORDER BY e.time DESC
    TOP 100
    PROJECT INTO e
"#;

match parse_query(query) {
    Ok(ast) => {
        // Use the AST to execute the query
        println!("Parsed successfully!");
    }
    Err(e) => {
        eprintln!("Parse error: {}", e);
    }
}


Conclusion

Good language design is about understanding the domain deeply and creating abstractions that feel natural. EventQL does this beautifully for event sourcing.

It proves that you don’t need to reinvent the wheel - SQL’s proven patterns work wonderfully when adapted thoughtfully to event streams. The result is a query language that’s both powerful and pleasant to use.

If you’re working with event sourcing, give EventQL a look. And if you need a production-ready parser, the Rust implementation is ready to use.

This parser was built to support my work on GethDB and other event-sourced systems. If you have feedback or want to contribute, issues and PRs are welcome on GitHub.

