Hacker News Top 30 — 2026-06-05

Generated on 2026-06-05 10:41 UTC

1. Changing How We Develop Ladybird

Source: https://ladybird.org/posts/changing-how-we-develop-ladybird/
Site: ladybird.org
Submitter: EdwinHoksberg (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-05 07:26 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 280 points · 171 comments
Length: 561 words (~3 min read)
Language: en

Today we’re changing how code enters the Ladybird project.

We will no longer accept public pull requests. From now on, code changes to the Ladybird codebase will only be introduced by project maintainers.

Ladybird is moving into a new phase. As we work toward our first alpha release, the project needs a tighter development process, a clearer security model, and a smaller set of people responsible for the code that enters the browser.

This is not a change we make lightly. Many valuable contributions have come from outside the maintainer group over the years, and we are grateful for them. Many of us also came up through open source by sending patches to projects we cared about.

For decades, code contributions have been how open source projects learned who to trust. People would show up, do the work, take responsibility for their changes, and stick around. Over time, trust emerged from the work itself.

AI tools have changed the economics of this very quickly. We use them ourselves every day, but a pull request no longer tells us as much as it used to about the person submitting it. A substantial patch used to imply substantial effort, and that effort was a reasonable proxy for good faith. That assumption no longer holds.

For a browser, this matters. A browser runs untrusted input from the entire internet on the user’s machine, and one well-disguised vulnerability is all an attacker needs. We have already seen patient, well-resourced campaigns in open source to earn maintainer trust and abuse it. What has changed is how much faster and cheaper it has become to produce work that looks like a serious contribution.

At the same time, every change that enters Ladybird becomes our responsibility. It has to fit the architecture, survive future refactoring, interact correctly with the rest of the browser, and be understood by the people maintaining it.

Whether code was typed by hand is beside the point. What matters is who is responsible for it once it enters the browser. Ladybird is becoming a browser for real users. The people introducing changes to it must be the people who decide those changes belong in the project, and who will answer for the consequences.

As part of this change, we will close all currently open public pull requests. We are grateful for the work people put into them, but keeping the existing queue open would keep that contribution path open in practice. There is no perfect time to make this change, so we are making it now. Going forward, pull requests will only be available to project maintainers.

There will not be a separate process for submitting patches by other means. We do not want to create a shadow contribution system through issues, comments, email, or forks. External code can of course exist under the terms of the license, but we will not treat forks or patch dumps as a review queue for upstream Ladybird.

Ladybird remains open source. The source code will continue to be publicly available under an open source license. Outside involvement still matters: clear bug reports, reductions, website testing, standards discussion, design discussion, security reports, and technical feedback all help move the project forward.

This is the right change for Ladybird now. We are preparing to ship a browser to real users, and our development process has to match that responsibility.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

2. Tracing a powerful GNSS interference source over Europe

Source: https://arxiv.org/abs/2606.03673
Site: arXiv.org
Author: [Submitted on 2 Jun 2026]
Submitted: 2026-06-05 08:32 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 50 points · 6 comments
Length: 167 words (~1 min read)
Language: en

View PDF HTML (experimental)

Abstract:This paper analyzes and identifies a space-based Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS) interference source that has caused scores of powerful transient wide-area interference events over continental Europe, Greenland, and Canada since 2019. While terrestrial or near-terrestrial sources are primarily responsible for the recent uptick in GNSS interference worldwide, space-based interferers are of special concern given their potential for vast geographic reach and their portent of a qualitative escalation in GNSS interference. Based on data collected between 2019 and 2026 from a network of terrestrial GNSS reference stations, this paper (1) develops a received-power-based detection framework; (2) details the spatial, temporal, and spectral patterns of wide-area interference events caused by the source; (3) presents and analyzes identification techniques that blend received-power and time-difference-of-arrival measurements; and (4) applies these techniques to confidently identify the GNSS interference source as a constellation of Russian early warning satellites in Molniya ("lightning") orbits.

Submission history

From: Todd Humphreys [view email]
[v1] Tue, 2 Jun 2026 13:57:43 UTC (2,828 KB)

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

3. Entanglement Builds Space-Time. Now "Magic" Gives It Gravity

Source: https://www.quantamagazine.org/entanglement-builds-space-time-now-magic-gives-it-gravity-20260603/
Site: Quanta Magazine
Author: By Charlie Wood June 3, 2026
Published: 2026-06-03
HN activity: 25 points · 11 comments
Length: 2.3K words (~11 min read)
Language: en

In holographic theories, physicists may have traced the pliability of space-time to its quantum roots: a measure of quantumness known as “magic.”

In 1973, John Archibald Wheeler described the relationship between space and matter in two sentences: “Space acts on matter, telling it how to move. In turn, matter reacts back on space, telling it how to curve.” Wheeler’s words serve as a pithy encapsulation of general relativity, Albert Einstein’s theory of gravity.

Wheeler’s sentences also lay out a challenge that theorists face today: When they build a model of the universe — at least one that works at the quantum level — it’s been difficult to get space and matter to interact in the way that they must.

Einstein cast gravity not as a force but as the geometric bending of space and time. In a popular analogy, the fabric of space-time is like the flat expanse of a mattress, and a massive object like a star is like a bowling ball sitting on top. The weight of the bowling ball compresses the mattress, forming a dimple — matter tells space-time how to curve.

In this analogy, a planet is like a smaller ball. If it rolls close enough to the bowling ball, its path will be altered by the dimple in the mattress — space-time tells matter how to move.

But general relativity has a fatal flaw. When a star dies and collapses, its mass is concentrated into an unimaginably dense point. The dimple in the mattress stretches into a deep depression, one that essentially rips all the way through. Physicists call this arrangement a black hole. If a ball reaches such a rip, it’s no longer guided by the fabric, and the analogy breaks down; scientists need a new theory to understand this and other, similarly extreme situations.

In the late 1990s, physicists had a stroke of luck. They learned that if they imagined space-time as a collection of purely quantum particles, they could in principle describe a black hole — rip and all — in an entirely new way.

Theorists have spent the last few decades trying to understand exactly how a space-time constructed from such quantum particles could work. And they’ve made progress: They’ve found that entanglement between particles gives space-time its structure, building an environment where matter can move — and satisfying the conditions of Wheeler’s first statement. But the origin of Wheeler’s second statement remained mysterious; in their models, matter didn’t tell space how to curve. The bowling ball sat atop the mattress without making a dent.

Until now. Physicists including Charles Cao at Virginia Tech have recently determined how quantum particles could give space-time its bendiness. In a handful of recent works, multiple teams have identified a feature of quantum mechanics that Cao calls “the fabric softener of space.” It’s a measure of quantumness called “magic.”

“Without magic, things are a little too simple,” said John Preskill, a physicist at the California Institute of Technology who contributed to Cao’s newest paper. “And, you know, quantum space-time isn’t quite that simple.”

How To Code a Universe

Perspective shifts abound in physics. For instance, there’s more than one way to look at the motion of a pendulum. You might specify its location using the height and the horizontal displacement of the weight hanging at the end of the string. Or you might use the length of the string and its angle instead. The perspectives are equivalent; simple trigonometric equations take you from one perspective to the other.

Mark Belan/Quanta Magazine

For 50 years, theorists have been chasing a far more profound perspective shift: a new way, beyond Einstein’s curved space-time, to look at the universe.

In the early 1970s, Jacob Bekenstein and Stephen Hawking took the first step in that direction when they discovered that you could reinterpret a black hole (and anything that had fallen into it) as a spherical collection of particles. In the late 1990s, Juan Maldacena, Edward Witten, and others extended this insight to a whole universe; they described an exotic, static world as a throng of interacting particles, also arranged in a sphere.

In both cases, you could replace the 3D region of space-time with particles on the region’s surface. You could consider the surface to be 2D, like a globe flattened into a paper map. Physicists call this dual nature of space-time the holographic principle, since it resembles the way a holographic sticker can cram a whole 3D scene onto a flat surface without losing data.

Over the last couple of decades, theorists have explored what gives the 3D fabric of space its shape. Entanglement, a quantum property that links particles to one another, seems to serve as space’s connective tissue. Take, for instance, a wormhole, a theoretical bridge connecting two distant regions of space. Holographically, a 3D wormhole is equivalent to two entangled sets of particles. Start snipping the “threads” of entanglement that link one set with the other, and the tunnel connecting the regions gets thinner and thinner. Cut the final thread, and the connection dissolves entirely.

Cao learned about the link between entanglement and space as a graduate student at Caltech in 2016, most notably through a paper by Daniel Harlow, a physicist now at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. “Charles spent a month understanding the paper,” said Jason Pollack, then a fellow graduate student, now a physicist at Syracuse University.

Harlow, building in part on the work of Preskill and others, had identified the type of math required to shift perspectives from 2D to 3D. He needed to encode a space and its matter — stars and planets and electrons — into a bunch of quantum particles. So why not use a quantum error-correcting code?

Quantum error-correcting codes are crucial to quantum computing because quantum computers work by manipulating “qubits,” quantum versions of bits that can exist in superpositions of 0s and 1s. Qubits are extremely delicate, frequently losing their superposition and therefore their extra information. And so physicists have worked out ways to protect this delicate information through redundancy. By spreading out one qubit’s information among many qubits, they can preserve it even if some of the qubits are lost.

The same type of redundancy shows up in holography. “When you design codes for quantum computing, you’re doing the same kind of thing that [holography] already did for you,” said Bartek Czech, a physicist at Tsinghua University in China. A single holographic location — a region of space and the matter in it — is not encoded in just one set of quantum particles; rather, it is spread across many sets, due to their entanglement. Harlow and collaborators detailed how this works in a code in 2014, and he further fleshed out the relationship in the 2016 paper that impressed Cao.

But these codes, known as “stabilizer codes,” had a shortcoming. They divided the entanglement of the particles into two types: one responsible for space and another responsible for matter. And the divide was unbridgeable. Such a perfect split is a virtue in quantum computing, since you want your encrypted data to stay perfectly isolated from the corrupting influence of the outside world. But in holography, that perfection left no room for the two to interact. “We knew how to build a space-time,” Czech said, but “this space-time was inert. It didn’t do anything.”

To get space and matter to interact, Cao knew he needed a more sophisticated code. “It was clear that something else beyond entanglement had to be there,” said Ning Bao, a physicist at Northeastern University.

The Magic Ingredient

Cao started by playing around with existing error-correcting codes. In 2020, he and a collaborator, Brad Lackey, tweaked one such code and found that it allowed space to change — just not in response to matter. It wasn’t gravity, but it was progress. Except that Cao and Lackey didn’t fully understand why the tweak worked.

M.C. Escher’s 1959 woodcut Circle Limit III has the geometry of a holographic world: A whole universe fits inside a spherical surface. In holography, you can learn about what’s happening in the interior by studying the surface itself.

M.C. Escher

The next year, Pollack and his collaborators realized that if you actually tried to create a quantum program that executed the tweaked code on a quantum computer, you’d need to use a particular operation known as a T gate, which rotates a qubit.

Cao took notice. He had just attended a quantum computing conference where researchers were buzzing about gates like these, in part because they are the key to making quantum computers more powerful than classical computers.

Researchers had previously thought the key was entanglement. They had worked out a way of running software on a classical computer that would mimic a quantum task. When that quantum task involved entangling qubits, quantum computers had an advantage over classical computers, as the classical program took ages to run. But then physicists discovered a way of speeding things up; it turned out that certain classical algorithms could mimic certain entangling operations even on a laptop.

In 2004, Alexei Kitaev and Sergey Bravyi, both then at Caltech, brought researchers’ attention to quantum operations known as non-Clifford gates, which include the T gate. When a quantum program uses these operations, the equivalent classical program takes much, much longer to run. Kitaev and Bravyi described the complexity that these operations introduce as “magic.” The more non-Clifford gates you need to produce a quantum state, the more magical that state is.

After Cao learned about magic and non-Clifford gates, he joined forces with Brian Swingle and Christopher White, both researchers at the University of Maryland. In 2020, they studied collections of particles equivalent to an exotic universe called an anti-de Sitter space. The group found that the particles were highly magical. What would the role of this magic be, they wondered, for the anti-de Sitter space the particles represented?

Cao — in partnership with Alioscia Hamma and others and building on work from Xi Dong, now at the University of California, Santa Barbara — found the answer a few years later. They showed that magic gave space its springiness. Magic, in other words, is connected to space’s ability to bend. And therefore magic is connected to gravity. “If you have one,” Bao said, “you always have the other.”

By early 2026, Cao and his collaborators had all the pieces. They knew that magic made space bend. And they knew that quantum codes got their magic from non-Clifford gates. So Cao, Preskill, and others created a next-generation code to succeed the stabilizer codes Harlow and others had focused on a decade before, when they split encoded space from encoded matter. This new code used lots of non-Clifford gates. The gates made the code magical, letting the entanglement for space and the entanglement for matter affect each other.

“This is pretty cool, because in quantum gravity, we don’t expect the background is fixed,” said Cynthia Keeler, a physicist at Arizona State University who was not involved in the work. “It should fluctuate.”

The essential nature of magic especially intrigues physicists like Swingle, who hope to use it on a quantum computer to simulate how gravity behaves in situations where general relativity fails. “If we need high magic, then we intrinsically need a quantum computer,” Swingle said, “because there’s no other way, in general, to get at that kind of question.”

Gravity From Quantumness

In principle, entanglement and magic could be enough for future physicists to simulate space on a quantum computer. But Cao’s new code still needs a lot of work.

During a talk about it at the American Physical Society’s annual summit in Denver, Cao joked that he was the only speaker who wasn’t actually studying quantum gravity. That’s because his code is still extremely general. It doesn’t describe the kind of space in which we live, doesn’t capture the particular reactions Einstein described, and doesn’t include the ticking of time.

The code is more of a proof of concept of the general shape that a theory of quantum gravity should take. If you want your space to bend, use a magical code. “This gets you a precursor of gravity,” Cao said. “You satisfy one of the necessary conditions. Right now, we are at step 0.5 of 5.”

But even at this early stage, the research program highlights some surprising features that any theory of quantum gravity should have.

Einstein and Wheeler thought of space-time as a large, featureless fabric existing with fixed bends and folds — a typical classical object. But now physicists are learning that the two defining features of quantum mechanics, entanglement and magic, correspond to the two defining features of space, its shape and its flexibility. This suggests that space itself is one of the most quantum things imaginable. “All the familiar aspects of gravity are actually a very direct manifestation of something quantum,” Swingle said.

It also suggests that gravity results from imperfect quantum encoding. Non-magical codes produce inert, gravity-free spaces because they protect their encoded information perfectly. Cao and collaborators have shown that gravity comes from the mixing of the encoded information. So by necessity, the encoding must be approximate, and therefore some aspects of what’s going on in the space-time can’t be perfectly recovered by measuring a subset of the quantum particles in the usual way. This approximation, which would indicate a poorly written code for a quantum computer, is “the reason Newton’s apple fell on him,” Czech said.

Cao, for his part, finds the feature appealing. Quantum error correction and quantum computing are human pursuits, he said. He sees no reason that gravity should accommodate our prejudice for perfection.

Correction: June 3, 2026
Charles Cao was a graduate student at Caltech, and he later held a postdoctoral position at the University of Maryland.

The article previously called the gates that introduce magic Toffoli gates and conflated them with a simpler gate called the T gate. Toffoli gates and T gates are both a part of a wider category called non-Clifford gates, all of which introduce magic.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

4. databow: a Rust CLI to query any database with an ADBC driver

Source: https://columnar.tech/blog/introducing-databow//
Site: Columnar
Submitter: hckshr (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-02 23:11 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 26 points · 0 comments
Length: 761 words (~4 min read)
Language: en

TL;DR

databow is a new open source command-line tool for querying any database that has an ADBC driver. Built in Rust, databow gives you one fast, modern interface to the SQL systems across your entire data stack. Install it with uv tool install databow.

In a typical day, a data engineer might query a local embedded database, a distributed cloud data warehouse, and an enterprise relational database server—each with its own CLI. psql, mysql, snowsql, bq, sqlite3: different flags, different output formats, different quirks. Switching between them means relearning syntax and reformatting results. GUI tools exist, but they’re heavyweight and pull you out of the terminal.

What if one fast, modern CLI could connect to any database?

Meet databow

Today, we’re excited to introduce databow—an open source command-line tool for querying databases with ADBC (Arrow Database Connectivity).

databow is built in Rust for fast queries and a small footprint. It connects to any database that has an ADBC driver, giving you one unified interface for the SQL systems across your entire data stack.

What databow can do

Connect to 30+ databases

databow works with any database that has an ADBC driver. That includes:

Transactional databases: PostgreSQL, MySQL, MariaDB, SQLite, Oracle Database, Microsoft SQL Server, CockroachDB, YugabyteDB, TiDB
Analytical databases: DuckDB, ClickHouse, Snowflake, BigQuery, Databricks, Amazon Redshift, Teradata
Lakehouse engines: Trino, Dremio, StarRocks, Apache Doris
Time-series databases: InfluxDB, TimescaleDB, GreptimeDB

The list keeps growing as the ADBC ecosystem expands.

Run queries in an interactive SQL shell

databow provides a modern REPL with the features you’d expect:

$ databow --driver duckdb
> SELECT * FROM 'sales.parquet' LIMIT 5;
┌────────────┬─────────┬──────────┐
│ date       │ product │ revenue  │
├────────────┼─────────┼──────────┤
│ 2026-01-15 │ Widget  │ 1250.00  │
│ 2026-01-15 │ Gadget  │ 890.50   │
│ 2026-01-16 │ Widget  │ 1100.00  │
│ 2026-01-16 │ Gizmo   │ 2340.00  │
│ 2026-01-17 │ Gadget  │ 756.25   │
└────────────┴─────────┴──────────┘

Syntax highlighting with automatic light/dark theme detection
Multiline SQL input for complex queries
Clean, aligned tables with dynamic column widths
Command history for navigating previous queries

Export your results

Need to share your query results? Export directly to the format you need:

# Export to CSV
databow --driver postgresql --uri "postgres://localhost/analytics" \
  --query "SELECT * FROM monthly_report" \
  --output report.csv

# Export to JSON
databow --profile warehouse --query "SELECT * FROM users" \
  --output users.json

# Export to Arrow IPC
databow --profile prod-db --query "SELECT * FROM events" \
  --output events.arrow

Power your automations

databow isn’t just for interactive use. It’s designed to fit into scripts and pipelines:

# Execute a query directly
databow --driver duckdb --uri warehouse.db --query "SELECT count(*) FROM logs WHERE level = 'ERROR'"

# Read from a SQL file
databow --driver postgresql --uri "postgres://localhost/analytics" \
  --file daily_metrics.sql --output metrics.csv

# Pipe queries from stdin
echo "SELECT version()" | databow --driver postgresql --uri "$DATABASE_URL"

Load connection details from profiles

Tired of typing long database connection strings? Save your configurations in ADBC connection profiles and refer to them by name:

# Use a saved profile
databow --profile production-warehouse --query "SELECT * FROM orders"

Why ADBC

databow is built on ADBC—the Arrow Database Connectivity standard from the Apache Arrow project. ADBC provides a vendor-neutral API for database access, similar to what JDBC and ODBC do for legacy connectivity. But ADBC is designed from the ground up to transfer data in the Apache Arrow format. That means:

Efficient data transfer: Results come back in Arrow’s columnar format, and when the database speaks Arrow natively, that means no row-by-row serialization overhead at all.
Consistent behavior: The same API works across databases.
Growing ecosystem: As more databases add ADBC drivers, databow automatically supports them.

By building on ADBC, databow benefits from the work of the entire Arrow community. When a new database releases an ADBC driver, databow users get access immediately.

Get started

databow ships as a single binary. Install it with uv or Cargo:

# Recommended: install with uv
uv tool install databow

# Alternative: install with Cargo
cargo install databow

Then install the ADBC driver for your database using dbc, the command-line tool for installing and managing ADBC drivers. For example, to install the ADBC driver for DuckDB:

dbc install duckdb

Then start querying:

databow --driver duckdb

Roadmap

We’re actively working on new features to make databow even more powerful:

Dot commands: Interactive commands for quick configuration and exploration
More export formats: Support for writing results to Parquet and other file types
Result set truncation: Configurable limits for large result sets to keep your terminal responsive
Data type display: Show column data types alongside query results for better schema visibility

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

5. Meta enables ADB on deprecated Portal devices [video]

Source: https://fb.watch/HxPu0fSyeH/
Redirected to: https://www.facebook.com/boz/videos/1561665975384013/?extid=CL-UNK-UNK-UNK-IOS_GK0T-GK1C&share_url=https%3A%2F%2Ffb.watch%2FHxPu0fSyeH%2F
Site: fb.watch
Submitter: jenders (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-05 00:44 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 228 points · 84 comments
Language: en

https://developers.meta.com/horizon/blog/build-apps-for-port...

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

6. Fine-tuning an LLM to write docs like it's 1995

Source: https://passo.uno/fine-tuning-docs-llm/
Site: passo.uno
Author: Fabrizio Ferri Benedetti
Submitted: 2026-06-05 05:46 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 74 points · 28 comments
Length: 2.1K words (~10 min read)
Language: en

Posted on Jun 1, 2026 · 10 min read

In my predictions for 2030 I wrote that tech writers would be using specialized LLMs, running locally on powerful hardware. I see hints of this move to “local first” among engineering pundits, but we’re not there yet, in part because of how much more powerful connected frontier models are. That doesn’t mean we can’t experiment, though. That’s precisely what I did last week, trying to fine-tune an instruct model to write like a software technical writer from the 80s and 90s.

Summoning old tech writing lore for research

To train a personal, local model to write like a technical writer from the 90s, one needs tons of written sources. If I wanted to fine-tune a model to write like myself, for example, this blog would not be enough, as it’s barely 100k words at the time of this post. You would need more samples for thorough training, and those are not easy to come by, nor simple to produce. The only quick way is to use an existing corpus. Where could I get one?

Meet Bitsavers: it’s a website that collects and scans old computer manuals and brochures. It’s an incredibly valuable repository of computer history and ancient tech writing, with mirrors available everywhere. As I’m fond of Microsoft manuals from the 90s, I chose the Microsoft collection as the source of training materials. The collection contains out-of-print docs published between 1977 and 2005: more than 37 million words, covering old systems and SDKs.

I downloaded the OCR’d text files and cleaned the content from artifacts and clutter (like indices and frontmatter) using good old Python scripts. I then used a cheap and fast model through OpenRouter, gemma-4-26b, to classify each paragraph as either “keep” or “drop” based on its intelligibility. This second pass cost around 8 dollars. Even with this two-pass cleaning, though, training data retained noise that I discovered only later, but that was largely OK for my tests.

I split the sanitized text into training examples on paragraph and section boundaries, breaking at headings and keeping code blocks whole, with each chunk capped at around 512 tokens as per Claude advice. Each chunk was paired with a synthetic instruction drawn from templates. I ended up with 192,456 examples in JSONL format (one JSON object per line). I could have used a small model to also come up with better instructions and questions, but I’m an impatient person.

💡 A note on the materials: This is an independent, non-commercial research project and is not affiliated with, sponsored, or endorsed by Microsoft. I used these out-of-print manuals for personal style-transfer experimentation only. The corpus, training data, and resulting adapters are not being distributed, and the fine-tuned models remain strictly local to my machine.

Fine-tuning as an alternative to training from scratch

In an ideal world, I would have several millions of dollars lying around, ready to be burned creating my own LLM, Fabrice. Since I’m far from rich (I wouldn’t be writing this otherwise), the alternative to Fabrice is fine-tuning, which involves tweaking the “weights” of a model so that each token generated is conditioned by the training materials. I like to picture fine-tuning as slightly steering the trajectory of a massive iceberg using tugs; just a little, just to get the intended effect.

Why fine-tuning and not, say, retrieval-augmented generation (RAG)? Because in this experiment I was not so much interested in retrieving facts, a scenario where RAG excels, as in getting an LLM to behave and write in a specific style, whatever its knowledge of the context. Compared to full training, fine-tuning doesn’t require a massive amount of data, so it’s cheaper. Also, just because: I always wanted to try fine-tuning as a technique and see how feasible it could be.

To avoid spending days or weeks fine-tuning a model on my computer, which has a rather old graphic card, I relied on Runpod, an online service for AI developers that provides on-demand pods with pre-configured GPUs and tools for a (relatively) small price. For less than $6 per hour, for example, you can lease a beast of a card, the Nvidia B200 (192gb of memory). The service has a convenient API with configurable auto-recharge and cost control mechanisms.

Entering a world full of mysterious buzzwords

After deciding to fine-tune a model, I consulted with Claude on the sanest methods to achieve that. We settled on QLoRA (Quantized Low-Rank Adaptation), which achieves fine-tuning not by altering each weight of an LLM, but by “freezing” them and putting an adapter on top, which is a small file that reshapes the model behavior (a bit like a mask, if you will). The Q in QLoRA means that the result is quantized, that is, compressed, reducing memory requirements.

Are you still with me? Good. If you think this is dense, it’s because it is.

Doing anything with LLMs at home these days is an exercise in compromises: you either sacrifice time, spend money, or curb your ambitious goals. I tried to strike a balance to get something meaningful in less than a weekend. I chose to try fine-tuning on two models, Llama 3.1 8B Instruct and Qwen 2.5 7B Instruct. At their size (around 8B) they run comfortably on a Macbook Air. I also tested a Llama base model (which is not trained to answer questions).

I tested fine-tuning under several different conditions: varying the volume of training materials (a subset vs. the full corpus), the number of epochs (training rounds), and structural parameters like the rank. I only hold a superficial knowledge of all this, but I trusted my agent to make the right choices, which I happily questioned at every step. For example, 3 epochs can result in “overfitting” in some cases; in the world of LLMs, that translates to excessive training. Fun times.

Run Base Data Epochs Rank
Llama instruct-40k Llama 3.1 8B Instruct 40k 1 16
Llama base-40k Llama 3.1 8B (base) 40k 1 16
Qwen-40k Qwen 2.5 7B Instruct 40k 3 16
Qwen-192k Qwen 2.5 7B Instruct 192k 1 16
Qwen-r8 Qwen 2.5 7B Instruct 40k 1 8
Qwen-r16 Qwen 2.5 7B Instruct 40k 1 16

Adapters can only be applied to the target model you fine-tuned for. After training each adapter, I exported them to my laptop and converted and quantized them to a GGUF LoRA file, and then registered it as a local Ollama model I could run in my laptop for benchmarking purposes. The local-conversion approach is faster and requires no GPU, though inference is somewhat slower than a fully merged model. For the test at hand, I did not care about speed that much.

Training the adapters for all conditions took perhaps an entire day, including breaks, for a total cost of $50. Along the journey, I lost two adapters: Runpod is unforgiving of budget and deletes pods immediately if funding is zero (there’s a lesson learned, yes). Claude took care of setting up each run and following up with Runpod’s API. The /goal command of Claude Code was quite helpful to loop through each phase (in retrospect, I would have run it in YOLO mode).

This table shows all the models I compared and their conditions:

Name What it is
llama3.1:8b Unmodified Llama baseline
qwen2.5:7b Unmodified Qwen baseline
msft-base-40k Llama base (non-instruct) + 40k (control)
msft-instruct-40k Llama instruct + 40k, 1 epoch, rank 16
msft-qwen-40k Qwen + 40k, 3 epochs, rank 16
msft-qwen-192k Qwen + 192k, 1 epoch, rank 16
msft-qwen-r8 Qwen + 40k, 1 epoch, rank 8
msft-qwen-r16 Qwen + 40k, 1 epoch, rank 16

Did the style transfer after fine-tuning?

I subjected each model to the same prompts:

Document malloc(), a staple C function, something the training materials might know about.
Document a fictitious ConnectWifi() Win32 API function. No presence in the training materials.
Explain what a REST API is in 1990s Microsoft style (the anachronistic test).

You can see all the questions and answers in this gist.

For the malloc() test, the unmodified models generated modern Markdown docs in the style of a README, while the fine-tuned models used a period correct structure, with a Synopsis block, a Return Value section, and so on. For the fictitious ConnectWifi() function, only the 3 epochs model maintained the fiction and documented it as if it was real, while the others broke the fourth wall to adhere to internal knowledge and resist the training.

The REST API exercise was quite interesting, too: Llama Instruct 40k failed, producing bland marketing prose. Claude attributed this to the heavy reinforcement training (RLHF) that Llama goes through to make it friendly and accessible. Qwen fine-tunes held the register way better, producing period-structured docs, using HTTP method names as verbs and formal headings. Qwen 192k was the strongest, opening like a chapter of the Windows 2000 Resource Kit.

Let me repeat that: a 7B model, trained on 1990s documentation and tested on a 2000s concept, produced a convincing chapter opening that could be mistaken for genuine period material. Style transferred. Wow. On the other hand, the base model, which is not trained to answer questions, but to autocomplete text, failed miserably, spurting raw corpus almost at random, hundreds of lines of garbage. Base models have no notion of “answer this question” or “complete this".

Model malloc() ConnectWifi() REST API
llama3.1:8b Modern style, markdown headers Plain English, no Win32 vocabulary Modern, friendly, analogies
qwen2.5:7b Modern style, good structure Correct form, breaks frame Modern essay, labels itself “1990s style”
msft-instruct-40k Terse, period markers, correct vocabulary SAL annotations, ERROR_SUCCESS Failed: marketing prose
msft-qwen-40k Man-page structure, ENOMEM Commits to fiction, invents constants Holds register
msft-qwen-192k Full man-page, See Also, example Breaks frame (caveats) Strongest: chapter-style, HATEOAS
msft-base-40k Ignores prompt entirely Ignores prompt entirely Ignores prompt entirely

I finished the experiment by comparing the effect of rank between Qwen models, with 1 epoch, varying between rank 8 and 16. If I understood it correctly, rank 8 means each adapter matrix can only describe 8 independent patterns. It’s like having 8 dials to tune. With so few dials, the adapter can’t be too clever: it must commit fully to the strongest, most repeated patterns in the training data. Rank 16 is, in theory, more expressive and subtler.

Model malloc() ConnectWifi() REST API
qwen2.5:7b baseline Modern explainer Correct form, breaks frame Long modern essay, labels itself
msft-qwen-r8 (40k, 1ep, rank 8) Terse, correct vocab, minimal structure Best of all models: full cross-refs, platform reqs, workflow Chapter-style, “In This Section”
msft-qwen-r16 (40k, 1ep, rank 16) Synopsis + Errors + example Minimal, no frame-break ⚠️ SOAP hallucination
msft-qwen-40k (40k, 3ep, rank 16) Syntax + description + ENOMEM Breaks frame with caveat Holds register cleanly
msft-qwen-192k (192k, 1ep, rank 16) Full man-page + See Also + example Breaks frame with caveat Best on REST: chapter outline, HATEOAS

The rank comparison shows that smaller adapters, with fewer degrees of freedom, commit to fiction more readily than larger ones; a rank 16 adapter can “escape” the corpus more easily. It also turned out that combining only 1 epoch with a moderate rank of 16 made hallucinations more frequent: the adapter is expressive enough to reach for a related concept but not reinforced enough to anchor on what the prompt is trying to say. Rank and epoch seem to interact — it’s like using a sound mixer. Interestingly, the cheaper the adapter, the more honest the impersonation.

Fine-tuned models make for convincing impersonators, but they’re not replacements

The fine-tuned models were great impersonators of Microsoft tech writers from the late 90s. The corpus impressed style and voice on the models, as well as some knowledge, while mostly retaining the models’ ability to describe novel concepts. It’s a relatively cheap process that could produce effective small models aimed at tasks such as reviews of style or drafting of new documents following in-house style guides.

Getting there, though, is not a simple ride. Fine-tuning a model, while cheap, requires a good amount of high-quality training data, which is not easy to produce. Even when you get your hands on it, you need to pick an underlying model that makes sense and is capable of accepting the additional training. And then, the multiple parameters at your disposal make the task of getting a fine-tuned model to the sweet spot a time-consuming proposition.

The reassuring takeaway is that such a model can never replace a human tech writer, only augment them. The fine-tuned models have the same lack of judgement as their non-tuned siblings, and they need abundant steering. Fabrice will have to wait.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

7. C++: The Documentary

Source: https://herbsutter.com/2026/06/04/c-the-documentary-released-today/
Site: Sutter’s Mill
Author: Herb Sutter
Published: 2026-06-05
HN activity: 161 points · 101 comments
Length: 472 words (~3 min read)
Language: en

C++ 2026-06-042026-06-04 2 Minutes

C++: The Documentary premiered today on YouTube, and it was great to be on the live chat with Bjarne and many other key folks who participated in C++’s history. I’m honored to have been one of hundreds of people who have played a part in advancing Bjarne’s wonderful project over the years.

If you haven’t watched this yet, make it a weekend goal. What a great synopsis of a 40-year success story, from humble beginnings to global adoption to being currently (as of Q3 2025) the fastest-growing of the top four languages in the world… +90% users in the past 3.5 years.

People who appear in the documentary:

Bjarne Stroustrup: Bell Labs, Designer and original implementer of C++
Alexander Stepanov: Designer of the Standard Template Library
Anders Hejlsberg: Creator of C#, TypeScript, and Turbo Pascal
Andrei Alexandrescu: Principal Research Scientist, Nvidia & C++ Author
Andrew Koenig: Bell Labs, Founding member of the C++ Standards Committee, Researcher, C++ Author & Educator
Barbara Moo: Bell Labs, Manager C++ Development Team & C++ Author
Brian Kernighan: Bell Labs, Computer Scientist, Co-author of “The C Programming Language”
Chris Lattner: Creator of Mojo, LLVM, Clang & Swift
Danilo Piparo: Particle Physicist, CERN, ROOT Framework Project Lead
Eric Lubin: Software Developer – Lead, Hudson River Trading
Gabriel Dos Reis: Software Engineer and Architect, Microsoft; C++ tools builder; Mathematician
Herb Sutter: Technical Fellow, Citadel Securities; Chair, Standard C++ Foundation; Chair Emeritus, ISO C++ Committee
John Romero: Video Game Developer, Co-Creator of Doom and Quake, Co-Founder id Software
Nina Ranns: Vice-Convener of the ISO C++ Committee

Chapters

00:00 Intro
01:50 Invention at AT&T Bell Labs
07:30 C with Classes
09:37 Early adoption of C with Classes
10:53 From C with Classes to C++ (and CFront)
12:32 Why is it called C++?
13:24 AT&T starts selling software / Another team tries to take over C++
16:08 Early development of C++ at AT&T Bell Labs
19:10 “It was a buggy product” / Release 2.0.0
21:55 C++ spreading beyond AT&T
24:50 Too many versions of C++
26:03 Need for standardization
29:38 The STL by Alexander Stepanov
37:19 The first standard: C++98
39:21 C++ at CERN in the 90s
40:34 C++ spreading to games and trading
43:00 C++ winter of the early 2000s
45:34 Programming language wars (C#)
49:25 There’s a need for an efficient programming language again
52:29 Modern C++ (C++11)
56:29 Is the standards committee making C++ too complicated?
1:00:45 C++ is everwhere
01:05:00 The future and challenges for C++
01:08:31 Bjarne’s impact

Published by Herb Sutter

Herb Sutter is an author and speaker, and a technical fellow at Citadel Securities. He serves as chair of the Standard C++ Foundation and its conference CppCon, and served as chair of the ISO C++ standards committee from 2002 to 2025. View all posts by Herb Sutter

Published 2026-06-042026-06-04

Post navigation

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

8. Anthropic's open-source framework for AI-powered vulnerability discovery

Source: https://github.com/anthropics/defending-code-reference-harness
Site: GitHub
Submitter: binyu (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-04 20:11 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 431 points · 121 comments
Length: 2.1K words (~10 min read)
Language: en

A reference implementation for autonomous vulnerability discovery and remediation with Claude, based on our learnings from partnering with security teams at several organizations since launching Claude Mythos Preview. For a write up of these learnings along with best practices, see the accompanying blog post (also available in blog-post.md). For a lightweight SDK-only walkthrough of the same recon → find → triage → report → patch loop, see the companion cookbook.

This repo is not maintained and is not accepting contributions.

🔒 Want a managed option? Anthropic offers Claude Security, a hosted product that finds and fixes vulnerabilities in your source code across multiple projects. Claude Security scans your repository for vulnerabilities, applies a multi-stage verification pipeline to reduce false positives, and lets you manage findings through their lifecycle: triage, fix validation, and rapid fix generation.

This repository is an open-source reference implementation based on general best practices for finding vulnerabilities using Claude. You can use it to build your own vulnerability finding pipeline, customize the logic, and it can be used with whatever access you have to Claude APIs (including Bedrock, Vertex, or Azure).

Contents

Claude Code skills: /quickstart, /threat-model, /vuln-scan, /triage, /patch, /customize: interactive scoping, scanning, triage, and patching. Open this repo in Claude Code and run /quickstart to get oriented.
harness/: the autonomous reference pipeline (recon → find → verify → report → patch), configured for finding C/C++ memory vulnerabilities using Docker and ASAN. This harness is a reference, not a product. The general shape, prompts, and sandboxing are reusable, but the harness will not work on every codebase out of the box. Run /customize to port it to your language, detector, or vuln class.

⚠️ Security: /quickstart, /threat-model, /vuln-scan, and /triage only read and write files. Running /patch on static findings (TRIAGE.json or VULN-FINDINGS.json) is likewise read- and write-only. /customize edits the harness code and runs validation commands. Any of these skills are safe to run unsandboxed, as long as you review and approve each tool use in Claude Code. The autonomous reference pipeline (including /patch on pipeline results) executes target code, so it refuses to run outside of a gVisor sandbox unless explicitly overridden. To get set up, run scripts/setup_sandbox.sh once, then invoke the pipeline via bin/vp-sandboxed. See docs/security.md and docs/agent-sandbox.md for more details.

Getting Started

git clone https://github.com/anthropics/defending-code-reference-harness
cd defending-code-reference-harness
claude

# 30-sec intro + guided first run on the canary target
> /quickstart

> /quickstart how do I port the pipeline to Java?
> /quickstart how do I triage all these bugs?

Further Reading

Blog Post · The accompanying blog post with learnings + best practices
Pipeline · How it works: diagram, stages, CLI flags
Security · Sandboxing, what not to mount
Agent sandbox · gVisor isolation + egress allowlist for every agent
Customize · Port to my stack; which files change and why
Patching · Generate and verify fixes for verified crashes
Troubleshooting · Duplicates, rate limits, subagent model pinning
Safeguards · Block for dangerous cyber work

Ramp Up

The most successful security teams we've partnered with are those that have gotten hands-on the fastest. Though it's tempting to spend months designing the perfect pipeline, we recommend starting small on Day 1 and building from there as learnings come. The steps below follow that pattern and set an ambitious (but reasonable) pace based on what we've seen.

Step 1 Day 1 Build a threat model and run your first static scan + triage
Step 2 Day 2 Run the reference pipeline on a C/C++ library
Step 3 Days 3-5 Customize the pipeline for your target
Step 4 Week 2 Start autonomous scanning, triage, and patching

Step 1 (Day 1): Build a threat model and run your first static scan + triage

Day 1 is focused on seeing the whole loop end-to-end. Using only the interactive skills, you'll build a threat model, run a static scan scoped by it, triage what comes back, and draft candidate fixes. You'll finish the day with a threat model, a ranked list of static findings, and candidate patches.

The relevant skills only read and write files in your repo. As long as you run Claude Code interactively and approve each tool use, no sandbox is needed.

# Pin every subagent to the model you want
export CLAUDE_CODE_SUBAGENT_MODEL=<model-id>
claude

# 0. intro + guided first run
> /quickstart

# 1. Build a threat model (aim before you shoot)
> /threat-model bootstrap targets/canary

# 2. Run a static scan, scoped by that threat model
> /vuln-scan targets/canary

# 3. Verify, dedupe, and rank what came back
> /triage targets/canary/VULN-FINDINGS.json

# 4. Generate candidate fixes for the verified findings
> /patch ./TRIAGE.json --repo targets/canary

This flow produces THREAT_MODEL.md, VULN-FINDINGS.{json,md}, TRIAGE.{json,md}, and PATCHES/.

The vulnerability candidates produced in Step 1 come from Claude's static review of the source (nothing is built or run), so expect more false positives on any non-canary targets. In Step 2, you'll produce execution-verified findings.

Note: on the canary target, /triage may dismiss the scan's findings as false positives. entry.c announces itself as deliberately vulnerable demo code, and /triage correctly excludes bugs in test / fixture code. To see the full confirm / dedupe / false positive flow, run it on the curated fixture instead (/triage .claude/skills/triage/fixtures/canary-findings.json --repo targets/canary) or point the Step 1 skills at your own code.

Step 2 (Day 2): Run the reference pipeline on a C/C++ library

On Day 2, you'll move from interactive skills to your first autonomous run using the reference pipeline. You'll run the full recon → find → verify → report loop in your environment on a known-vulnerable open-source library, then generate a candidate patch for what it finds. You'll finish with a set of reproducible crashes, exploitability reports, and candidate patches, along with a feel for how the pipeline works.

Running the pipeline is simple:

# One-time setup
python3 -m venv .venv && .venv/bin/pip install -e .
./scripts/setup_sandbox.sh   # installs gVisor, builds the agent images, and verifies isolation; note: requires Docker
export ANTHROPIC_API_KEY=sk-ant-...   # or CLAUDE_CODE_OAUTH_TOKEN; the pipeline requires one in env

# Run the recon → find → verify → report loop
bin/vp-sandboxed run drlibs --model <model-id> --runs 3 --parallel --stream --auto-focus
# Generate a candidate patch for each finding
bin/vp-sandboxed patch results/drlibs/<timestamp>/ --model <model-id>

# Or, ask Claude Code to launch the pipeline and watch the run for you
claude
> run the pipeline on drlibs and explain findings as they come

Results from the loop land in a results/drlibs/<timestamp>/ directory. With the --stream flag, the first report will appear in minutes under reports/bug_NN/.

⚠️ run spawns autonomous agents. The pipeline runs each agent inside a gVisor container with egress restricted to the Claude API. Agent-spawning subcommands refuse to start outside it unless explicitly overridden. For more information, see docs/security.md and docs/agent-sandbox.md.

Under the hood, the pipeline walks through seven stages:

Build: Compiles the target into a Docker image with ASAN (the memory error detector for C and C++). The pipeline builds this image automatically on first run using the target's Dockerfile.
Recon: A lightweight agent reads the source inside a network-isolated container and proposes a partition, i.e., "here are N distinct input-parsing subsystems worth attacking separately", so that parallel find agents explore different areas instead of converging on the same bug. Without the --auto-focus flag, the pipeline uses the focus_areas list from the target's config.yaml.
Find: N agents run in parallel, each in its own isolated container. Each agent reads the source, crafts malformed inputs, and runs the ASAN binary until a given input produces a crash 3 out of 3 times.
Verify: A separate grader agent reproduces each crash in a fresh container that the find agent hasn't touched. The only thing that crosses over from the find agent to the grader is the proof of concept it produced.
Dedupe: A judge agent compares verified crashes against bugs already reported and decides whether each is a new bug, a better example of a known bug, or a duplicate to skip.
Report: A report agent writes a structured exploitability analysis per unique bug, including details on primitive class, reachability, escalation path, and severity.
Patch (the separate patch command above): A patch agent writes a proposed fix, and a grader agent confirms that the new code builds, that the original proof of concept input no longer crashes, that the target's test suite still passes, and that a fresh find agent can't find a way around the fix.

For more details, see docs/pipeline.md.

Step 3 (Days 3-5): Customize the pipeline for your target

On Days 3-5, you'll customize the harness for your own target. First, you'll point the Step 1 skills at your code, then you'll use /customize to port the pipeline to your stack. By the end of the week, you'll have a targets/<your-service>/ directory that the pipeline can run against, validated with a single smoke run of the pipeline, and ready to scale up in Step 4.

While the reference pipeline is designed for finding memory vulnerabilities in C and C++ code, its shape is generic. Porting it to a new vuln class or language just means answering the following questions for your target stack:

Question C/C++ Reference Your target (examples)
What signals a finding? ASAN crash signature exception / canary file / DNS callback
What does a proof of concept look like? crashing input file HTTP request sequence / tx list / test harness
How is the target built and run? Dockerfile (using clang + ASAN) your language's build in a container

Before customizing, point the Step 1 skills at your own code. As a reminder, they're read- and write-only, so they can run unsandboxed.

claude

> /quickstart how do I customize this for ~/code/my-service?

> /threat-model bootstrap-then-interview ~/code/my-service
> /vuln-scan ~/code/my-service
> /triage ~/code/my-service/VULN-FINDINGS.json --repo ~/code/my-service

Then, use the artifacts produced by those skills in the /customize skill, which modifies the harness for your codebase.

> /customize use ~/code/my-service/{THREAT_MODEL.md,VULN-FINDINGS.json} and ./TRIAGE.md

When /customize is done, you'll have a targets/my-service/ directory set up. Validate it with a smoke run of the pipeline before scaling up.

bin/vp-sandboxed run my-service --model <model-id> --runs 1

For more details, see docs/customizing.md.

Step 4 (Week 2): Start autonomous scanning, triage, and patching

In Week 2, you'll use the pipeline you customized in Step 3 on your own targets, adding an outer loop to the inner pipeline loop - run multiple pipeline scans, triage the findings from across those runs, patch based on prioritization, and repeat.

# Scan - run a wave of parallel runs against your target
bin/vp-sandboxed run my-service --model <model-id> --runs 5 --parallel --stream --auto-focus

# Triage - dedupe and rank every finding across all waves using your threat model
> /triage results/my-service/ --repo ~/code/my-service --auto --votes 5

# Patch - generate and validate fixes, starting with what triage ranked the highest
> /patch results/my-service/<timestamp>/ --model <model-id>

⚠️ Follow the same sandboxing guidelines as in Step 2

A given pipeline run already verifies and deduplicates its own findings. /triage works across many pipeline runs. When pointed at the results/ directory, it collapses duplicates across all runs (and any static findings from /vuln-scan if present), recalibrates severity ratings against your threat model, and attempts to route every finding to the component owner.

When possible, patching findings quickly helps keep the outer loop as productive as possible. When findings are fixed, the model can't re-find them, and instead will surface net new, typically deeper issues. As you run more pipeline waves, the number of findings will likely go down, but the complexity will likely also go up. If quick patching isn't possible, even just recording prior findings in the target's known_bugs can help steer future runs toward newer bugs.

Autonomous triage and patching are still open issues, and this reference harness doesn't fully solve them. The verification strategies in /patch help raise the bar, but severity and prioritization are ultimately judgments about your environment, and verified patches are not always upstreamable. Many partners have reported these steps as their current bottlenecks, and you should budget real engineering time for them.

For more details, see docs/triage.md and docs/patching.md.

Looking Forward

After the initial ramp up, the teams we've worked with have tended to invest in a few directions:

Reviewing all their internal repos and key open-source dependencies, ranking which are the most important to scan (e.g., based on their exposure, history of CVEs, business-criticality), then working through scanning the list in priority order.
Setting up bespoke infrastructure for scanning to move scans off of laptops or one-off VMs. The most successful teams resist the urge to build the perfect scanning platform before scaling up.
Incorporating scans into their SDLC. Some teams have set up recurring scans (e.g., daily, weekly) or have added scanning into their CI pipelines.
Testing and experimenting with the models to find what works best for them.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

9. The IsUpMap lets you check the status of over 100 major sites at once

Source: https://isupmap.com/
Site: isUpMap
Submitter: mikelgan (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-05 04:44 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 63 points · 24 comments
Length: 3 words (~1 min read)
Language: en

GitHub @JaironDevNull

Donate

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

10. Leap in DNA synthesis slashes time to build new genetic sequences

Source: https://spectrum.ieee.org/faster-dna-synthesis-sidewinder
Site: IEEE Spectrum
Author: Elie Dolgin
Published: 2026-05-26
HN activity: 33 points · 5 comments
Length: 985 words (~5 min read)
Language: en

A new method for writing DNA promises to unlock the potential of generative AI in biology, giving scientists a fast, affordable, and accurate way to physically build the novel genetic sequences that predictive models are now producing faster than anyone can construct them.

The technique, called Sidewinder, can assemble dozens of genetic sequences simultaneously in a single test tube, producing just one incorrect junction for every 10 million assembly events—a level of precision that far surpasses conventional methods, which misfire roughly once every 10 to 30 joins. Sidewinder also draws on cheap raw materials that have until now been too difficult to use reliably.

“It’s a step change,” says Thomas Gorochowski, a bioengineer at the University of Bristol, in England, who was not involved in the research. “It really opens up the feasibility of synthesizing large genetic systems, maybe even small genomes.” And that, he adds, “is uber-important for all of the AI stuff that’s coming out at the moment around generative genome sequences.”

The advance, presented earlier this month at SynBioBeta 2026 in San Jose, Calif., and detailed in a preprint posted to bioRxiv, addresses one of the more vexing mismatches in modern genomics research. Generative AI tools like Evo 2, trained on the genetic code of millions of organisms, can design new DNA sequences on demand at extraordinary speed. But physically constructing long DNA sequences in a laboratory has remained slow and expensive, especially when building not just one sequence at a time but dozens of different designs simultaneously, as testing AI predictions at scale demands.

RELATED: Can Biologists Rewrite the Genome’s Spaghetti Code?

In a demonstration of how squarely Sidewinder targets this bottleneck, the team behind the technique, led by Caltech synthetic biologist Kaihang Wang, harnessed the power of Evo 2 to redesign a 12,500-letter DNA sequence of the E. coli genome in silico and then used Sidewinder to build it from scratch—with no errors. Sequences of that length can encode entire biochemical pathways, laying the groundwork for engineered microbes that manufacture drugs, biofuels, or specialty chemicals, and eventually to the assembly of vast DNA constructs approaching complete artificial genomes.

In the past, says Brian Hie, the Stanford computational biologist whose lab developed Evo 2, a project like this would likely take more than a month, based on his team’s experience with conventional commercial methods. “With a technology like this,” he says, “you could probably achieve the same thing in a few days.”

To commercialize Sidewinder, [from left] Noah Robinson, Kaihang Wang, Adrian Woolfson, and Brian Hie cofounded a company called Genyro. Marcus Ubungen

A New Assembly Logic

The new method builds on a DNA synthesis strategy that Wang and his colleagues first outlined at the beginning of the year in Nature, but with substantially greater capacity.

Thanks to a new algorithm that automates the most computationally demanding part of the process and laboratory innovations in how raw ingredients are managed, it is now feasible to synthesize ever larger and more numerous DNA constructs simultaneously. This opens up applications including drug discovery, data storage, and the design of synthetic organisms.

“The pace at which you can start to explore these things just opened up massively,” Gorochowski says.

To understand how Sidewinder works, it helps to understand how DNA is typically made in a laboratory. The process begins with short, chemically manufactured strands called oligonucleotides, or oligos, the molecular alphabet blocks from which longer sequences are assembled.

Ordering oligos individually is reliable but expensive. Scientists discovered years ago that they could slash costs by synthesizing thousands of different oligos together in a single pool. But doing so creates a chaotic soup in which fragments tangle with unintended partners, leading to errors.

Sorting out specific sequences from such a pool has traditionally required elaborate separation steps: physically dividing up the fragments, isolating them in tiny droplets, or fishing them out one by one with laser light. Each approach added cost, time, and specialized equipment.

The Caltech team sidestepped the problem entirely.

Page Numbers for DNA

Sidewinder also starts with oligos, the kind anyone can buy from DNA synthesis vendors such as GenScript or Twist Bioscience, but tags each fragment with a unique molecular barcode. This short identifying sequence ensures that each piece links up only with its intended neighbor in the order that will yield the desired genetic sequence. When two bar-coded fragments meet, they form what chemists call a three-way junction: a fleeting molecular knot that locks the pieces in alignment before being cleanly removed, leaving a seamless strand.

Wang likens these barcodes to page numbers. Whereas conventional assembly is like collating an unnumbered manuscript by matching the last line of one page to the first line of the next—workable for a short document, a recipe for chaos when sequences repeat—Sidewinder’s barcodes guide each fragment to its correct partner regardless of what sequence it carries.

The original Sidewinder protocol required a computationally intensive calculation to design those barcodes, however, and this became impractically slow as the number of fragments grew.

A former Caltech undergraduate student named Jean-Sebastien Paul developed a workaround. While working in Wang’s lab one summer, Paul, who is now pursuing a Ph.D. at Stanford, built a software tool called PyWinder that churns out the barcodes in minutes on a standard laptop, replacing a calculation that had previously been too slow to scale.

Bioengineer Noah Robinson, a postdoc in Wang’s lab who codeveloped the original Sidewinder method, also adapted the approach to work from cheap, mass-produced DNA ingredients, further cutting time and cost.

Wang and Robinson, together with Hie and entrepreneur Adrian Woolfson, cofounded a company called Genyro—to commercialize the technology, hoping to turn a profit through paying pharmaceutical and biotech clients. According to Robinson, however, they intend to make the Sidewinder platform broadly accessible to the academic research community.

“We really want this to be an enabling platform,” says Robinson. “We want people to do cool things with the technology.”

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

11. Do transformers need three projections? Systematic study of QKV variants

Source: https://arxiv.org/abs/2606.04032
Site: arXiv.org
Author: [Submitted on 1 Jun 2026 (v1), last revised 4 Jun 2026 (this version, v2)]
Submitted: 2026-06-04 23:11 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 173 points · 34 comments
Length: 251 words (~2 min read)
Language: en

View PDF HTML (experimental)

Abstract:Transformers have become the standard solution for various AI tasks, with the query, key, and value (QKV) attention formulation playing a central role. However, the individual contribution of these three projections and the impact of omitting some remain poorly understood. We systematically evaluate three projection sharing constraints: a) Q-K=V (shared key-value), b) Q=K-V (shared query-key), and c) Q=K=V (single projection). The last two variants produce symmetric attention maps; to address this, we also explore asymmetric attention via 2D positional encodings. Through experiments spanning synthetic tasks, vision (MNIST, CIFAR, TinyImageNet, anomaly), and language modeling (300M and 1.2B parameter models on 10B tokens), we discovered that our transformers perform on par or occasionally better than the QKV transformer. In language modeling, Q-K=V projection sharing achieves 50% KV cache reduction with only 3.1% perplexity degradation. Crucially, projection sharing is complementary to head sharing (GQA/MQA): combining Q-K=V with GQA-4 yields 87.5% cache reduction, while Q-K=V + MQA achieves 96.9%, enabling practical on-device inference. We show that Q-K=V preserves quality because keys and values can occupy similar representational spaces and attention operates in a low-rank regime, whereas Q=K-V breaks attention directionality. Our results systematically characterize projection sharing as an underexplored instance of weight tying in attention, with direct, quantifiable inference memory benefits, particularly valuable for edge deployment. The code is publicly available at this https URL

Submission history

From: Anusha Madan Gopal [view email]
[v1] Mon, 1 Jun 2026 20:59:05 UTC (2,017 KB)
[v2] Thu, 4 Jun 2026 17:08:43 UTC (2,017 KB)

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

12. Open Code Review – An AI-powered code review CLI tool

Source: https://github.com/alibaba/open-code-review
Site: GitHub
Submitter: geoffbp (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-05 00:04 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 185 points · 53 comments
Length: 1.7K words (~8 min read)
Language: en

The open source AI code review agent.

English | 简体中文

What is Open Code Review?

Open Code Review is an AI-powered code review CLI tool. It originated as Alibaba Group's internal official AI code review assistant — over the past two years, it has served tens of thousands of developers and identified millions of code defects. After thorough validation at massive scale, we incubated it into an open source project for the community. Simply configure a model endpoint to get started.

It reads Git diffs, sends changed files to a configurable LLM via an agent with tool-use capabilities, and generates structured review comments with line-level precision. The agent can read full file contents, search the codebase, inspect other changed files for context, and produce deep reviews — not just surface-level diff feedback.

The Problem with General-Purpose Agents

If you've used general-purpose agents like Claude Code with Skills for code review, you've likely encountered these pain points:

Incomplete coverage — On larger changesets, agents tend to "cut corners," selectively reviewing only some files and missing others.
Position drift — Reported issues frequently don't match the actual code location, with line numbers or file references drifting off target.
Unstable quality — Natural-language-driven Skills are hard to debug, and review quality fluctuates significantly with minor prompt variations.

The root cause: a purely language-driven architecture lacks hard constraints on the review process.

Core Design: Deterministic Engineering × Agent Hybrid

Open Code Review's core philosophy is to combine deterministic engineering with an agent, each handling what it does best.

Deterministic Engineering — Hard Constraints

For review steps that must not go wrong, engineering logic — not the language model — guarantees correctness:

Precise file selection — Determines exactly which files need review and which should be filtered, ensuring no important change is missed.
Smart file bundling — Groups related files into a single review unit (e.g., message_en.properties and message_zh.properties are bundled together). Each bundle runs as a sub-agent with isolated context — a divide-and-conquer strategy that stays stable on very large changesets and naturally supports concurrent review.
Fine-grained rule matching — Matches review rules to each file's characteristics, keeping the model's attention sharply focused and eliminating information noise at the source. Compared to purely language-driven rule guidance, template-engine-based rule matching is more stable and predictable.
External positioning and reflection modules — Independent comment-positioning and comment-reflection modules systematically improve both the location accuracy and content accuracy of AI feedback.

Agent — Dynamic Decision-Making

The agent's strengths are concentrated where they matter most — dynamic decisions and dynamic context retrieval:

Scenario-tuned prompts — Prompt templates deeply optimized for code review, improving effectiveness while reducing token consumption.
Scenario-tuned toolset — Distilled from deep analysis of tool-call traces in large-scale production data — including call frequency distributions, per-tool repetition rates, and the impact of new tools on the overall call chain — resulting in a purpose-built toolset that is more stable and predictable for code review than a generic agent toolkit.

How to Use

CLI

Install

Via NPM (Recommended)

npm install -g @alibaba-group/open-code-review

After installation, the ocr command is available globally.

From GitHub Release

Download the latest binary from GitHub Releases:

# macOS (Apple Silicon)
curl -Lo ocr https://github.com/alibaba/open-code-review/releases/latest/download/opencodereview-darwin-arm64
chmod +x ocr && sudo mv ocr /usr/local/bin/ocr

# macOS (Intel)
curl -Lo ocr https://github.com/alibaba/open-code-review/releases/latest/download/opencodereview-darwin-amd64
chmod +x ocr && sudo mv ocr /usr/local/bin/ocr

# Linux (x86_64)
curl -Lo ocr https://github.com/alibaba/open-code-review/releases/latest/download/opencodereview-linux-amd64
chmod +x ocr && sudo mv ocr /usr/local/bin/ocr

# Linux (ARM64)
curl -Lo ocr https://github.com/alibaba/open-code-review/releases/latest/download/opencodereview-linux-arm64
chmod +x ocr && sudo mv ocr /usr/local/bin/ocr

# Windows (x86_64) — move ocr.exe to a directory in your PATH
curl -Lo ocr.exe https://github.com/alibaba/open-code-review/releases/latest/download/opencodereview-windows-amd64.exe

# Windows (ARM64) — move ocr.exe to a directory in your PATH
curl -Lo ocr.exe https://github.com/alibaba/open-code-review/releases/latest/download/opencodereview-windows-arm64.exe

From Source

git clone https://github.com/alibaba/open-code-review.git
cd open-code-review
make build
sudo cp dist/opencodereview /usr/local/bin/ocr

Quick Start

1. Configure LLM

You must configure an LLM before reviewing code.

# Option A: Interactive config
ocr config set llm.url https://api.anthropic.com/v1/messages
ocr config set llm.auth_token your-api-key-here
ocr config set llm.model claude-opus-4-6
ocr config set llm.use_anthropic true

# Option B: Environment variables (highest priority)
export OCR_LLM_URL=https://api.anthropic.com/v1/messages
export OCR_LLM_TOKEN=your-api-key-here
export OCR_LLM_MODEL=claude-opus-4-6
export OCR_USE_ANTHROPIC=true

Config is stored in ~/.opencodereview/config.json.

It is also compatible with Claude Code environment variables (ANTHROPIC_BASE_URL, ANTHROPIC_AUTH_TOKEN, ANTHROPIC_MODEL) and parses ~/.zshrc / ~/.bashrc for those exports.

2. Test Connectivity

ocr llm test

3. Review

cd your-project

# Workspace mode — review all staged, unstaged, and untracked changes
ocr review

# Branch range — compare two refs
ocr review --from main --to feature-branch

# Single commit
ocr review --commit abc123

Integrate with Coding Agents

OCR can be seamlessly integrated into AI coding agents as a slash command, enabling code review directly within your agent workflow.

Option 1: Install as a Skill

Use npx to install the OCR skill into your project:

npx skills add alibaba/open-code-review --skill open-code-review

This installs the open-code-review skill from the skills registry, which teaches your coding agent how to invoke ocr for code review, classify issues by priority, and optionally apply fixes.

Option 2: Install as a Claude Code Plugin

For Claude Code, install the command plugin through the following command in Claude Code:

/plugin marketplace add alibaba/open-code-review
/plugin install open-code-review@open-code-review

This registers the /open-code-review:review slash command, which runs OCR and automatically filters and fixes issues.

Option 3: Copy the Command File Directly

For a quick setup without any package manager, simply copy the command file to use the /open-code-review slash command in Claude Code.

Project-level (shared with team via git):

mkdir -p .claude/commands
curl -o .claude/commands/open-code-review.md \
  https://raw.githubusercontent.com/alibaba/open-code-review/main/plugins/open-code-review/commands/review.md

User-level (personal global use across all projects):

mkdir -p ~/.claude/commands
curl -o ~/.claude/commands/open-code-review.md \
  https://raw.githubusercontent.com/alibaba/open-code-review/main/plugins/open-code-review/commands/review.md

Prerequisite: All integration methods require the ocr CLI to be installed and an LLM configured. See Install and Configure LLM above.

CI/CD Integration

OCR can be integrated into CI/CD pipelines to automate code review on Merge Requests / Pull Requests.

The core command for CI integration:

ocr review \
  --from "origin/main" \
  --to "origin/feature-branch" \
  --format json

The --format json flag outputs machine-readable results suitable for parsing in CI scripts.

See the examples/ directory for integration examples:

github_actions/ — GitHub Actions integration example
gitlab_ci/ — GitLab CI integration example

Commands

Command Alias Description
ocr review ocr r Start a code review
ocr rules check <file> — Preview which review rule applies to a file path
ocr config set <key> <value> — Set configuration values
ocr llm test — Test LLM connectivity
ocr viewer ocr v Launch WebUI session viewer on localhost:5483
ocr version — Show version info

ocr review Flags

Flag Shorthand Default Description
--repo — current dir Git repository root
--from — — Source ref (e.g., main)
--to — — Target ref (e.g., feature-branch)
--commit -c — Single commit to review
--preview -p false Preview which files will be reviewed without running the LLM
--format -f text Output format: text or json
--concurrency — 8 Max concurrent file reviews
--timeout — 10 Concurrent task timeout in minutes
--audience — human human (show progress) or agent (summary only)
--rule — — Path to custom JSON review rules
--max-tools — built-in Max tool call rounds per file; only takes effect when greater than template default
--tools — — Path to custom JSON tools config

Examples

# Preview which files will be reviewed (no LLM calls)
ocr review --preview
ocr review -c abc123 -p

# Review workspace changes with default settings
ocr review

# Review branch diff with higher concurrency
ocr review --from main --to my-feature --concurrency 4

# Review a specific commit with verbose JSON output
ocr review --commit abc123 --format json --audience agent

# Use custom review rules
ocr review --rule /path/to/my-rules.json

# Preview which rule applies to a file
ocr rules check src/main/java/com/example/Foo.java
ocr rules check --rule custom.json src/main/resources/mapper/UserMapper.xml

# View review session history in browser
ocr viewer
ocr viewer --addr :3000

Viewer security

The viewer serves session JSONL contents (LLM request messages and responses) over HTTP. It enforces a Host-header allowlist on every request: loopback names (localhost, 127.0.0.0/8, ::1) and the concrete bind host are always allowed. Wildcard binds (--addr :3000, --addr 0.0.0.0:3000) and other non-loopback Hostnames must be added via the OCR_VIEWER_ALLOWED_HOSTS environment variable (comma-separated):

OCR_VIEWER_ALLOWED_HOSTS=review.internal,ocr.lan ocr viewer --addr :3000

This blocks DNS-rebinding attacks against the local viewer.

Review Rules

OCR resolves review rules using a four-layer priority chain. Each layer uses first-match-wins: if a file path matches a pattern, that rule is used; otherwise it falls through to the next layer.

Priority Source Path Description
1 (highest) --rule flag User-specified path CLI explicit override
2 Project config <repoDir>/.opencodereview/rule.json Per-project rules, can be committed to git
3 Global config ~/.opencodereview/rule.json User-wide personal preferences
4 (lowest) System default Embedded system_rules.json Built-in rules covering common languages and file types

Rule File Format

Layers 1–3 share the same JSON format:

{
  "rules": [
    {
      "path": "force-api/**/*.java",
      "rule": "All new methods must validate required parameters for null values"
    },
    {
      "path": "**/*mapper*.xml",
      "rule": "Check SQL for injection risks, parameter errors, and missing closing tags"
    }
  ]
}

path supports ** recursive matching and {java,kt} brace expansion.
Within each layer, rules are evaluated in declaration order — the first match wins.
If a rule file does not exist, it is silently skipped.

Configuration Reference

Config file: ~/.opencodereview/config.json

Key Type Example
llm.url string https://api.openai.com/v1/chat/completions
llm.auth_token string sk-xxxxxxx
llm.model string claude-opus-4-6
llm.use_anthropic boolean true | false
language string English | Chinese (default: Chinese)
telemetry.enabled boolean true | false
telemetry.exporter string console | otlp
telemetry.otlp_endpoint string OTLP collector address
telemetry.content_logging boolean Include prompts in telemetry

Environment variables take precedence over the config file.

Environment Variables

Variable Purpose
OCR_LLM_URL LLM API endpoint URL
OCR_LLM_TOKEN API key / auth token
OCR_LLM_MODEL Model name
OCR_USE_ANTHROPIC true = Anthropic, false = OpenAI

Telemetry

OpenTelemetry integration for observability (spans, metrics). Disabled by default.

ocr config set telemetry.enabled true
ocr config set telemetry.exporter otlp
ocr config set telemetry.otlp_endpoint localhost:4317

Set telemetry.content_logging to include LLM prompts and responses in exported data.

Contributing

See CONTRIBUTING.md for development setup, coding guidelines, and how to submit pull requests.

Star History

License

Apache-2.0 — Copyright 2026 Alibaba

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

13. ESP32 Bit Pirate, a Hardware Hacking Tool with WebCLI That Speaks Every Protocol

Source: https://github.com/geo-tp/ESP32-Bit-Pirate
Site: GitHub
Submitter: geotp (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-05 07:40 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 33 points · 19 comments
Length: 1.0K words (~5 min read)
Language: en

ESP32 Bit Pirate is an open-source firmware that turns your device into a multi-protocol hacker's tool, inspired by the legendary Bus Pirate.

It supports sniffing, sending, scripting, and interacting with various digital protocols (I2C, UART, 1-Wire, SPI, etc.) via a serial terminal or web-based CLI. It also communicates with radio protocols like Bluetooth, Wi-Fi, Sub-GHz and RFID.

Use the ESP32 Bit Pirate Web Flasher to install the firmware in one click. See the Wiki for step-by-step guides on every mode and command. Check ESP32 Bit Pirate Scripts for a collection of scripts.

For hardware extensions, see the ESP32 Bus Expander for additional radio interfaces, and the ESP32 Bit Pirate Dock to use original Bus Pirate adapters and accessories.

Features

Interactive command-line interface (CLI) via USB Serial or WiFi Web.

Modes for:

HiZ (default)
I2C (scan, glitch, slave mode, dump, eeprom)
SPI (eeprom, flash, sdcard, slave mode)
UART / Half-Duplex UART (bridge, read, write)
1WIRE (ibutton, eeprom)
2WIRE (sniff, smartcard) / 3WIRE (eeprom)
DIO (Digital I/O, read, pullup, set, pwm)
Infrared (send, record, universal remote)
USB (HID, flashrom, storage, usb-uart)
Bluetooth (BLE HID, scan, spoofing, sniffing)
Wi-Fi / Ethernet (sniff, deauth, nmap, netcat)
JTAG (scan, SWD, openOCD)
LED (animations, set LEDs)
I2S (test speakers, mic, play sound)
CAN (sniff, send and receive frames)
SUBGHZ (analyze, record, replay)
RFID (read, write, clone)
RF24 (scan, send, receive)
FM (analyze, broadcast)
CELL (dump sim card, sms, call)

Protocol sniffers I2C, UART, SPI, 1Wire, 2wire, CAN, Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, SubGhz.

Baudrate auto-detection, AT commands and various tools for UART.

Registers manipulation, EEPROM dump tools, identify devices for I2C.

Read all sort of EEPROM, Flash and various others tools for SPI.

Scripting using Bus Pirate-style bytecode instructions or Python.

Device-B-Gone command with more than 80 supported INFRARED protocols.

Direct I/O management, PWM, servo, GPIOs state.

Analyze radio signals and frequencies on every bands.

Near than 50 addressable LEDs protocols supported.

Ethernet and WiFi are supported to access networks.

Import and export data with the LittleFS over HTTP.

Pirate assistant to help you with the firmware.

USB-Uart dongle, SPI programmer, logic analyzer and more.

Supported Devices

Device Description
ESP32 S3 Dev Kit More than 20 available GPIO, 1 button
M5 Cardputer 2 GPIO (Grove), screen, keyboard, mic, speaker, IR TX, SD card, battery, standalone mode
M5 Cardputer ADV 12 GPIO (Grove, Header), screen, keyboard, mic, speaker, IR TX, SD card, IMU, battery, standalone mode
M5 Stick S3 13 GPIO (Grove, Header), screen, mic, speaker, IR TX, IR RX, IMU, 3 buttons, battery
M5 StampS3 9 GPIO (exposed pins), 1 button
M5 AtomS3 Lite 8 GPIO (Grove, Header), IR TX, 1 buttton
LILYGO T-Display 13 GPIO (1 Qwicc), screen, 2 buttons
LILYGO T-Embed 9 GPIO (Grove, Header), screen, encoder, speaker, mic, SD card
LILYGO T-Embed CC1101 4 GPIO (2x Qwiic), screen, encoder, speaker, mic, SD Card, CC1101, PN532, IR TX, IR RX , battery
LILYGO T-Embed CC1101 Plus 4 GPIO (2x Qwiic), screen, encoder, speaker, mic, SD Card, CC1101, NRF24, PN532, IR TX, IR RX , battery
Seeed Studio Xiao S3 9 GPIO (exposed pins), 1 button

Other ESP32-S3-based Boards

All boards based on the ESP32-S3 can be supported, provided they have at least 8 MB of flash.

You can flash the s3 dev-kit firmware onto any ESP32-S3 board.

Keep in mind that the default pin mapping in the firmware may not match your specific board.

Getting Started

🔧 Flash the firmware

Use the ESP32 Bit Pirate Web Flasher to burn the firmware directly from a web browser.
You can also burn it on M5Burner, in the StickS3, AtomS3, M5StampS3 or Cardputer category.

🔌 Connect via Serial or Web

Serial: any terminal app (see Connect via Serial)
Web: configure Wi-Fi and access the CLI via browser (see Wi-Fi Connection)

🧪 Use commands like:

mode
help
scan
sniff
...


Wiki

📚 Visit the Wiki for detailed documentation on every mode and command.

Includes:

Terminal mode - About serial and web terminal.
Mode overviews - Browse supported modes.
Serial setup - Serial access via USB.

The wiki is the best place to learn how everything works.

Scripting

🛠️ Automate interactions with the ESP32 Bit Pirate using Python scripts over serial.

Examples and ready-to-use scripts are available in the repository: ESP32 Bit Pirate Scripts.

Including: Logging data in a file, eeprom and flash dump, interracting with GPIOs, LED animation...

Expander

🔌 Expand the capabilities of the ESP32 Bit Pirate with additional hardware modules. The Expander adds support for the WiFi 5 GhZ or other radio protocols.

Dock

🔧 A docking station for the ESP32 S3 DevKit designed to work with original Bus Pirate adapters.
It allows you to plug and use the original Bus Pirate ecosystem of adapters and accessories.

(Coming soon)

Command-Line Interfaces

The ESP32 Bit Pirate firmware provides three command-line interface (CLI) modes:

Interface Advantages Ideal for...
Web Interface - Accessible from any browser
- PC, tablets, mobiles
- Works over Wi-Fi
- No cables needed Quick tests, demos, headless setups
Serial Interface - Faster performance
- Instant responsiveness
- Handles large data smoothly Intensive sessions, frequent interactions
Standalone - Only for the Cardputer
- On device keyboard
- On device screen Portable sessions, Quick tests

All interfaces share the same command structure and can be used interchangeably (more details).

Mobile Web Interface over WiFi

Standalone Mode for the Cardputer

Using the ESP32 Bit Pirate to speak UART over WiFi

Contribute

See How To Contribute section, which outlines a simple way to add a new command to any mode.

Visuals Assets

See images, logo, presentations, photo, video, illustrations. These visuals can be freely used in blog posts, documentation, videos, or articles to help explain and promote the firmware.

Warning

⚠️ Voltage Warning: Devices should only operate at 3.3V or 5V.

Do not connect peripherals using other voltage levels — doing so may damage your ESP32.

⚠️ Usage Warning: This firmware is provided for educational, diagnostic, and interoperability testing purposes only.

Do not use it to interfere with, probe, or manipulate devices without proper authorization.
Avoid any unauthorized RF transmissions (e.g., sub-GHz) that could violate local regulations or disrupt networks and communications.
The authors are not responsible for any misuse of this software or hardware, including legal consequences resulting from unauthorized access or signal emission.
Always stay within the bounds of your country’s laws and responsible disclosure policies.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

14. I'm skeptical about efforts to revolutionize schooling

Source: https://www.scotthyoung.com/blog/2026/05/27/revolutionize-schooling/
Site: Scott H Young
Author: Scott Young
Published: 2026-05-27
HN activity: 183 points · 269 comments
Length: 2.0K words (~9 min read)
Language: en-US

Being the guy who wrote a book called Ultralearning, I get asked a lot of questions about what I think schools should be doing better. Having never taught in a classroom or worked for even a single day in education, it’s a question I’m totally unqualified to answer. It’s a bit like asking a guy to reform an entire health care system because he’s good at lifting weights.

But being totally unqualified has never stopped me before, so I’ll try to explain the answer I typically give to this question, which is that I’m skeptical of dramatic proposals to make school considerably more effective or efficient for the average student.

To be clear, that’s not because no improvement is possible. We do know some about things that work that are inconsistently applied: phonics should be taught, cognitive load should be managed, skills should be fully taught and practice should be fun and ample.

But these answers aren’t the kind that satisfy the people who ask me these questions. Instead, having had many of these conversations, I feel like the person asking already “knows” what my response should be:

Isn’t it obvious that school sucks? That we should be teaching critical thinking and problem-solving skills instead of useless facts and theories? That school should be more like real life, with real-world projects and experiments and collaboration? That there should be less of that stuffy work of sitting at a desk and memorizing things?

If you had asked me this question years ago, I probably would have agreed with you. It took reading a lot of research to convince me that this intuitively appealing idea is actually bad. Below, I’d like to explain why.

First, the Evidence

Before I get into the explanation of why these kinds of seemingly-good strategies don’t work, I should begin by pointing out that these ideas are not new. They have been tried, and they have been found wanting.

Entire books have been written pointing out the flaws in many of these strategies. I won’t be able to do the full debate justice here, but, if you’re interested, you can check out Daniel Willingham’s Why Don’t Students Like School? Greg Ashman’s The Power of Explicit Teaching and Direct Instruction or, if you want to learn more about the actual debate between proponents of both sides, try Constructivist Instruction: Success or Failure.

To briefly recap some of the evidence:

Project Follow Through was one of the largest educational experiments ever conducted. Run in the 1970s, it compared how different teaching methodologies impact student outcomes. Direct Instruction, a method of teaching that has students sit in desks and perform extremely structured drills in unison, performed best.
Problem-based learning tends to do worse than traditional schooling in medical education. An influential meta-analysis by Albanese and Mitchell, for instance, found that students required more time studying, had worse exam scores and ordered more unnecessary tests compared to traditionally taught students.
Despite needing to relearn this truth every few decades, the best way to teach kids how to read has been known for centuries: break down the sound-spelling correspondence, and do lots of practice on it before moving up to authentic texts. Approaches based on skipping these drills in favor of “inspiring a love of reading” do worse.
Practice testing and distributed practice—basically, having regular quizzes spread out over a course—are the studying methods with the best empirical support. Fancy methods like mnemonics and concept maps fare worse.
General problem solving abilities are neither learned nor taught. While some problem-solving methods have broader applicability than others (such as the scientific process of hypothesis testing), students learn these methods better when they’re explicitly taught rather than simply giving students projects and hoping they’ll reinvent them on their own.

In short, whenever we have high-quality evidence that rigorously compares two teaching methods, the research invariably favors strong, direct instruction plus practice.1 Or, in other words, the exact stereotype of schooling that so many of the people asking me about school reform despise.

Your Stereotype of School is an Endangered Species

This doesn’t mean education couldn’t be better. My impression upon first encountering the Direct Instruction research was that I had never been taught this way in my entire life.

Clichés are often out of date. I went to grade school in the nineties, when the lofty aims of project-based and discovery learning were the educational orthodoxy. I spent a lot of my school years doing time-consuming projects that had us gluing and coloring and expected us to do our own research.

I’m pessimistic about real reform because the changes needed to make schools more effective are often opposite of what many people intuitively feel. For schools to teach more effectively, they should be more rigorous about carefully defining the knowledge objectives of the class, thoroughly breaking down complex skills into components, and doing lots and lots and lots of practice.

In short, a “better” school probably looks more like the stereotype of an old-fashioned schoolhouse with kids sitting at desks, drilling facts and concepts that are patiently explained by a teacher. To the extent that school becomes more like free play, project-building or acting like a scientist, it will probably be worse.

Why It’s Hard to Improve Schools

Schools face a number of practical constraints that make thorough reform difficult. Students are unmotivated. They range in background knowledge and innate ability. We care about sorting just as much as educating, so schools end up doing both.

But the real reason it’s hard to improve schools is simply that there are fundamental constraints on how the brain learns that prevent radical shortcuts.

The boring truth is that expertise in most subjects is largely a matter of having an enormous library of knowledge and skill. For example, if you want to learn a language, you need to learn a lot of words. Any method that tries to skip over the fact that there are tens of thousands of words to learn is doomed to failure. All skills are like this, it’s simply that the “atoms” of learning are usually less obvious than in languages.

When students complain about all the boring facts and skills they had to learn in school, my response is to claim that there isn’t any other type! All skills are simply an accumulation of small bits of facts, procedures and concepts.

Those small bits, in isolation, seem kind of trivial. But quantity has a quality all its own, and with enough well-integrated knowledge the result is expertise that seems almost magical to those who don’t possess it.

This means that improving education comes down to largely two different options:

First, you can increase the efficiency of the system. Efficiency here looks like the kind of factory redesign that increases product throughput—increasing the number of words learned per day, optimizing cognitive load, boosting mnemonic efficiency through spacing and retrieval—without skipping over the fundamental bottleneck in cognition.

Second, you can choose to learn different things. Given the high degree of specificity of most knowledge, the choice of what to learn can have profound consequences. But if choosing a pedagogical method is contentious, curricular choice is even more so! For every “useless” subject that reformers want to discard, there are die-hard advocates arguing that we should be putting in even more.

I believe in both of these things, and I’ve focused much of my writing career on how we can do them better, particularly outside of the typical classroom. But if you want lots of skills, there’s no way around learning a lot of stuff—including a ton of stuff that feels too obscure to be broadly useful.

What About Ed Tech?

Thus far, I’ve mostly been targeting a certain kind of questioner: someone who feels that school was maybe too boring and impractical, and who longs for the possibility that education could be more like play and less like studying.

There are reformers of all stripes, and educational technologists are another side of this debate. These are the people who champion efforts to gamify learning, carefully match teaching to each student’s ability level, develop AI-based tutoring, put an iPad in every child’s hands and so on.

In theory, these ideas are possibly useful. Drills can be boring, so wrapping them with gamification elements that reward progress and engagement might be helpful. Skills can be too hard or too easy, so adjusting difficulty automatically might be helpful. AI-tutoring, too, might help with closing Bloom’s famous 2 sigma problem.

But I’m more skeptical in practice. As Kelsey Piper writes, a lot of ed-tech games have a fairly low density of actual useful learning. I can attest to this: eager to give my son a head start on the phonetic skills involved in reading, I tried a few different iPad games with him. He mostly messed around randomly until he got the reward, largely ignoring the educational content to fixate on the cute cartoon characters.

Gamified learning is a bit like wrapping medicine in candy. Yes, it may help some students swallow some instruction they otherwise find bitter, but in practice it’s easy to pull off the candy, consume it, and throw the medicine away.

Individualized instruction aided by technology does solve some of the problems of differing ability levels. But schools aren’t just solving the cognitive problems of learning, they’re also working on motivational ones. A rigorous, but achievable, standard that applies to everyone may be more sustainable for motivation than an individually-tailored goal for each student.2

Similarly, while I’m hopeful that AI advances will make automated tutoring more useful, it’s still far away from the skill a teacher can provide. As someone who makes use of AI quite a bit in my own learning, I can say that it’s still relatively weak at having a good model of an individual’s skill gaps and conceptual weaknesses. It’s very much at the “better than nothing”—not the “better than teachers”—stage right now.

So, while I’m hopeful that there will be some improvements in technology around the margins, I’m skeptical of anything touted as a radical overhaul in educational process or outcomes.

What About Ultralearning?

Does this line of thinking rule out the methods I describe in Ultralearning? I don’t think so. The big distinction (and it is a big one) between my aims for that book and the aims of educational reformers is that I started with the assumption of a highly motivated learner.

The people I document in that book all began with the starting point that they were willing to work hard, even obsessively, on a project they were deeply motivated to succeed with. In such cases, the classroom structures that facilitate motivation can instead become obstacles: fixed homework assignments, mandatory lectures, exam deadlines. These things keep uninterested students going, but they may hold back the aggressively curious.

For instance, I still believe that full immersion is the best way to learn a language, provided you also augment that with a lot of the studying approaches I describe above, but it’s obviously a high-effort strategy. I’ve spoken to lots of people who have asked me for advice on how to learn a language, but relatively few that took up Vat’s and my actual strategy of avoiding speaking English.

Ultimately, I believe enhanced learning is certainly possible, and a highly motivated person can often do better than the average, and sometimes even the upper end, of what is typically seen in school. But such optimism about the possibility of learning doesn’t so easily transfer to a situation where motivation is much lower.

Footnotes

Manu Kapur’s work on productive failure doesn’t undermine this finding, contrary to some misinterpretations. Kapur’s research simply finds that the timing of instruction has some effects. Sometimes, for certain kinds of skills, in certain kinds of environments, attempting to solve a problem first and failing can be helpful for later understanding the solution procedure that is fully taught.
Researcher Greg Ashman makes a good argument against common pleas to individualize instruction in his book.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

15. Ohbin – uv wrapper for installing tools from GitHub

Source: https://github.com/prostomarkeloff/ohbin
Site: GitHub
Submitter: notmarkeloff (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-02 12:02 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 10 points · 4 comments
Length: 1.5K words (~7 min read)
Language: en

Declare binaries, not wrapper packages.

Your project needs ripgrep, or oasdiff, or some Rust linter that ships only as a GitHub release. Python can't install it. So you either tell every developer "go install it yourself" — and watch versions drift and CI break — or you hand-write a download-and-verify wrapper package, and copy it into every repo, for every tool.

ohbin deletes that. Declare the tool in pyproject.toml; it's fetched on first use, SHA256-checked against a pinned hash, cached per host, and exec'd. One dev-dependency. Any number of tools.

uv add --dev git+https://github.com/prostomarkeloff/ohbin.git

Before & After

❌ The hand-rolled wrapper — a whole package, per tool, copied into every repo

# a download-and-verify wrapper · ~180 lines · written again for the next tool
_PLATFORM_ASSETS = {
    ("linux",  "x86_64"): _Asset("ripgrep-14.1.1-x86_64-unknown-linux-musl.tar.gz", "4cf9f2741e6c…"),
    ("darwin", "arm64"):  _Asset("ripgrep-14.1.1-aarch64-apple-darwin.tar.gz",      "24ad767777…"),
    # ...two more, each SHA hand-copied from the release page
}

def ensure_binary() -> Path:
    asset = _resolve_asset()                      # platform.machine() guesswork
    with _flock(cache / ".lock"):                 # concurrency, if you bother
        _download(url, archive)                   # urllib + redirects (+ retries, if you bother)
        _verify_checksum(archive, asset.sha256)   # hashlib
        _extract(archive, binary)                 # tarfile, atomic rename
    return binary
# + a wheel shim, [project.scripts], and a [tool.uv.sources] entry — in every repo

✅ ohbin — one dev-dependency, one table per tool

uv run ohbin add BurntSushi/ripgrep --version 14.1.1 --name rg --binary rg

[tool.ohbin.tools.rg]
repo = "BurntSushi/ripgrep"
version = "14.1.1"
binary = "rg"
# + one [..assets.<os>-<arch>] table per platform — written by `add`, checksums and all

uv run ohbin run rg -- TODO src/

One is a package you maintain. The other is a table you declare.

Why a wrapper at all?

uv can't install an arbitrary GitHub-release binary — and that's not an oversight. uv run <name> resolves to a Python console-script entry point, which is static wheel metadata baked at build time. There is no hook that reads a config table and conjures a command. So something has to bridge "a binary on a release page" to "a command in your venv."

The honest choices are (a) a wrapper package per tool — the duplication above — or (b) one generic engine that reads a manifest. ohbin is (b): the per-tool detail (repo, version, per-platform asset + checksum) lives in [tool.ohbin.tools.*], and a single mostly-stdlib engine does download / verify / cache / exec for all of them.

ohbin add does the boring part

Point it at a repo. It resolves the release, matches one asset per platform, pins each SHA256 (from the GitHub API digest, else by downloading and hashing), and writes it into your pyproject — comments and formatting intact, via tomlkit:

$ uv run ohbin add BurntSushi/ripgrep --version 14.1.1 --name rg --binary rg
resolving BurntSushi/ripgrep@14.1.1 ...
  + linux-x86_64    ripgrep-14.1.1-x86_64-unknown-linux-musl.tar.gz   (downloaded+hashed)
  + linux-aarch64   ripgrep-14.1.1-aarch64-unknown-linux-gnu.tar.gz   (downloaded+hashed)
  + darwin-x86_64   ripgrep-14.1.1-x86_64-apple-darwin.tar.gz         (downloaded+hashed)
  + darwin-arm64    ripgrep-14.1.1-aarch64-apple-darwin.tar.gz        (downloaded+hashed)

wrote [tool.ohbin.tools.rg] to pyproject.toml

--name sets the command when it differs from the repo (ripgrep → rg); --binary sets the executable's name inside the archive. Odd naming scheme? The manifest is the source of truth — add just fills it; fix an entry by hand. Uses the gh CLI when present (auth, rate limits), else the public REST API (GH_TOKEN / GITHUB_TOKEN honored).

ohbin run does the rest

uv run ohbin run rg -- --files       # first run: download → verify → cache → exec
uv run ohbin run rg -- TODO src/     # next runs: straight to exec
uv run ohbin which fd                 # print the cached path (downloads if needed)
uv run ohbin list                     # declared tools + resolved platforms

Every command takes --pyproject-file PATH to target a specific manifest; reads otherwise discover the nearest pyproject.toml with [tool.ohbin] (or $OHBIN_PYPROJECT), while add / add-gist write only to the CWD's pyproject. Each run prints [ohbin] resolved pyproject as <realpath> so the target is never a guess.

run replaces the process with execv, so the tool owns stdin/stdout, signals, and the exit code — drop-in for CI and Make, where the prefix disappears behind a variable:

RG := uv run ohbin run rg --
search:; $(RG) TODO src/

Private binaries — encrypted, through a gist

add assumes the release is public. But you have a tool you built yourself and don't want on a public repo — a closed-source linter, a vendored binary, an internal CLI. You still want ohbin run to just work.

The answer is a secret gist carrying the binary encrypted with a password. The gist link is link-gated (unlisted, not searchable); the password lives only in a private repo. A leaked link alone is useless — the bytes are AES garbage without the key, and ohbin is what decrypts them. No TTL, no key server: to revoke, delete the gist or rotate the password.

$ uv run ohbin publish-gist ./dist/mytool --password "$PW"
published mytool (current platform) to https://gist.github.com/you/ab12…
add it with:  uv run ohbin add-gist https://gist.github.com/you/ab12…

publish-gist gzips the binary, encrypts it (openssl AES-256-CBC, PBKDF2 / 200k iters), base64s the ciphertext into one gist file per platform, and writes an ohbin.json index next to them. Publish each platform from its own machine — pass --gist <id> to add to the same gist:

uv run ohbin publish-gist ./dist/mytool-linux --password "$PW" --platform linux-x86_64 --gist ab12…

add-gist reads the index, pins each blob's immutable raw_url + ciphertext SHA256, and writes an encrypted = true tool into pyproject:

$ uv run ohbin add-gist https://gist.github.com/you/ab12… --name mytool
wrote [tool.ohbin.tools.mytool] (encrypted) to pyproject.toml
run it with:  uv run ohbin run --password <pw> mytool -- <args>

At run time the password comes from --password (before the tool name — args after it forward to the tool), or from a password field in the manifest. run verifies the downloaded ciphertext SHA, decrypts, checks the plaintext SHA (a wrong password is caught cleanly, not as a crash), then caches and execs like any other tool:

uv run ohbin run --password "$PW" mytool -- --help

Needs the gh CLI (reuses your auth) and openssl on PATH. The password never touches argv — it's piped to openssl via a file descriptor. Store it with add-gist --password only if committing it is acceptable; otherwise pass --password at run time.

How it works

ohbin run rg -- --version
   │
   ├─ read [tool.ohbin.tools.rg]                  _manifest   (walks up to your pyproject)
   ├─ pick the asset for this os/arch             _platform   (→ darwin-arm64)
   │
   ├─ cached?  ~/.cache/ohbin/rg/14.1.1/rg
   │    ├─ yes ───────────────────────────────┐
   │    └─ no → flock → download → SHA256 ✓    │   _engine
   │              → extract (tar/zip/raw) → +x │
   ▼                                            ▼
  os.execv(binary, ["rg", "--version"])  ◄──────┘


Cache — $XDG_CACHE_HOME/ohbin/<tool>/<version>/<binary> (~/.cache/… default). The version is in the path, so a bump is a clean new download that never collides with the old one.
Concurrency — the first caller downloads under a flock; the rest wait and reuse. Safe under xdist / parallel CI.
Integrity — SHA256-checked before extraction. A mismatch aborts; nothing partial lands in the cache.

It survives the network

Release assets live behind CDNs that hiccup; gh rate-limits; DNS blips mid-clone. Every release lookup and every download retries with exponential backoff — and a real 404 is never mistaken for a transient failure (the bug that makes naive wrappers cry "release not found" on a dropped packet):

$ uv run ohbin add BurntSushi/ripgrep --version 14.1.1
ohbin: download failed (attempt 1/4): … Connection reset by peer; retrying in 0.5s
  + linux-x86_64    ripgrep-14.1.1-x86_64-unknown-linux-musl.tar.gz   (downloaded+hashed)
  …

That is a real line from a live run — a reset connection, recovered, no fuss.

In-process

Need the binary's path, not to exec it? Same manifest, one call:

from ohbin import ensure

path = ensure("rg")   # -> pathlib.Path, downloaded + verified on first use

Discovery walks up from CWD to the nearest pyproject.toml carrying [tool.ohbin]; set OHBIN_PYPROJECT to point at a specific file (CI, or callers running from an unrelated directory).

Hand-rolled wrapper vs ohbin

wrapper package per tool ohbin
Packages to maintain one per tool one, total
New tool write a new package ohbin add
New repo copy the files one dev-dependency
Checksums hand-pinned from the release page auto-pinned by add
Network resilience re-implemented (or skipped) retry + backoff, built in
Integrity check re-implemented per wrapper shared, SHA256

Limitations

POSIX only. The install lock is fcntl.flock; the engine imports fcntl at the top, so Windows fails on import.
Four platforms. linux/darwin × x86_64/arm64 are what add auto-resolves. Others (windows, musl, riscv) you add by hand — the engine runs them fine.
Heuristic matching. add matches assets by OS/arch tokens in the filename and prefers .tar.gz. The manifest is the source of truth; an unusual scheme is a one-line fix.

Development

git clone https://github.com/prostomarkeloff/ohbin
cd ohbin && uv sync

make lint-heavy     # ruff format + ruff check --fix + pyright
make test-full      # 68 network-free tests (platform / matching / manifest / engine / crypto / gist / retry)

CI runs the lint once, then an os: [ubuntu, macos, windows] × python: [3.11, 3.12, 3.13, 3.14] matrix.

Stop copying wrapper packages. Start declaring binaries.

Made with 📦 by @prostomarkeloff

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

16. Watching a Z80 from an RP2350

Source: https://emalliab.wordpress.com/2026/05/26/watching-a-z80-from-an-rp2350/
Site: Kevin's Blog
Author: Published by Kevin
Published: 2026-05-26
HN activity: 24 points · 2 comments
Length: 1.9K words (~9 min read)
Language: en

I’m messing around with the Raspberry Pi Pico RP2350 and PIO and at some point want to see if I can hook it up to a Z80.

As a starter, I’ve been experimenting with seeing if I can get an RP2350 to see the Z80 address and data bus in any manner.

I’m using a Pimoroni PGA2350 in my own custom breakout PCB.

The Z80 Bus

There is a lot of detail out there about the Z80 and Z80 bus, so I’m not going to go over that again here, but here are some key references:

http://www.z80.info/ – the home of everything Z80!
The RC2014 bus specification and description.
Electronic Circuits – interfacing with a Z80 microprocessor v3 (data and address buses).
Z80 User Manual – Chapter on “Timing”.
Build Your Own Z80 Computer – Steve Ciarcia

The key features relevant to me are:

16-bit address bus (A0-A15).
8-bit data bus (D0-D7).
A number of OUTPUT control lines.
A number of INPUT control lines (including RESET and CLOCK).

The original Z80 was an NMOS device and ran at 2.5MHz (Z80), but there were 4MHz (Z80A) and 6MHz (Z80B) versions soon afterwards. Then the CMOS versions appeared with a whole range of clock speeds, typically 8MHz (Z84C0008) and 10MHz (Z84C0010), and even up to 20MHz (Z84C0020). They were made by a whole host of different manufacturers – Zilog, SGS, ST, NEC, Mostek, etc (more here), but they don’t all seem to have had the same numbering schemes that I could find.

It was discontinued in 2024, although some overseas marketplaces assure me that they can provide brand new 20MHz Zilog Z84C0020’s at less than a few £s each 😉

A Z80 CPU Tester will give an idea of the type and speed of any unknown Z80 found “in the wild” though (I had fun testing a batch of said “20MHz” devices myself).

The Z80 Clock

Of particular interest to me is the clock speed. In particular, what is the minimum clock speed possible? There are some (modern, apparently) versions of the Z80 that are fully static – i.e. they will retain state between clock pulses, including a complete stop. But I’m not clear if most are. But seeing as someone managed to create a hand-cranked, clocked Z80 based computer, I suspect a really slow clock is unlikely to be an issue. There is a note here that it is best to hold the clock HIGH when not being cycled.

Going back to the original Z80A datasheet, we find:

The max clock period is defined in note [12] as:

So basically adding those values together. The max pulse width for LOW has a given value of 2000nS, and the rise and fall times are fixed at 30nS, so key to determining the longest period accepted is the max pulse width for HIGH. That is provided in note [E]:

So the implication is that clock LOWs should be no longer than 2uS, but clock HIGHs in principle can be anything, with guaranteed functionality up to 200uS. This gives a total clock period of at least around 203uS which equates to a clock frequency of just under 5KHz.

This explains the previous noted comment about holding clocks HIGH.

One issue could be that some signals need several clock cycles. In particular, RESET is expected to be held for 3 clock cycles to ensure a proper reset occurs, so that will naturally have to be longer for longer clock pulses.

It is worth noting at this point that the Z80 has two concepts of a cycle: machine (M) cycles and clock (T) cycles (sometimes called states). Machine cycles are multiples of clock cycles (typically 3 to 6 T cycles per M cycle). Many Z80 instruction references will list the number of cycles (M) and states (T) that an instruction will take to execute.

There is also the option for an external peripheral (e.g. memory) to get the Z80 CPU to wait. This involves asserting the /WAIT signal until the peripheral is ready to continue. This allows synchronisation between the CPU and slower memory.

Part of the consequence of all this is that a single-clock-cycling option isn’t particularly useful, as it will need several steps of the single-cycle clock to execute a single Z80 instruction.

For interest, there is an instruction-aware single-stepper circuit in the Build Your Own Z80 Computer book (figure 4.5), which can monitor /M1 and use /WAIT to pause the CPU until the next step.

RP2350 GPIO

I’m using the Arduino Pico core from here: https://github.com/earlephilhower/arduino-pico

Which makes it easy to build and download code to the RP2350, but I’m trying to stick to Pico C/C++ SDK functions rather than using the Arduino environment overlays.

To initialse GPIO on an RP2040/RP2350 requires the following:

gpio_init(pin);
gpio_set_dir(pin, dir);
gpio_put(pin, value);
value = gpio_get(pin);

But this is too slow for a bus read. But there is an option to act on several GPIO pins at the same time, for example:

gpio_init_mask(gpiobitmap);
gpio_set_dir_in_masked(gpiobitmap);
gpio_clr_mask(gpio_bitmap);
gpio_set_mask(gpio_bitmap);
uint32_t value = gpio_get_all();

But these APIs were designed with the RP2040 in mind, and so only needs to address up to 32 GPIO pins. The RP2350B I’m using has 48 GPIO, so the SDK has the concept of a GPIO base, which can be 0 (for the range 0-31) or 1 (for the range 32-63).

Unfortunately how this appears in the API is a little inconsistent. In some cases there is a _n version of the API which takes a base (0 or 1) as a parameter. In some cases, e.g. for single GPIO pins, any value up to the maximum supported is fine.

PIO is different again and the base needs to be set before hand using pio_set_gpio_base. But for PIO the base is treated differently: base 0 is GPIO 0-31, but base 1 is GPIO 16-47. I guess this is to allow a fully parallel 32 GPIO pins in both cases, but it is confusing being different to the non-PIO functions.

Some API functions don’t have an equivalent (that I could find anyway), so I could find no “base 1” version of gpio_init_mask.

To initialise all the GPIO I need uses the following:

  gpio_init_mask(GP_BASE0_MASK);
  gpio_set_dir_in_masked(GP_BASE0_MASK);

  for (int i=0; i<GP_LED_PINS; i++) {
    gpio_init(ledPins[i]);
    gpio_set_dir(ledPins[i], true);  // out = true
  }

I also find it really annoying that there are gpio_set_dir_in/out functions for combinations of pins, but for a single pin you have to use gpio_set_dir(pin, direction) where direction is a bool indicating out or not.

The GPIO pin map I’m using is the same as that used by the picoZ80:

RP2350 GPIO	Z80 Bus
0-15	A0-A15
16-23	D0-D7
24	/RD
25	/WR
26	/BUSACK
27	/HALT
28	/M1
29	/RFSH
30	/MREQ
31	/IORQ
32	/BUSRQ
33	/INT
34	/WAIT
35	/CLK
36	/NMI
37	Not used
38	/RESET

RP2350 Test Code

The simplest code will take what is received on the Z80 data bus and write it straight out to some LEDs. This is what is going on in the following code.

Note this is NOT real-time – it is just a continually updating snapshot of the data bus, not an accurate representation of the full activity and certainly not synchronised to any of the bus control signals.

In short, it looks pretty, but is essentially useless for any practical purposes. But it illustrates the idea and shows the connections are working.

// GPIO Base 0 Definitions
// Start from GPIO 0 up to GPIO 31
//
#define GP_ADDR_START 0ul
#define GP_ADDR_PINS  16ul
#define GP_ADDR_MASK (0xFFFFul<<GP_ADDR_START)

#define GP_DATA_START 16ul
#define GP_DATA_PINS  8ul
#define GP_DATA_MASK (0xFFul<<GP_DATA_START)

#define GP_RD 24ul
#define GP_WR 25ul
#define GP_M1 28ul
#define GP_MREQ 30ul
#define GP_IORQ 31ul
#define GP_CTRL_MASK ((1ul<<GP_RD)|(1ul<<GP_WR)|(1ul<<GP_M1)|(1ul<<GP_MREQ)|(1ul<<GP_IORQ))
#define GP_CTRL_PINS 5ul
int ctrlPins[GP_CTRL_PINS] = {GP_RD, GP_WR, GP_M1, GP_MREQ, GP_IORQ};

#define GP_BASE0_MASK (GP_ADDR_MASK | GP_DATA_MASK | GP_CTRL_MASK)

// GPIO Base 1 Definitions
// Start from GPIO 32 onwards
//

#define GP_LED_START 40
#define GP_LED_MASK (0xFF<<(GP_LED_START-32))
#define GP_LED_PINS 8
int ledPins[GP_LED_PINS] = {40,41,42,43,44,45,46,47};

#define GP_BASE1_MASK (GP_LED_MASK)

void setup() {
  // Pins in range lower than 32 can be initialised at once
  gpio_init_mask(GP_BASE0_MASK);
  gpio_set_dir_in_masked(GP_BASE0_MASK);

  // Set the LED outputs
  // Can't be set all at once I think...
  for (int i=0; i<GP_LED_PINS; i++) {
    gpio_init(ledPins[i]);
    gpio_set_dir(ledPins[i], true);  // out = true
  }
}

void loop() {
  uint32_t gpio31 = gpio_get_all();
  uint8_t data8 = (GP_DATA_MASK & gpio31) >> GP_DATA_START;
  gpio_clr_mask_n(1, GP_LED_MASK);
  gpio_set_mask_n(1, (data8<<(GP_LED_START-32)));
  delay(5);
}

RC2350 8-bit IO Module

Having got this far, it is now possible to check for various control values on the Z80 bus, for example perhaps looking for an IO write to a certain address.

For an IO write, I need to look for /IORQ and /WR going LOW and then the address I’m interested in appearing in the lower 8 bits of the address bus. Then I can pull the data off the data bus.

The following code looks for a write to IO address 0 and lights the LEDs according to the value of the data bus.

void loop() {
  uint32_t gpio32 = gpio_get_all();
  // Look for /IORQ, /WR, and ADDR matching IO location 0
  if (
     ((gpio32 & GP_CTRL_MASK) == ((1<<GP_RD)|(0<<GP_WR)|(1<<GP_M1)|(1<<GP_MREQ)|(0<<GP_IORQ))) 
  && ((gpio32 & 0xFF) == 0)
     )
  {
    // Grab the data off the bus and update LEDs
    uint8_t data8 = (GP_DATA_MASK & gpio32) >> GP_DATA_START;
    gpio_clr_mask_n(1, GP_LED_MASK);
    gpio_set_mask_n(1, (data8<<(GP_LED_START-32)));
  }
}

I’ve basically used a 32-bit dual-core ARM CORTEX M0+ running at 150MHz to emulate a couple of TTL logic chips as can be found in the RC2014 digital IO module to flash some LEDs from an 8-bit, 10MHz processor!

This is the BASIC code that is running on the RC2014:

 10 FOR F=1 TO 6
 20 OUT 0,2^F
 30 GOSUB 100
 40 NEXT F
 50 FOR F=7 TO 0 STEP -1
 60 OUT 0,2^F
 70 GOSUB 100
 80 NEXT F
 90 GOTO 10
100 FOR Z=1 TO 200
110 NEXT Z
120 RETURN 

You can see this running in the video at the start of this post.

Conclusion

Naturally this is a pretty crazy thing to be doing, but it is showing the basic idea.

At present, this is just running at full CPU speed, consuming one of the cores of the RP2350 just to watch what is going on, on the bus.

There are a number of interesting directions that could now be taken. Some that I’m pondering are:

Support both read and write, i.e. INPUT and OUTPUT IO access.
Getting the IO handling onto one core of the RP2350 whilst the other core does something with the information.
A memory-mapped device, watching for memory reads and writes.
Controlling the Z80 clock from the RP2350 for some interesting clock control possibilities – varying speeds, instruction aware-stepping, etc.
Go back to my experiments with PIO on the Raspberry Pi Pico to see if I can do it more autonomously.
Emulate some of the existing Z80 peripherals, similar to how the Pico is used on the RP6502 The Picocomputer. Although it is worth noting that this is essentially what the Z80-MBC is doing…

I doubt many of these will get past the thinking stage, but there are a lot of options now the basic mechanisms seem to work.

Kevin

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

17. Lee Kuan Yew's Singapore Story

Source: https://www.historytoday.com/archive/feature/lee-kuan-yews-singapore-story
Site: History Today
Author: Albert Lau
Published: 2023-08-20
HN activity: 10 points · 2 comments
Length: 3.3K words (~15 min read)
Language: en

One man more than any other is associated with Singapore’s remarkable 20th-century success. Who was Lee Kuan Yew, and how did he do it?
Prime Minister of Singapore Lee Kuan Yew speaks in Fullerton Square, Singapore, 18 December 1984. Alex Bowie via Getty Images.

On the north bank of the Singapore River is an eight-foot-tall statue of a man striking a stately pose, arms folded, gazing into the horizon. Stamford Raffles stands – according to the plaque attached to the plinth – on the ‘historic site’ where he first landed as an agent of the British East India Company on 28 January 1819 and, thereafter, ‘with genius and perception changed the destiny of Singapore from an obscure fishing village to a great seaport and modern metropolis’. Raffles – who is officially recognised as the ‘founder’ of modern Singapore – had a strong conviction that the tiny trading outpost he founded at the southern tip of the Malay Peninsula would fulfil a destiny larger than its physical size. He was right. But he was not a nation-builder. He visited Singapore just three times, spending slightly more than nine months on the island across a period of three years. After founding the outpost, he spent most of his time elsewhere, in neighbouring Indonesia (then the Dutch East Indies). If Raffles boasted of Singapore as his ‘child’, it is fair to say he was an absent father.

The story of Singapore’s ascent from ‘Third World’ to ‘First’, following its forced separation from Malaysia in August 1965, happened under the watch of another visionary, Lee Kuan Yew. In September 2023, Singapore celebrates the centenary of his birth. Reflecting on his life and achievements a few years before his death in 2015, Lee told a group of assembled journalists: ‘I have spent my life, so much of it, building up this country. There’s nothing more that I need to do. At the end of the day, what have I got? A successful Singapore. What have I given up? My life.’ Lee believed this: his 1998 autobiography was titled, simply, The Singapore Story. Since his passing, Lee has been honoured as the nation’s ‘founding father’.

Rise during fall

Lee grew up in a comfortable, but not rich, English-speaking Chinese family. His parents, brought together in an arranged marriage, belonged to the colony’s majority Chinese community. Like any Singaporean child, Lee mingled with children of other ethnicities and played with Malay friends. The eldest of four children, the young Harry Lee – his anglicised first name was added by his grandfather who admired the British, but later dropped by Lee – was a gifted student. Coming first at the Senior Cambridge examinations in Singapore and Malaya in 1940, Lee decided to study law in London. The Second World War precluded this and, with Britain at war, Lee accepted a scholarship to study at Raffles College, the colony’s leading tertiary institution in the arts and sciences. There, he became the college’s best student in mathematics, but not in English or economics, which were topped by another student, Kwa Geok Choo, Lee’s future wife.

War had torn Europe apart and was creeping towards Singapore. On 8 December 1941, the sleepy city was awakened before dawn by the blare of air-raid sirens to the stark realisation that Britain was now at war with Japan. With classes cancelled, Lee volunteered as a medical auxiliary. Less than three months later, he watched with bewilderment the rapid collapse of British Malaya, as demoralised British and Commonwealth troops beat a desperate retreat to their island citadel of Singapore, only to see their much vaunted ‘impregnable fortress’ fall on 15 February 1942.

The brutal Japanese occupation lasted for three-and-a-half years and profoundly affected the trajectory of Lee’s life, and that of the city. The occupation was very hard on the city’s inhabitants, especially its Chinese population which was suspected of being anti-Japanese. Before the invasion, many overseas Chinese had openly supported China in its prolonged war with Japan. The victorious Japanese army, which had fought in China, now sought revenge. Like many other Chinese men, Lee was ordered to report to a ‘screening centre’. Many of those who complied were loaded onto lorries and executed. Lee asked to leave the line in order to return to a friend’s dormitory to collect his belongings. He hid there and never returned. Had the Japanese guard refused his request, Lee could have been among the estimated 5,000 to 50,000 Chinese men who were unfavourably ‘screened’ by the Japanese and who perished in the Sook Ching (‘purge through cleansing’) massacre. ‘I will never understand how decisions affecting life and death could be taken so capriciously and casually’, he later reflected.
Japanese troops in Singapore following the fall of the city in 1942. Lee Kuan Yew narrowly escaped death during the Second World War occupation and the experience profoundly shaped his view of Britain. Chronicle/Alamy Stock Photo.

Before the war, Lee had considered himself apolitical. But the war – and the Japanese occupation – destroyed the myth that the British were a superior and invincible people with an inherent right to rule Asians: ‘In 70 days of surprises, upsets and stupidities, British colonial society was shattered, and with it all the assumptions of the Englishman’s superiority.’ In his memoirs, Lee described being slapped and forced to kneel for failing to bow to a Japanese soldier. Lee’s experience of British failures destroyed his reverence for them; his experience of Japanese brutality led him to abhor them. As he later wrote, he emerged from the war ‘determined that no one – neither the Japanese nor the British – had the right to push and kick us around’.

After the war, Lee left Singapore for England to read law at the London School of Economics. Disliking London, he moved to Cambridge University. By the time he graduated in 1949 with a double first with starred distinction, he was a changed man. While his stellar achievements at Cambridge gave him confidence in subsequent dealings with British officials, his experiences in England also forged a deeply anti-colonial sentiment. He never forgot Britain’s blunders during Singapore’s fall, nor the class and colour prejudices he encountered in Britain. Inspired by socialist ideals, he befriended political leaders in the British Labour Party and even campaigned on behalf of one of his Cambridge friends, David Widdicombe, a Labour candidate. His growing political involvement in England caught the eye of Singapore’s Special Branch, which added Lee to its watch list.

In 1950, Lee delivered a parting speech to the Malayan Forum, a London-based discussion club founded to deliberate the future of Malaya. Lee spoke of how returning Malayan students, schooled in British institutions, could lead the fight for independence and oversee a smooth transfer of power. Upon returning home to begin his legal practice, the 27-year-old law graduate found a city still reeling from the aftermath of war, battling a rising communist insurgency, and shuffling uneasily toward an uncertain post-colonial future.

Party time

Since 1948, a mainly Chinese-led communist insurgency, cloaked as an anti-imperialist revolt, had established itself across Malaya and Singapore. In Malaya, British troops battled communists in a jungle war that would last another 12 years. In Singapore, the city’s mostly Chinese population made it a major target for communist subversion.

Lee considered joining a political party but none suited his left-wing, anti-colonial convictions. Because of the communist insurgency, only pro-British, right-wing parties such as the Progressive Party had survived. In response, Lee assembled a group of like-minded English-educated activists who met in the basement dining room of his bungalow at 38 Oxley Road to ponder the merits of forming a party. Lee’s roles as barrister and would-be politician soon became inseparable as he took on cases, often pro bono, of unionists, civil servants and student groups who had got into legal skirmishes with the colonial government. High-profile cases brought him public attention and he became a sought-after legal adviser. Contact with the leftist Chinese students he represented opened his eyes to the dynamism and anti-colonial potential among Singapore’s Chinese-educated population, which the communists had been working on for decades. Ever pragmatic, Lee formed an alliance of necessity with the communists to gain access to their mass base.
Lee Kuan Yew surrounded by supporters of the People’s Action Party following their victory in the September 1963 Singapore elections, held five days after the formation of Malaysia. Associated Press/Alamy Stock Photo.

On 21 November 1954, ahead of a legislative assembly election the following year, Lee and his group launched the People’s Action Party (PAP), committed to using ‘every constitutional means’ to hasten the end of colonial rule in Malaya. Lee’s ‘men-in-white’ – identified by their all-white party uniform to symbolise incorruptibility – duly elected him as their Secretary General. At the PAP’s first election in 1955, Lee’s token team did well, winning three of the four seats it contested, and Lee became de facto opposition leader in a shaky coalition government helmed by the Labour Front. In the legislative assembly, Lee attacked colonialism and called for its swift demise.

But the PAP was not united. Split within, a pro-communist faction, sceptical of the effectiveness of constitutional methods, advocated the use of united front tactics, and even violence, in toppling the colonial government. The internal power struggle ended after Lee expelled the pro-communists in 1961. The splintered group formed the Barisan Sosialis (Socialist Front) and remained a troublesome thorn in the PAP’s side into the late 1960s.

In 1959, the PAP, campaigning on a pro-independence agenda and a detailed plan to solve bread-and-butter issues, won a spectacular landslide victory to form the government of self-governing (but not yet independent) Singapore. Lee became its founding prime minister, an office he retained until 1990. Since 1959, the PAP has won every general election on the island.

Malay or Malaysian

Under Lee, Singapore became independent twice, once by choice, once not. Lee’s goal had never been an independent Singapore; he wanted a free Malaya that included Singapore, which had been constitutionally detached from the peninsula as part of controversial British postwar plans to reconstitute its Malayan dependency. Britain feared that Singapore’s inclusion would unbalance Malaya’s population in favour of the Chinese. The island’s separation was to have serious repercussions for its future. Lee did not believe that tiny Singapore could survive on its own, or that the British would grant the colony freedom when communists were waiting to take power. After Malaya achieved independence ahead of Singapore in 1957, Lee championed ‘independence through merger’ with Malaya as the only realistic strategy for Singapore’s future. He convinced the Malayan premier, Tunku Abdul Rahman, of the security and political merits of including Singapore in a wider federation under Malayan leadership that also comprised the British Borneo territories. Lee defended this merger abroad and at home against a ferocious campaign by the Barisan Sosialis, and conducted a keenly fought, if controversial, referendum, which he won decisively, on merger terms agreed between the two leaders. Incorporating Singapore, the new state of Malaysia came into being on 16 September 1963, Lee’s 40th birthday.

But hopes of Singapore playing a role in the new Malaysian nation were dashed almost as soon as they had begun. No Singaporean minister was invited to join the right-wing Malaysian cabinet. Tunku Abdul Rahman did not want another prime minister in his cabinet. Heightened political competition and tensions flared up over competing visions of what Malaysia represented – whether it was to be a Malay Malaysia, where political power was jealously vested in a Malay-led and privileged central government; or a Malaysian Malaysia, where multiracial ideals were upheld.
Singapore Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew with (left to right) Malaysian Prime Minister Tunku Abdul Rahman, Harold Macmillan and Duncan Sandys, British Secretary of State for Commonwealth Relations and the Colonies, at Admiralty House, 31 July 1962. Chronicle/Alamy Stock Photo.

In 1964, deadly Sino-Malay race riots broke out in Singapore. Lee blamed the riots on incitement by radical Malay activists hoping to undercut the appeal of the PAP’s socialist agenda to young Malays within Singapore and Malaya. ‘They wanted us to confine ourselves to Chinese voters and stop appealing to the Malays’, he later said: ‘The Malay electorate was out of bounds to non-Malay parties like the PAP.’ As relations slumped and a war of words became more and more heated, Tunku Abdul Rahman decided that removing Singapore from Malaysia was the only way to contain a potentially explosive situation. For their part, PAP leaders appeared set on leading a newly formed Malaysia-wide multiracial coalition to challenge Tunku’s government and its weaponising of race. Amid calls for his arrest to nip the PAP’s ‘Malaysian Malaysia’ movement in the bud, Lee secretly set his finance minister, Goh Keng Swee, to work on a deal with his Malayan counterparts for Singapore’s disengagement from federal affairs. But Goh exceeded his brief. He pressed instead for separation, convinced that the political cost of merger was dreadful and the economic benefits non-existent. Lee supported the move, which Tunku backed. With no better offer on the table, the Singapore premier, with great difficulty, persuaded his senior Malaya-born PAP ministers to accept separation and avert a bloody headlong collision. On 9 August 1965, Lee delivered a press conference announcing the separation, weeping at the shattering of his Malaysian dream. After less than two years, Singapore was out of Malaysia and independent for a second time.

‘First World oasis’

Independence was as sobering as it was cathartic. In Singapore’s Chinatown, relief at the end of the altercation was celebrated with firecrackers. But this light-hearted response belied the grave situation Singapore faced. ‘I have a responsibility for the survival of the two million people in Singapore’, Lee told foreign correspondents five days after separation. Lee was faced with the task of building a nation that would prove his earlier thesis wrong: that a small, vulnerable, independent Singapore, bereft of its Malayan hinterland, could survive. ‘Ten years from now’, he declared weeks later, ‘this will be a metropolis. Never fear!’

Within ten years it was. The PAP government, led by Lee, embarked on a novel strategy, using multinational corporations as agents of economic development at a time when many developing postcolonial nations shunned them for being exploitative. Interventionist and pro-business policies transformed the city-state into a leading financial, aviation and shipping hub, a ‘global city’ with the world as its hinterland. No effort was spared to promote Singapore overseas as an efficient and hassle-free investment destination, offering favourable industrial infrastructure and generous tax breaks and subsidies. Additionally, Lee galvanised domestic support for his social programmes, underpinned by the values of multiracialism, meritocracy, equality and rule of law. Over the following decades, Lee built a strong government that was backed by a competent and virtually corruption-free civil service, provided affordable world-class public housing making Singaporeans a nation of homeowners and created a well-equipped, modern defence force from scratch (with Israeli help) based on mandatory conscription for men. Drawing on his wide network of friends and world leaders, who valued his astute assessments of Asia and the world, Lee enlarged the nation’s strategic space to give big powers a stake in its continued survival and security. He fussed over every detail and imperfection, however minor, and imbued Singapore with his personal attributes: an openness to ideas and an emphasis on discipline, order and cleanliness. Singapore was to be his lush ‘garden city’, a First World ‘oasis’ in a Third World region.
Lee Kuan Yew announces Singapore’s separation from Malaysia in a televised press conference, 9 August 1965. Associated Press/Alamy Stock Photo

Lee succeeded because he was backed by an exceptionally able team of ‘lieutenants’, but also because he built a deep reservoir of trust with Singaporeans over his long tenure. A charismatic speaker in English, Mandarin and Malay, Lee persuaded and cajoled Singaporeans to work with him on his national project. He lived frugally – his home was spartan, his office unadorned. Singapore survived its early years and became one of the most stable, safe, cosmopolitan and wealthy countries in Asia, enjoying a role and influence well out of proportion to its size. By the time Lee stepped aside as prime minister in 1990, Singapore’s GDP per capita had risen to around US$13,000, up from US$500 in 1965, surpassing South Korea, Israel and Portugal. Lee continued as senior minister and then minister mentor, before resigning from the cabinet in 2011. His death in March 2015, aged 91, was met with a nationwide outpouring of grief and gratitude. An estimated 1.5 million Singaporeans attended his lying in state to bid farewell to the nation’s strict father who once said he would rather be feared than loved.

Benign dictator?

Lee’s legacy, however, is not without its critics. Among the charges are that the PAP’s record of undefeated electoral successes since 1959 has turned Singapore into a one-party dominant state – perhaps even a dictatorship – with no tolerance for political dissent or parliamentary opposition. The heavy hand used against challenges to Lee’s authority and his conception of social order – curbing free speech and assembly, muzzling a free press, bankrupting opposition politicians by lawsuits (often for libel, which Lee won) and sanctioning detention without trial – is evidence of the dark side of Lee’s legacy.

For Lee, such ideological subtleties did not matter. ‘Do I need to be a dictator when I can win, hands down?’ he asked one American interviewer. Lee sensed a more sinister reason for the criticisms he faced, especially those from the West: an unspoken fear that Singapore’s success was proof of what enlightened authoritarianism can achieve where liberal democracy cannot. Does Singapore’s success justify the darker parts of Lee’s record in the ‘trade-off’ between prosperity and freedom? Lee never believed Western liberal democracy to be a universal good; its only virtue, he argued, was to change governments without violence. The essence of politics to him was not elections, but good governance and ensuring Singapore’s survival. ‘What political party helps an opposition to come into power?’ he probed. ‘Why should we not demolish them before they get started?’ Lee could be notoriously Machiavellian.

Monumental

As Singapore commemorates the 100th anniversary of Lee’s birth on 16 September 2023, no full-sized statue has been built to honour him (busts, however, are a different story; two have been publicly displayed with his permission). This is in accordance with his wishes. Lee was adamant that his Oxley Road home – the birthplace of the PAP – be demolished after his death to prevent it from becoming a museum. He worried that a personality cult around him would be detrimental to Singapore’s future. He may – or may not – have his wish. Since his death, Oxley Road has been the focus of an ongoing family feud involving Lee Hsien Loong, Lee’s eldest son and Singapore’s current prime minister, and his two younger siblings over the demolition of the house. The younger Lees accuse their brother (who has recused himself from cabinet deliberations on the property) of wanting to benefit politically by avoiding the demolition of their family home.

Lee did not believe the PAP would rule forever, even if he was scrupulous in bringing in new blood to perpetuate its political longevity. But the PAP and independence are not his only legacies. In his eulogy to his father, Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong referenced the Latin epitaph on the grave of Sir Christopher Wren in St Paul’s Cathedral: ‘si monumentum requiris, circumspice’ (‘if you seek his monument, look around you’). ‘To those who seek Mr Lee Kuan Yew’s monument’, he added, ‘Singaporeans can reply proudly: “Look around you.”’

Albert Lau is Associate Professor of History at the National University of Singapore.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

18. WiFi Time

Source: https://mitxela.com/projects/wifi_time
Site: mitxela.com
Submitter: surprisetalk (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-02 14:30 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 82 points · 4 comments
Length: 3.4K words (~15 min read)

31 May 2026
Progress: Abandoned

It's another obsessive post about timekeeping!

Here I'll describe an abandoned project to build a "fake" GPS module that grabs the time over WiFi, to function as a drop-in replacement for the GPS breakout boards used on earlier versions of my Precision Clock. My mistake was being too ambitious, the almost impossible goal of getting sub-millisecond accuracy, over WiFi, using regular NTP at slow polling intervals, and with only the built-in oscillator of an ESP8266. It perpetually felt like I was on the cusp of accomplishment, and in the end I petered out without posting anything.

It's been about six years since I last touched this, and given that the Mk IV clock has a much better GPS module (along with an SMA connector for a better, or better placed, antenna), it's unlikely I'll ever finish it. But the other day as I wrote up my virtual precision clock with its comical NTP proxy I was reminded of these earlier experiments, and thought they might be worth sharing.

I'll now briefly hand the narrative over to my younger self, for the partial writeup I did in July 2020.

* * *

NTP Precision Clock Module

If you're looking to build a precision clock, look no further than GPS. Nothing gives you such excellent results for so little effort. Even the cheapest GPS modules have timing accuracy in the tens of nanoseconds.

But indoors, GPS reception isn't great. Especially in new homes built with aluminium-lined insulation, sometimes a GPS signal simply isn't reliable.

NTP, the Network Time Protocol, is several orders of magnitude less accurate than a GPS module, but in many buildings it's easier to pick up a WiFi signal than GPS.

I have no interest in building a WiFi-enabled Precision Clock. The idea of connecting it to the internet turns it into a different type of clock. The next version of my Precision Clock is unlikely to feature WiFi. But... there is a certain appeal to a "fake GPS" module, which can be dropped into the precision clock, to convert it to a WiFi NTP clock.

There's an existing project that does exactly this. An ESP8266 is used and it outputs NMEA strings just like a real GPS module. I took a look at it and it's a pretty good attempt, but there are few reasons it's not sufficient for a Precision Clock.

The time calculation is inaccurate. It's roughly correct, but well outside of the millisecond tolerance I'm aiming for.
The PPS signal is treated carelessly, such as toggling it while waiting for WiFi to establish. The PPS signal should only be pulsed if the time is accurate.
There are a bunch of other signals emulated, and a serial interface, all of which we don't care about. On the other hand, we don't want the WiFi credentials to be hard-coded, so a soft-AP interface would be good.

Environment The example I linked to above is built using the Arduino environment, with the ESP8266 "core". I installed this to try it out, and I must say, although I hate many aspects of it (the bloat, and how it glosses over important details) it's hard to argue with the ease of getting started. The last (and only other) time I attempted a project with the ESP8266 I installed the SDK and toolchain manually, and it took bloody ages.

Although I'm starting over, I decided to continue with the Arduino environment if possible.

There are dozens of NTP implementations for Arduino and ESP8266, but looking at their code is disheartening. The included "NTP library" performs the time measurement by calling delay(10) in a loop and counting the iterations. So even if the rest of it was perfect, the result would be, at best, quantized to 10ms increments. I have to be realistic about the level of precision we can achieve – a few milliseconds is probably the best we can do – but we might as well implement the standard correctly, and to the best of our timing ability.

Another problem with beginner-friendly environments is that many of the tutorials and examples are produced by blindly copying and pasting code chunks from each other. The example NTP implementation inexplicably fills out some of the NTP header with junk, and many other examples and implementations have copied this exact code, without explanation.

In fact, you only need one single byte to be non-zero to form a working NTP request. The first byte needs to indicate that we're a client, and optionally the NTP version. The remainder of the 48 bytes can be left zero, they'll get filled out by the server.

NTP stamps There are many guides on the internet explaining the operation of NTP.

In essence, we send a request and wait for its response, measuring the time taken. The response has a couple of timestamps set by the server. We add half the time taken for the request to return and we've got ourselves an accurate timestamp. If the network route is symmetrical, this should be accurate to well within a millisecond.

NTP timestamps are 8 bytes. The first 4 bytes are the number of seconds since January 1, 1900. Very similar to the unix timestamp, except tediously different. It's an unsigned number, so it will overflow in 2036, two years before the unix timestamp rolls over.

The next 4 bytes are a fractional offset, so the full 8 bytes makes a fixed-point number.

The example NTP code manually turns this into a date and time string, but the standard time.h stuff is already included by default, so all we need to do is add an offset to get the unix timestamp, and call gmtime and strftime.

Endianness The timestamps in the NTP packet are in network-byte-order, i.e. big endian. The ESP8266 is little endian by default (the processor can technically support both, but I doubt it's possible to switch within the Arduino environment).

I gladly bid goodbye to endless shifts for switching between byte orders when I found out about a relatively new feature of gcc: scalar_storage_order("big-endian") Adding this attribute to a struct will enforce that endianness, regardless of platform. Any shift instructions needed will be generated automatically.

Sadly, this didn't work at all here. Arduino is C++, not C, and g++ does not support this extension. Worse than that, by default all warnings are suppressed, so it doesn't even tell you that it's ignoring the attribute.

* * *

We now return to your regular writer in this the year 2026, where I'll do my best to remember the juicy details.

Pulse Measurement

The most important part is being able to measure our output. We're lucky enough to have the real GPS module to hand, and at the tolerances we're working, its PPS output can be considered gospel. The main thing is to stick a really good antenna on it, so it doesn't lose its fix.

We will create our own PPS output on the ESP8266, which can then be compared to the GPS output, and the best tool to do this is a logic analyser. Luckily I had invested in this, the world's cheapest logic analyser:

This 8 channel, 24MHz USB logic analyser cost about £5, and they had the audacity to write "Saleae" on it, along with some delightful Comic Sans. But it's more than adequate for what we need to do.

The chipset on the device is a Cypress FX2, and the interesting thing is that the firmware is loaded into RAM on powerup over USB. The open source fx2lafw firmware can be loaded by sigrok for us.

We want to sample at the highest resolution, but over a period of many minutes, potentially hours, which would be a huge amount of data. Much better would be to store just the offsets between the two pulses each second. Sigrok supports many protocol decoders, and I understand it's not too difficult to write your own, but an existing decoder called "Jitter" is able to do everything we need. We instruct it to consider the GPS PPS as clock, and our ESP8266 PPS as the signal.

The command was something like this:

sigrok-cli -d fx2lafw --config samplerate=200kHz --samples 800M -C D0,D1,D2,D3,D4 -P jitter:clk=D0:sig=D4 -B jitter


This could be piped (or tee'd) into a file giving us a list of offsets, which could be pasted into a spreadsheet. A command-line alternative is gnuplot, which is ancient and quirky, but as I was repeating this dozens of times it made sense to get this automated. Apparently, at the time I was going through a perl phase, as I made a tiny script that sat between them like this:

#!/usr/bin/perl

$| = 1;

while (<>) {
  chomp;
  print $i++ . "\t";
  while ($_ > 0.5) {$_ -= 1.0;}
  print $_ . "\n";
}


This also compensates if the jitter amount has wrapped by a whole second, which would sometimes happen if we started it at exactly the wrong moment. In order to watch the graph in real time, my gnuplot file looked like this (optionally fix yrange as needed):

plot "plot.dat" using 1:2 with lines
#set yrange [0:0.004]
pause 1
reread


I wish I had made more detailed notes at the time, but obviously my focus was on getting the pulse timing right, rather than on documenting how the graphs were plotted. I remember that my eventual setup was a single command, that would start logging the offsets, and also plot them in real time, which made the development slightly less painful than it otherwise would have been. It still involved waiting for ~15 minutes to see the effects of any changes we made though.

Hardware setup

Experiments were carried out on this rather grotty old breadboard. I'll suggest it was a bit cleaner at the time, and accumulated grot during its subsequent storage.

The flying barrel jack has a regulator on it. Not shown are the FTDI cable for reprogramming, the GPS module for comparison, and the logic analyser.

I did also produce a prototype on protoboard, but this was less useful for developing and measuring its performance.

The jumper is to put it into programming mode, which conveniently uses the same TX/RX pins as the NMEA.

Discipline and NTP Etiquette Polling NTP gives us an instantaneous estimate of the time. It assumes the round-trip is roughly symmetrical.

Due to the terrible unpredictability of WiFi, we'll need to make lots of estimates to average out the jitter. Packets can have a random delay added in either or both directions.

Once we have some estimates, we need to discipline our own oscillator, so that we can keep time between polls. I have often wondered what the etiquette is for NTP, as it's an unauthenticated UDP packet, and how frequently you'd have to poll this free service to be considered a nuisance. Default NTP installs rarely poll faster than once every 64 seconds, and often they only poll once an hour, or every few hours. I worry especially when I'm producing a circuit board that I (at the time) planned to distribute to others, even if only in small numbers.

My general plan was to start off polling every 16 seconds, and then gradually back off as the estimates agreed with one another.

The onboard oscillator of an ESP8266 is not particularly accurate. Disciplining it is more complicated than simply polling, seeing if we're fast or slow, and adjusting it. To eliminate outliers, to average correctly and hopefully backoff with the polling, we need to keep a history of estimates and adjustments, but those timings are referenced to an oscillator that's now changing. It is quite a complex control loop problem.

Instead of disciplining the main oscillator, we can pretend it's stable and discipline a secondary timer derived from it. The main oscillator will still drift with temperature, but hopefully slow enough that it doesn't play havok with our estimates.

First Plots Perhaps the story is better told through graphs. The very first capture looked like this:

In this and subsequent plots, the horizontal axis is in seconds, where 1000 is about 16 minutes. The vertical axis is also in seconds, showing the offset between the PPS pulses. In this first plot, we simply polled NTP every 10 seconds and attempted to output PPS accordingly.

It's immediately obvious that there are plenty of outliers, with a bias towards the positive. The flat where I lived at the time had atrocious WiFi contention, with dozens of overlapping networks. I'm not too familiar with the physical layer of WiFi, but maybe the chances of a packet collision are greater in one direction than the other. If the initial outbound packet is unable to be sent because the channel is busy, it will be delayed, but once the channel becomes free it (possibly) remains free for the next second or so, meaning a collision is less likely on the return. I'm just speculating though.

Measured again, some of the outliers were more than 15ms.

Aside from the outliers, the average seems to be settling somewhere around 3 milliseconds off, which was a puzzle at this point.

Eliminating the outliers by keeping track of our estimates and discarding results that cross a threshold, our results are still pretty unsatisfactory:

Note the vertical scale has changed. The slope of the lines between polls is the same as before, just more visible. It represents the drift of our uncalibrated oscillator, which we are not yet disciplining.

Many acquisitions later, I was sometimes getting plots as good as this:

Even undisciplined, the results agree almost within a millisecond, which is fantastic. The systematic offset remained a mystery for the moment. Have a think what it might be...

Loop tuning If our oscillator discipline works well, the slope of the line between each poll should flatten to be perfectly horizontal. Then we can back off on the polling and coast on our tuned oscillator.

Initial attempts gave some amusing results.

Our correction overcompensates, and the system becomes unstable. As part of our attempt to enforce stability, we average the result of each poll with previous estimates, limiting the effect of a single data point.

Fiddling with the parameters for our control loop could even, almost, be described as fun, if it didn't take another 16 minutes to check what effect it had.

Systematic Offset and the Pool The offsets were consistent throughout the measurement, but different if we measured again on a different day. Embarrassingly late, I finally figured out why the numbers converged a few milliseconds off: the time reported by NTP was wrong.

The NTP "pool" is a collection of servers that report the time, for free. The majority of these servers are run by volunteers. When you request pool.ntp.org (or a subdomain), it returns the IP address of a geographically nearby server that's part of the pool. Most of the servers are not "stratum-1" servers, that is, they themselves are only synchronised to other servers by NTP.

We do the DNS lookup before we start polling (it would ruin the timing otherwise) and then hold on to the server IP address for maybe a few hours or more. With some logging we can correlate performance to IP addresses, and it became clear that the results were substantially better on an occasionally returned IP, that, it turns out, belongs to cloudflare.

Setting time.cloudflare.com as our preferred timeserver immediately gave us a massive boost in performance. Evidently cloudflare have the budget to keep their timeservers accurate, though saying that, a standard GPS module doesn't exactly break the bank. I suppose the vast majority of people using NTP don't care about a few milliseconds.

Another environment The second big improvement to my results came from running the experiment on a different Wifi network. Trying it at a friend's house, and at the hackspace, showed that my home network had far more jitter than most.

But, it needs to run on my home network, or it's not worth bothering. At certain times of day it seemed to work a lot better, so I tried doing some longer measurements. If our control loop works well we should be able to average things out.

4000 points is about 66 minutes. The lead-in on the left is the powerup sequence where the oscillator is way off. On the roadmap was to maybe store our estimates in EEPROM, so that initial powerup could be a little closer to the mark.

The slope is exaggerated because the horizontal scale has changed, but really this is a fantastic result and gave me confidence that the goal was in sight. Most of that graph above is within half a millisecond of the GPS reference. All we need to do is get the control loop right, so we can back off with the polling.

It's easy to look at these graphs and get a feel for what the loop should actually be doing, but remember, we're plotting these against a known good PPS reference. The control loop is running blind. After the undershoot, a bunch of readings seem to agree with the slope, so it backs off with the polling, and creates that peak in the middle.

I have a huge amount of plots, tens of hours of experiments, many of which involved a tiny tweak to the loop behaviour, then we wait to see what effect it had. Here's one where it oscillated wildly:

The fact that it's giving a lovely sinewave (with a period of about 20 minutes) suggests that if we could just get our averaging/damping right, we'd be onto a winner. It would take a bloody long time though. Often the loop appeared to be working well, but then after a couple of hours would start to go haywire. Here's a capture that started off OK, got a bit shaky, and by the third hour decided to run away:

In the following plot, captured at a friend's house, I must have instructed it not to start backing off until some threshold was met. Here it managed to go for 15 minutes without polling, and stay within 0.6ms throughout. But it may just have been a fluke.

Overall, perhaps this conveys why I was never quite satisfied with the behaviour.

I'm fully aware that what I was trying to do was re-inventing the wheel. I am sure that control loops for synchronising clocks over jittery networks has been solved before. But more importantly, what I really should have done was just stick a TCXO on the board. Even without disciplining it, a TCXO will be within a few ppm out of the box. With that we could have simply polled, say, every five minutes and not bothered with anything else.

Saying that, it's definitely possible to make this work with no extra hardware. I think another approach to disciplining our oscillator would be to use the fact that we know the real wall-clock time with each pulse. Instead of adjusting based on the time between pulses, we could have just taken two measurements, ten minutes or even an hour apart, and counted the number of clock cycles between them. Even if the measurements were outliers that would give us a good estimate with little chance of instability. That does again assume that the oscillator is not changing with temperature.

Finally, since the Mk III clock I wanted to pair this with only displayed the time to the nearest 10ms, maybe there wasn't really any need to aim for sub-1ms accuracy. A 5ms or even 10ms tolerance would have been fine, no-one was going to use this for anything that matters.

PCB In parallel with the experiments I produced a simple PCB.

The button is both to enable re-programming, and potentially for configuration. I did set up WifiManager, which hosts an access point with a simple menu to select the WiFi network, but this normally only triggers if it can't connect. Pressing the button to begin setup would have made sense.

And here's the prototype alongside the GPS breakout board we were trying to imitate:

Conclusion This project is abandoned and as such has no conclusion.

I have put the source files on github. The latest commit may not be the best performing one, given what I wrote as the commit message.
~ mitxela.com » Projects » Hardware » Wifi Time

Questions? Comments? Check out the Forum

Support mitxela.com

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

19. Branchless Quicksort faster than std:sort and pdqsort with C and C++ API

Source: https://tiki.li/blog/blqsort
Site: tiki.li
Author: Christof Kaser
Submitted: 2026-06-02 20:00 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 180 points · 51 comments
Length: 757 words (~4 min read)

Fast Branchless Quicksort using Sorting-Networks with C and C++ Interface

Performance results naturally depend on the underlying hardware. The following benchmarks show the execution times for sorting 50 million doubles using different sorting implementations. The measurements were taken on an Apple M1 system using Clang and on an AMD Ryzen 3 Linux system using GCC, both compiled with the -O3 option.

Implementation Apple M1 AMD Ryzen
std::sort 1.33s 5.56s
pdqsort 1.33s 2.81s
blqsort (single threaded) 0.97s 2.06s

For a fair comparison, the single-threaded version of blqs was used here. On an M1, the threaded versions are another factor of 3 to 4 faster. In terms of runtime, the C++ versions differ only very little from the C version.

blqsort

Full source code is included on Github.There are four implementations of blqsort here, each provided as a single header file.

File Description
blqs.h C++ Single-Threaded
blqs_thr.h C++ Multi-Threaded
blqsort.h C Single-Threaded
blqsort_thr.h C Multi-Threaded

Branchless programming

On modern CPUs, avoiding branch misprediction is a key technique to speed up programs. This branchless approach:

for (int i = 0; i < 1000; i++) {
    small_numbers[smlen] = numbers[i];
    smlen += (numbers[i] < 500);
}
 is much faster than the conventional version with a conditional branch:

for (int i = 0; i < 1000; i++) {
    if (numbers[i] < 500) {
        small_numbers[smlen] = numbers[i];
        smlen += 1;
    }
}
 This paper by Edelkamp and Weiß shows how partitioning performance in Quicksort can be improved by avoiding conditional branches.

The strategy of using an auxiliary buffer for branchless partitioning is inspired by fluxsort. The “auxiliary buffer” here means a 1024‑element stack array, not heap memory.

First, 1024 elements are copied from one side into an auxiliary buffer to make room for subsequent operations. Then, we alternately copy a 1024-element block to the left and right in a branchless manner. The left pointer is only incremented if the element is smaller than the pivot, otherwise, the right pointer is incremented - branchless, of course.

This involves more more than double the necessary copy operations. For data types that are cheap to copy, however, this is much less expensive than the branch mispredictions that would otherwise occur.

Pivot strategy, bad input and sorting network

To avoid the O(n²) runtime caused by bad input data, the program can group identical elements together and switch to heapsort for that specific part if it detects a big imbalance during partitioning. The program also checks if a partition is already sorted.

For larger parts, it uses a median-of-medians strategy to find a good pivot. In addition, critical partitioning loops are explicitly unrolled.

For 2 to 12 elements, the algorithm uses custom sorting networks. This approach requires a separate code path for each size but sorts small subsets with very few swaps using a branchless sort‑2 primitive. Source for sorting networks

C++

For types with higher copy costs that are not is_trivially_copyable (such as strings), the buffer-based branchless approach becomes less efficient. In such cases, a BlockQuicksort (Edelkamp and Weiß) variant is used instead. This processes only the element indices in a branchless manner and then moves the actual data with fewer swaps. Some ideas are from pdqsort.

Usage

You only need to include blqs.h, and it can be used just as easily as std::sort.

#include "blqs.h"

double data[SIZE];

blqs::sort(data, data + SIZE);
 For the C++ multithreaded variant, which uses C++ threads, include blqs_thr.h instead of blqs.h. The function call remains the same.

C

In C, the code specialized for the data type is generated using #define.

Usage

#define BLQS_CMP(a, b) ((a) < (b))
#define BLQS_TYPE double
#include "blqsort.h"

double data[SIZE];

blqsort(data, SIZE);
 For the C multithreaded variant, which uses POSIX threads, include blqsort_thr.h instead of blqsort.h. The function call remains the same here as well.

Sorting Custom Data Structures

In practice, we often need to sort custom data structures. This is where SIMD libraries like Google Highway - while very fast for simple numbers - become difficult to use.

Using std::sort or blqsort gives you much more flexibility.

C++

#include "blqs.h"

struct entry {
    int id;
    int value;

    bool operator<(const entry& other) const {
        return id < other.id;
    }
};

struct entry data[SIZE];

blqs::sort(data, data + SIZE);


C

struct entry {
    int id;
    int value;
};
#define BLQS_CMP(a, b) (((a).id) < ((b).id))
#define BLQS_TYPE struct entry
#include "blqsort.h"

struct entry data[SIZE];

blqsort(data, SIZE);
 Execution times for sorting 50 million of these structs.

Implementation Apple M1 AMD Ryzen
std::sort 3.46s 4.75s
pdqsort 3.46s 4.72s
blqsort 0.96s 2.20s

Links

When ‘if’ slows you down, avoid it.

Interactive sorting demo

christof.kaser@gmail.com

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

20. Linear Cosine Palettes(2025)

Source: https://blog.djnavarro.net/posts/2025-09-14_cosine-palettes/
Site: Notes from a data witch
Author: Danielle Navarro
Submitted: 2026-06-05 03:40 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 29 points · 0 comments
Length: 1.2K words (~6 min read)
Language: en

So. Looking back at my history on this blog I have noticed that I, ummmmmm, tend to write long posts. It is a character flaw of which I am acutely aware. When I want to understand a thing I feel a kind of psychological compulsion to delve too deeply into the darkness, dive into to as many of the specifics as I possibly can, organise my thoughts around those specifics, and then drag the whole cursed mess into the daylight so that my long-suffering readers can look on in horror at the grotesquerie of my inner world.

I am aware that this is perhaps unwise.

Reflecting on this as a personal weakness, I have set myself a challenge this fine Sunday: is it even possible for me to write a simple blog post? Like, is it even possible for a mediocre bitch to write a short goddamn article without turning it into some macabre monograph? Given my past form, it is not at all obvious that I’m capable of this level of self-restraint. Let’s see if I can do it?

Linear cosine palettes

The motivation came from this mastodon post by Mike Cheng proposing a simple method for randomly generating continuous colour palettes in R. The original idea comes from a blog post by Inigo Quilez on simple procedural palettes, and the idea is painfully simple. Let’s say we have length-3 vectors \(\mathbf{a}\), \(\mathbf{b}\), \(\mathbf{c}\), and \(\mathbf{d}\) representing four “base” colours from which a continous palette is to be generated. In R we could choose these base colours using the colors() function. Once these are selected we can define a smooth palette using the following function

\[ f(t) = \mathbf{a} + \mathbf{b} \ \cos(2 \pi(\mathbf{c} t + \mathbf{d})) \]

where \(t\) is varied from 0 to 1. The nice thing about this paletting rule is that it can be very fast, especially since – I am told by people who understand such things – there are a lot of optimisations in modern CPUs and GPUs to make cosine evaluation fast. Admittedly, speed is not something I care about much in my generative art work because palette generation is not even close to being a bottleneck in my code and also I’m lazy.

Okay, so here’s an R function that implements a very minor tweak on Mike’s implementation of Inigo Quilez’ cosine palettes:

cosine_palette <- function(n, base = NULL, seed = NULL) {
  if (!is.null(seed)) set.seed(seed)
  if (is.null(base)) base <- colors(distinct = TRUE)
  a <- c(0.5, 0.5, 0.5)
  b <- (sample(base, 1) |> col2rgb() |> as.vector()) / 255
  c <- (sample(base, 1) |> col2rgb() |> as.vector()) / 255
  d <- (sample(base, 1) |> col2rgb() |> as.vector()) / 255
  pal <- vapply(
    seq(0, 1, length.out = n), 
    function(t) a + b * cos(2 * pi * (c * t + d)), 
    double(3)
  )
  pal[pal > 1] <- 1
  rgb(t(abs(pal)))
}

cosine_palette(n = 16, seed = 11)

 [1] "#7F1616" "#6F1A17" "#362A20" "#22442F" "#8A6642" "#F18A5A" "#FFAD74"
 [8] "#FFCB8F" "#FFE0A9" "#FFE9C0" "#FFE6D3" "#AAD6E1" "#40BDE8" "#1F9CE9"
[15] "#6377E3" "#7F54D6"

That’s nice, but as my visual cortex is not optimised for the interpretation of hexadecimal RGB colour codes, I find it convenient to show palettes using… check notes… images? Yes. Yes, that sounds right. To that end I’ll use this shade_strip() that I sometimes use to display a continuously varying palette as a strip:

shade_strip <- function(cols) {
  withr::with_par(
    list(mar = c(0,0,0,0)),
    image( matrix(seq_along(cols), ncol = 1), col = cols, axes = FALSE)
  )
}

seeds <- 11:22
seeds |> 
  purrr::map(\(s) cosine_palette(n = 256, seed = s)) |> 
  purrr::walk(shade_strip)

I wanted to get a sense of how well these palettes might behave if applied in a generative art system, so I chose 12 sequential seeds. The sequence starts at seed = 11 because I happened to like the first piece that was generated using that palette, but apart from that minor intervention I haven’t tried to “hack” the seed to bias the outputs.

Application to generative art

To get a feel for how these palettes behave when used in generative art, here are some pieces created using them. These pieces are created using the subdivision() system that I wrote about as part of the art from code workshop I gave a few years ago.
Code for subdivision()

choose_rectangle <- function(blocks) {
  sample(nrow(blocks), 1, prob = blocks$area)
}

choose_break <- function(lower, upper) {
  round((upper - lower) * runif(1))
}

create_rectangles <- function(left, right, bottom, top, value) {
  tibble::tibble(
    left = left,
    right = right,
    bottom = bottom,
    top = top,
    width = right - left,
    height = top - bottom,
    area = width * height,
    value = value
  )
}

split_rectangle_x <- function(rectangle, new_value) {
  with(rectangle, {
    split <- choose_break(left, right)
    new_left  <- c(left, left + split)
    new_right <- c(left + split, right)
    new_value <- c(value, new_value)
    create_rectangles(new_left, new_right, bottom, top, new_value)
  })
}

split_rectangle_y <- function(rectangle, new_value) {
  with(rectangle, {
    split <- choose_break(bottom, top)
    new_bottom <- c(bottom, bottom + split)
    new_top <- c(bottom + split, top)
    new_value <- c(value, new_value)
    create_rectangles(left, right, new_bottom, new_top, new_value)
  })
}

split_rectangle <- function(rectangle, value) {
  split_fn <- ifelse(runif(1) < .5, split_rectangle_x, split_rectangle_y)
  split_fn(rectangle, value)
}

split_block <- function(blocks, value) {
  old <- choose_rectangle(blocks) 
  new <- split_rectangle(blocks[old, ], value)
  dplyr::bind_rows(blocks[-old, ], new)
}

subdivision <- function(ncol = 100, 
                        nrow = 100, 
                        nsplits = 256,
                        border = NULL, 
                        seed = NULL) {
  
  if (!is.null(seed)) set.seed(seed)

  pal <- cosine_palette(n = 256, seed = seed)

  if (is.null(border)) border <- pal[128]

  rct <- create_rectangles(
    left = 1, 
    right = ncol, 
    bottom = 1, 
    top = nrow, 
    value = 0
  )

  div <- purrr::reduce(
    1:nsplits, 
    split_block, 
    .init = rct
  )

  plt <- div |> 
    ggplot2::ggplot(ggplot2::aes(
      xmin = left, 
      xmax = right, 
      ymin = bottom, 
      ymax = top,
      fill = value
    )) +
    ggplot2::geom_rect(
      show.legend = FALSE, 
      color = border,
      linewidth = 1
    ) +
    ggplot2::scale_fill_gradientn(colours = pal) +
    ggplot2::scale_x_continuous(expand = ggplot2::expansion(mult = .15)) + 
    ggplot2::scale_y_continuous(expand = ggplot2::expansion(mult = .15)) + 
    ggplot2::coord_equal() +
    ggplot2::theme_void() +
    ggplot2::theme(plot.background = ggplot2::element_rect(
      color = border,
      fill = border
    ))

  plt
}

seeds |> purrr::walk(\(s) plot(subdivision(seed = s)))

Not too bad at all. Some of the pieces are pretty awful, a few of them are lovely, and most are okay. Given that I’ve made no attempt at all to optimise the way that palette aligns with the structure of the pieces, that’s not a bad outcome at all.

As a second example, here’s a series of pieces based on the lissajous system, all using the same palettes:

seeds |> purrr::walk(\(s) lissajous(seed = s))

Also pretty tolerable. In any specific application I’d probably want to tinker a bit and adapt to the specific aesthetic that the system is targeting, but I’m not displeased at all. For something so simple it works better than I expected. Okay, all good. We’re done now. Post completed, nothing else to add. Somehow I have managed to write a short blog post without turning it into a computational novella, and the whole exercise only took a few hours from beginning to end. 🎉

Reuse

Citation

BibTeX citation:

@online{navarro2025,
  author = {Navarro, Danielle},
  title = {Linear Cosine Palettes},
  date = {2025-09-14},
  url = {https://blog.djnavarro.net/posts/2025-09-14_cosine-palettes/},
  langid = {en}
}


For attribution, please cite this work as:

Navarro, Danielle. 2025. “Linear Cosine Palettes.” September 14, 2025. https://blog.djnavarro.net/posts/2025-09-14_cosine-palettes/.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

21. SpaceX, Other Mega IPOs Denied Fast Index Entry by S&P

Source: https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2026-06-04/s-p-dow-jones-keeps-megacap-ipo-rules-as-is-after-consultation
Site: bloomberg.com
Submitter: tristanj (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-04 22:48 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 590 points · 287 comments

Scrape failed: http 403

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

22. There's no escaping it: an exploration of ANSI codes

Source: https://blog.safia.rocks/2025/12/22/ansi-codes/
Site: Safia Abdalla
Author: Safia Abdalla
Published: 2025-12-22
HN activity: 7 points · 3 comments
Length: 805 words (~4 min read)
Language: en-us

December 22, 2025 · 4 minutes to read · by Safia Abdalla

ANSI escape codes are kinda crazy, no? I mean, crazy in the sense that they are such a simple and enduring concept. Every time your terminal renders bold red text or a progress bar crawls across the screen, you’re taking advantage of a standard that is almost 50 years old. I’m not the biggest computing history buff, but I think understanding and admiring these standards can give us a greater appreciation for our industry, and a sense of how the standards that we are building today might scale for the next fifty years of computing. With that in mind, let’s dive into ANSI escape codes.

How they work

Back before I existed as a physical concept on Earth, terminals were physical devices: CRT monitors connected to mainframes via serial cables. These “dumb terminals” could display text, but that was about it. The standard that codified ANSI escape codes emerged as a reaction to the limitations of this medium. Plain-text was the only available transport format in use and these terminals could only process the text stream character-by-character. The standard described a format that allowed text streams to encode additional behavior for terminals to support: the ability to control cursor position, text formatting, and colors.

The terminal consumes a text stream that might contain special character sequences that represent these ANSI codes. Modern terminal emulators read the stream character by character, and when it hits an escape sequence, it interprets it as a command rather than displaying it.

An ANSI escape sequence starts with the ESC character (ASCII 27, or \x1b in hex) followed by a left bracket [, forming what’s called the Control Sequence Introducer (CSI). After that comes the actual command. For example:

\x1b[31m sets the text color to red
\x1b[1m makes text bold
\x1b[0m resets all formatting
\x1b[2J clears the entire screen
\x1b[H moves the cursor to the top-left corner

You can combine multiple attributes by separating them with semicolons. So \x1b[1;31m gives you bold red text. The m at the end is the Select Graphic Rendition (SGR) command, which handles all the styling stuff.

The original spec defined 8 colors (black, red, green, yellow, blue, magenta, cyan, white), but modern terminals have expanded this significantly. The 256-color mode uses codes like \x1b[38;5;208m for extended colors. True 24-bit color support looks like \x1b[38;2;255;128;0m for RGB values.

Why they matter

A standard from 1979 is still the backbone of how we interact with CLIs today. When you see colorized output from a command or progress indicators when executing a long-running command, that’s ANSI codes at work. If you’ve styled your shell with a custom prompt, you’ve also taken advantage of these ANSI codes for background and foreground colors.

ANSI codes are so enduring a standard that they’ve received a modern refresh. Packages like Spectre.Console in .NET or chalk in Node expose helpers for interacting with these ANSI codes from user-authored applications. Many of them expose super sophisticated (well, in comparison to whatever was happening in 1979) patterns for rendering spinners and bouncers by using cursors moves and rewrites to edit content in place. If you’ve used the aspire deploy command, you can see how these patterns can be composed for rather colorful and interactive UIs. You can read more about that in one of my earlier posts.

Even fancier terminal UIs, like Vim and htop, extend the ANSI codes for cursor positioning and screen manipulation further by providing full-screen interactive experiences. They take advantage of sequences like \x1b[10;20H that indicate how your cursor should move. In this case, the numerals indicate the cursor should move to row 10, column 20. Combined with the ability to clear lines and draw characters, you can build surprisingly sophisticated interfaces using nothing but text streams.

Try it yourself

I built a little interactive widget below where you can experiment with different escape sequences and see how they render in real-time. You can see how font styles, foreground and background colors, and cursor movements result in different ANSI escape codes.

The next time you’re admiring colorful terminal output, you’ll know exactly what incantations are making it happen.

P.S. This blog post was largely an excuse to show the little interactive UI above. As a serial backend baddie (alliteration and a pun? unreal!), I’m trying to get better at developing design taste by building small learning interactions like this. I got the chance to finally play around with Tailwind as part of building this out and it was decently fun. Full disclosure, AI did most of the code writing here. The heavy lifting I did was mostly around figuring out how the experience should look here. Let me know if this obviously looks like it was built by somebody who spends most of their time looking at text.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

23. Go Experiments Explained

Source: https://www.alexedwards.net/blog/go-experiments-explained
Site: alexedwards.net
Author: Alex Edwards
Submitted: 2026-06-01 08:39 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 39 points · 12 comments
Length: 2.0K words (~9 min read)
Language: en

Go often ships with experimental features as part of a release.

These experimental features can take different forms: sometimes they're completely new packages in the standard library, sometimes they're changes to the compiler or runtime, or – very occasionally – they can be breaking changes to Go's behavior.

Most of the time, the purpose of experimental features is to get real-world feedback from users before something graduates to general availability and becomes a permanent part of Go. If the feature causes regressions, or gets negative feedback from the community, it can be changed before it is finalized – or even abandoned entirely.

Some examples

Let's look at a few recent examples to illustrate the type of things that Go experiments can cover.

Go 1.24 shipped with experimental support for a new testing/synctest package (which provides support for testing concurrent code). After feedback, the package API was adjusted slightly and it graduated to general availability in Go 1.25.

Go 1.25 shipped with experimental support for a new garbage collector design with better performance. After incorporating feedback, the new garbage collector became the default in Go 1.26.

Go 1.21 shipped with an experimental behavioral change to loop variable semantics. This change closed off a previously common bug with Go code, but was technically a breaking change to the language. Shipping the change as an experiment gave people a chance to test their code before the new behavior became the default in Go 1.22.

Experiment lifecycle

There isn’t a single fixed lifecycle for experiments, but there are some common patterns.

Most experiments initially ship as off-by-default. You explicitly opt-in to try out the feature, usually by setting the GOEXPERIMENT environment value (which we'll talk about more in a moment).

If things go well, one or two releases later the experimental feature is finalized, graduates to general availability, and becomes on-by-default.

If an experiment affects the behavior of something, then after it graduates to general availability there is sometimes – but not always – a transitional grace period where it's possible to temporarily disable it and use the old behavior. For example, in Go 1.26 the new garbage collector design (which we briefly mentioned above) graduated to general availability and is on-by-default, but it's still possible to disable it and use the old garbage collector if you need to.

So that's the most common pattern, but sometimes things take longer or work out differently. For example:

Go 1.22 shipped with an experimental implementation of the compiler's inlining logic, which is still off-by-default and under evaluation more than two years later.

The same release also shipped with a memory arenas experiment. After negative feedback and concerns from users, it remains off-by-default, is on indefinite hold, and may eventually be removed completely.

Or finally, when the Go team is confident in a change, they might skip the feedback stage and go straight to general availability... but there may still be a transitional grace period where it's possible to disable it.

A good example of this is when Go 1.24 changed its map implementation to use Swiss tables. The Go team was confident enough in the implementation and its performance benefits for this to go straight to general availability and become on-by-default, but – at least for now – it's still possible to opt out and use the old map implementation if you want to.

So in practice there are really three broad experiment states:

Off-by-default and under evaluation
Off-by-default and on hold/dormant
On-by-default with a temporary opt-out

Permanent experiments

Go also has a handful of experimental features that aren't really “experiments” in the normal sense.

These are features that are off-by-default, but they're not under evaluation, not seeking feedback, and there's no expectation that they will ever graduate to general availability and become on-by-default.

Although they are controlled by the GOEXPERIMENT environment setting in the same way as other experiments, really they are more like optional Go features that you might want to use in specialist situations.

I'll refer to these as "permanent experiments" in the rest of this post.

For example there is a field tracking diagnostic feature that tracks which struct fields are accessed. It's been available for a decade, and there's no intention for it to ever graduate to general availability. Or there is a static lock ranking feature, which is a diagnostic for finding potential deadlocks in the Go runtime.

What experiments are available right now?

It's surprisingly difficult to find out what experimental features are currently available and what their status is.

Unfortunately, there isn't a page in the official Go documentation or Go Wiki that tracks experiment status, and for this post I've had to piece together the information from various places. If you want to do the same:

You can get a list of all available experiments by running $ go doc goexperiment.Flags.

You can figure out which experiments are on-by-default by reading the source code of src/internal/buildcfg/exp.go – specifically looking at the baseline variable declaration in the ParseGOEXPERIMENT() function.

You can cross-reference the experiment names with the Go release notes and search through GitHub issues to try to figure out the current status.

As far as I can tell, as of Go 1.26 here are the available permanent experiments:

Experiment name Description Status
FieldTrack Diagnostic to track which struct fields are accessed Off-by-default and permanent fixture
StaticLockRanking Diagnostic to validate lock acquisition order to catch deadlocks Off-by-default and permanent fixture
CgoCheck2 Diagnostic to check cgo pointer passing rules; too expensive to run by default Off-by-default and permanent fixture
BoringCrypto Replaces Go's crypto with FIPS-validated BoringSSL; no longer relevant since Go 1.24 Off-by-default and permanent fixture but will be removed soon
PreemptibleLoops Allows scheduler to preempt goroutines at loop back-edges; generally not relevant since Go 1.14, but still may be useful on platforms where preemption is otherwise unsupported Off-by-default and permanent fixture

Here are the current off-by-default experiments and their status:

Experiment name Description Status
HeapMinimum512KiB Reduces minimum heap size from 4MB to 512KiB; may be useful for constrained environments Off-by-default and likely dormant
Arenas Memory arena implementation Off-by-default and on hold following negative feedback
NewInliner Rewritten compiler inliner with better call-site heuristics Off-by-default and under evaluation (available since Go 1.22)
JSONv2 New encoding/json/v2 package with improved JSON encoding/decoding functions Off-by-default and under evaluation (available since Go 1.25)
RuntimeSecret New runtime/secret package with functions for zeroing out memory; available on Linux amd64/arm64 only Off-by-default and under evaluation (available since Go 1.26)
GoroutineLeakProfile Adds a goroutineleak pprof profile type Off-by-default and under evaluation (available since Go 1.26)
SIMD New simd/archsimd package providing access to architecture-specific SIMD operations; only available on amd64 Off-by-default and under evaluation (available since Go 1.26)
RuntimeFreegc Allows immediate reuse of memory without waiting for a GC cycle when safe to do so Off-by-default and under evaluation (available since Go 1.26, but see #74299 for status information)
SizeSpecializedMalloc Enables malloc implementations that are specialized per size class Off-by-default and under evaluation (available since Go 1.26, but see #74299 for status information)

And here are the currently on-by-default experiments:

Experiment name Description Status
LoopVar Per-iteration loop variable scoping On-by-default since Go 1.22, but opt-out kept for edge cases
Dwarf5 DWARF 5 debug info generation; reduces binary size On-by-default with a temporary opt-out (opt-out may be removed in a future release)
RandomizedHeapBase64 Randomizes the heap base address at startup as a security measure On-by-default with a temporary opt-out (opt-out expected to be removed in a future release)
GreenTeaGC New garbage collector with improved performance; unavailable on darwin/ios/aix On-by-default with a temporary opt-out (opt-out expected to be removed in Go 1.27)
RegabiWrappers ABI wrappers for calling between ABI0 and ABIInternal functions; only available on 64-bit architectures On-by-default with a temporary opt-out, but opt-out is effective for s390x only, and will be removed in Go 1.27
RegabiArgs Enables register arguments/results in all compiled Go functions; only available on 64-bit architectures On-by-default with a temporary opt-out, but opt-out is effective for s390x only, and will be removed in Go 1.27

How do you enable and disable experiments?

Experiments are controlled using the GOEXPERIMENT environment setting.

If there are some off-by-default experiments you want to try, you should include the experiment names as comma-separated lowercase values in GOEXPERIMENT. For example, if you wanted to build your application with the JSONv2 and GoroutineLeakProfile experiments enabled, you would do so like this:

$ GOEXPERIMENT=jsonv2,goroutineleakprofile go build ./...


If there is an on-by-default experiment that you want to turn off, you do so by prefixing the lowercase experiment name with no. For example, if you want to build your application with the GreenTeaGC and RandomizedHeapBase64 experiments turned off, you would do so like this:

$ GOEXPERIMENT=nogreenteagc,norandomizedheapbase64 go build ./...


It's totally fine to mix enabled and disabled experiments:

$ GOEXPERIMENT=jsonv2,nogreenteagc go build ./...


Note that if you build the same package with different GOEXPERIMENT values, Go treats them as different builds and stores separate entries in the build cache.

I've used go build in the examples above, but you can use exactly the same pattern when using go run or go test too. If you want to try it yourself, try creating the following program which uses the experimental encoding/json/v2 package:

package main

import (
    "encoding/json/v2"
    "fmt"
)

type Person struct {
    Name string `json:"name"`
    Age  int    `json:"age"`
    City string `json:"city"`
}

func main() {
    p := Person{Name: "Ada", Age: 36, City: "Vienna"}

    data, _ := json.Marshal(p, json.StringifyNumbers(true))
    fmt.Println(string(data))
}


If you run this normally, the program won't compile and you'll get an error message similar to this:

$ go run main.go 
package command-line-arguments
        imports encoding/json/v2: build constraints exclude all Go files in /usr/local/go/src/encoding/json/v2


But if you enable the JSONv2 experiment, the program will run as expected:

$ GOEXPERIMENT=jsonv2 go run main.go 
{"name":"Ada","age":"36","city":"Vienna"}


Which experiments should you actually care about?

If you're a run-of-the-mill Gopher like me, who mainly uses Go to write programs rather than working on Go itself, most of the available experiments probably won't be very relevant to you.

The most interesting and relevant ones probably are:

GreenTeaGC – If you're using Go 1.26, you're already using this by default. But if you notice any performance or behavior problems, it's worth being aware that you can still disable it (and you should also file an issue).

Dwarf5 – Again, if you're using Go 1.25 or later then you're already using this by default. But if you run into any problems, it's useful to know that you can still disable it.

JSONv2 – I don't recommend switching to this until it graduates to general availability, but if you write a lot of code that deals with JSON, it's worth experimenting with the new encoding/json/v2 package, familiarizing yourself with what's coming, and giving feedback if you notice any problems.

GoroutineLeakProfile – This one is immediately useful and worth enabling if you suspect you have a goroutine leak and need to debug it.

RuntimeSecret – Worth experimenting with and giving feedback on if you write cryptographic code or need to handle sensitive data.

RuntimeFreegc – If you have an application that leans heavily on the garbage collector, it may be worth benchmarking your code with this enabled to see if it improves performance, and giving feedback if you notice any issues.

Finally, it's worth emphasizing that experimental features are not covered by the Go compatibility promise. Their APIs, behavior, and performance characteristics may all change, so it's generally a good idea to avoid adopting too early and depending on experimental features before they are finalized.

But experimental features often act as a preview to some of the biggest changes in Go. If you know that an experiment is likely to affect you or your code once it eventually becomes generally available and on-by-default, it's a good idea to try it out, run benchmarks where appropriate, and give feedback if you find issues.

If you want to keep track of what experiments are available and their status, the Go release notes have recently started doing a much better job of documenting experimental features and how to use them. Between this blog post and browsing the release notes when there's a new Go release, you should have a decent idea of what's going on.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

24. Delacroix's Entry of the Crusaders into Constantinople Restored

Source: https://www.louvre.fr/en/explore/life-at-the-museum/delacroix-s-entry-of-the-crusaders-into-constantinople-restored-to-its-original-glory
Site: Le Louvre
Submitter: rawgabbit (Hacker News)
Published: 2026-05-27
HN activity: 32 points · 13 comments
Length: 796 words (~4 min read)
Language: en

Delacroix’s Entry of the Crusaders into Constantinople Restored to Its Original Glory

Collection newsRestoration

19 May 2026

Following a meticulous course of conservation treatment, Eugène Delacroix’s Entry of the Crusaders into Constantinople is returning to the Red Rooms, joining a number of other famous works by the artist. By restoring the piece’s colours to their original brilliance, once darkened by yellowed varnish, the conservators’ work has allowed its complex significance to shine through once more.

Commissioned in 1838 by King Louis-Philippe I, the Entry of the Crusaders into Constantinople (12 April 1204) was one of many artworks intended to decorate the historical galleries of the Château de Versailles. The painting was completed in 1840 and displayed at the 1841 Paris Salon, then found a more permanent home in the neo-Gothic Crusades Rooms in Versailles. Counted as one of Delacroix’s masterpieces, it returned to Paris on several occasions, including the 1855 and 1864 retrospective exhibitions dedicated to the artist. By virtue of its artistic merit, the Administration of Fine Arts decided to transfer ownership to the Louvre in 1881, replacing it with a full-scale copy at the Château de Versailles.
Entry of the Crusaders into Constantinople (12 April 1204), Eugène Delacroix, 1840, Department of Paintings

The Entry of the Crusaders into Constantinople (12 April 1204) was one of the major works painted by Delacroix at the height of his career. The mandated subject was particularly violent and ambiguous: the artist fulfilled the order with a masterful example of history painting. He represented the sack of the capital of the Eastern Christian empire by Western Christian knights, who, diverting away from their initial objective of retaking the Holy City from Muslim control, took advantage of the political instability and financial debt in which the Byzantine Empire was mired.

Over the years, the painting’s old varnishes yellowed, darkening the picture and obscuring Delacroix’s chromatic effects. Conservation treatment undertaken between May 2025 and April 2026 reinforced the structure of the work – the canvas was mounted back onto its restored stretcher – and removed timeworn varnishes and materials left behind from previous restoration efforts from the pictorial layer. A new, transparent varnish was then applied, and the small gaps in the paint were filled in.
Restoring the Entry of the Crusaders into Constantinople (12 April 1204).

Scientific imaging revealed how the artist made every effort to exhaustively depict the violence of this historical event. Delacroix’s first concept included the corpse of a soldier, trampled by a horse, in the foreground; he then chose to hide it behind banners. This discovery explains the sharp movement of the horse’s head, and its terrified gaze staring directly at the viewer. The animal expresses the compassion that the victors are unable to feel towards their victims.
Image produced by the Thierry Radelet Laboratory. Detail of the reworked banners photographed in diffused light.
Image produced by the Thierry Radelet Laboratory. Detail of the reworked banners photographed via digital radiography. These radiographic images were created with photostimulable phosphor storage plates scanned at 100 µm.

Delacroix also chose to highlight the plight of the enslaved women: shown in the foreground, they are emphasised by a vibrant colour scheme that makes them stand out from the other characters. By removing the dark screen of varnish that concealed the painting, the conservation treatment brought the colours much closer to the artist’s intended effect. His technical mastery now unveiled, the viewer can admire how he used an interweaving of colours, called flochetage, to give flesh tones an unprecedented vitality: the blues, purples, pinks, oranges, pale greens and warm greys meld together to render the captive woman’s nudity. The conservators’ work also restored the piece’s full depth of field, which is produced through various chromatic effects. In the background, white cities seem suspended in the emerald green of the mountains, which plunge down into turquoise-blue waters – they recall the watercolours of the Moroccan coast that the artist produced in 1832.
Entry of the Crusaders into Constantinople (12 April 1204), Eugène Delacroix, 1840, Department of Paintings. Detail

This substantial course of conservation treatment beautifully caps off a years-long conservation campaign of Delacroix’s large formats, which started in 2019.

The preliminary studies and the conservation of Entry of the Crusaders into Constantinople were performed thanks to the generous support of Ms Isabelle Ealet-Corbani.

By Mathilde Dillmann

You may also like

CreationCréation

Collection newsRestoration

Say it with a bench!

Tuileries Garden Benches Sponsorship Campaign

The Louvre is launching a long-running operation in benefit of the historical benches that have been present in the Tuileries Garden since the 19th century. This campaign aims to support an ambitious project to restore and recreate the iconic benches of the largest garden in Paris, in order to improve the visitor experience.

24 December 2024

TuileriesMake a donation

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

25. Magenta RealTime 2: Open and Local Live Music Models

Source: https://magenta.withgoogle.com/magenta-realtime-2
Site: Magenta
Submitter: selvan (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-05 04:09 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 42 points · 7 comments
Length: 2.8K words (~13 min read)
Language: en

Jun 4, 2026

We’re excited to share Magenta RealTime 2 (MRT2), a state-of-the-art open model and efficient real-time inference engine that enables you to build and play AI musical instruments on your laptop!

To get started, download the apps on your MacBook (requires Apple Silicon).

Unlike other large generative music models that work offline to turn a prompt into a track, MRT2 is a live, interactive model that you can control with MIDI and audio, in addition to text. It performs low-latency on-device inference to respond to your inputs instantly. You can run it as a standalone app, drop it into your DAW, or integrate it into other music software.

In addition to the open-weights model, we are releasing a collection of playable instruments and experiences built with MRT2. Experiment with cloning sounds, blending styles, and creating live accompaniment with this low-latency music model.

To explore the potential of live music models as instruments, today we are releasing:

Magenta RealTime 2, an open-weights model (2.4B parameters) capable of high-quality real-time music synthesis with low-latency real-time controls via MIDI, text, and audio.
Alongside our model, we release an open source Python library (pip install magenta-rt) offering inference via JAX/MLX using SequenceLayers.
An inference engine written in C++, enabling efficient streaming audio generation on a MacBook GPU via MLX.
A suite of example applications built on the inference engine. These offer a glimpse into the creative potential of Magenta RealTime 2, and serve as references to help you get started building new instruments and software integrations.

For a decade, the Magenta team has championed a vision of AI as a tool for musicians, never a replacement. We released our first neural synthesizer, NSynth, back in 2017 which put machine learning into playable hardware. We continued creating AI Instruments with projects such as DDSP, Piano Genie, and the first version of Magenta RealTime, our debut live music model capable of generating and blending a wide range of musical styles. MRT2 achieves ~15x lower latency than version one, works on standard hardware and integrates directly into DAWs, making this live model a true musical instrument.

A live music model with lower latency and expanded control

Magenta RealTime Magenta RealTime 2
Live music generation ✅ ✅
Hardware required TPU/GPU MacBook
Frame size 2s 40ms
Control latency ~3s ~200ms
Control modalities Text, Audio Text, Audio, MIDI
Model sizes 760M / 220M 2.4B / 230M

Both MRT and MRT2 are codec language models operating on sequences of audio tokens from the SpectroStream codec, but MRT2 achieves lower latency by performing frame-level autoregression with frame-aligned conditioning. To enable expressive musical control, MRT2 is designed to model audio that continuously follows MIDI inputs, alongside style prompts which can be either audio or text; prompts are embedded via MusicCoCa. For minimal interaction lag, both signals are injected as frame-aligned conditioning at every generation step, allowing the model to react to changes in the signal within a single frame (40 ms, plus additional sources of empirical latency, see below).

Key to this approach is the use of a causal sliding window attention mechanism to enable continuous streaming generation while bounding memory requirements. Alongside this, learnable attention embeddings are also incorporated to improve generalization to arbitrary durations and context eviction artifacts (e.g., ringing and feedback) during long-context generation.

Fast C++ inference engine via MLX

While the original Magenta RealTime required a high-power GPU or TPU, Magenta RealTime 2 brings live generation to the hardware musicians actually use. To achieve this, we built a C++ inference engine powered by MLX that allows MRT2 to run natively on Apple Silicon. Apple’s MLX framework provides the link between Python and C++. More specifically, we use MLX to compile the MRT2 model, implemented using the SequenceLayers library, into an .mlxfn file which is a model container that bundles the weights and computational graph. Our C++ inference engine loads that file and uses the MLX runtime to efficiently execute it on Apple Silicon GPUs. The inference engine handles other necessary infrastructure (model state, audio buffering / resampling, MIDI input) and can be embedded into many music application frameworks where C++ supported.

MLX allows MRT2 to run on Apple Silicon (M-series): both model sizes can run offline (non-real-time) inference on any Apple Silicon Mac, while real-time streaming (generating audio faster than playback) is supported on the following devices:

Model Platform
Base (2.4B) MacBook M3 Pro (or higher) MacBook M2 Max (or higher)
Small (230M) Any Apple Silicon MacBook, including MacBook Air

A suite of example applications for musicians and developers

A key goal of Magenta RealTime 2 is to allow musicians to integrate live music models within existing software, and help developers build custom applications. To help you get started, our codebase provides several examples, including standalone apps, plugins and extensions.

What’s Next?

Our team members have been building new instruments with machine learning for nearly 10 years, excitedly making unique and quirky sounds from statistical knowledge of music. With Magenta RealTime 2, AI instruments are finally starting to gain the controllability and immediacy we expect from music creation tools, but plenty remains to be explored. From even more interaction and lower control latency, to audio streaming inputs that can enable jamming and real-time audio control, we look forward to expanding the capabilities of live music models further. Stay tuned for future updates!

And in the meantime, we are also excited to bring more features and example applications to MRT2 soon, including:

Finetuning, allowing anyone to customize the model by directly training on their own data.
Example performance tools created in collaboration with Manaswi Mishra.

In the next few days, we will also be at the Music Technology Hackathon in Boston, where we are presenting a challenge centered around Magenta RealTime 2. We look forward to seeing what everyone will come up with!

Citation

Please cite our work as:

Magenta Team. “Magenta RealTime 2: Open & Local Live Music Models”. https://magenta.withgoogle.com/magenta-realtime-2. June 2026

@article{mrt2,
  title  = {Magenta RealTime 2: Open & Local Live Music Models},
  author = {Magenta Team},
  year   = {2026},
  note   = {https://magenta.withgoogle.com/magenta-realtime-2}
}

Appendix: Technical Details

Low-latency streaming generation

Some background on Codec Language Modeling. A codec language model (LM) operates on discrete sequences of tokens from a neural audio codec. Here a codec refers to a pair of functions, an encoder and decoder, that convert audio to and from a discrete, compressed representation while minimizing distortion.

More formally, the encoder is a function mapping raw stereo audio waveforms \(\textbf{a} \in \mathbb{R}^{T f_s \times 2}\) into matrices of discrete tokens \(\mathbf{x} \in \mathbb{V}_c^{Tf_k \times d_c}\) where \(T\) is the duration in seconds, \(f_s\) the audio sampling rate, \(f_k\) the token frame rate, \(\mathbb{V}_c\) the codec vocabulary, and \(d_c\) is the number of tokens per frame. In this case, \(d_c\) refers to the “depth” of the residual vector quantization algorithm, referring to the iterative quantization of continuous embeddings of each audio frame.

The goal of the codec LM is to model these token matrices. For efficiency, an increasingly common approach is to adopt a hierarchical autoregressive framework using a pair of Transformers: one which compresses temporal history into fixed-length embedding vectors (\(\texttt{Temporal}_\theta\)), and another which iteratively decodes tokens depth-wise given the current frame embedding (\(\texttt{Depth}_\phi\)). Assuming \(\mathbf{x_i}\) refers to the \(i\)-th frame of \(\mathbf{x}\), and \(x_i^j\) refers to its \(j\)-th token, the joint distribution over \(x\) is modeled autoregressively as: \[ P_{\theta,\phi}(\mathbf{x}) = \prod_{i=1}^{Tf_k} \prod_{j=1}^{d_c} P_\phi(x_i^j | \mathbf{x_i^{<j}}, \texttt{Temporal}_{\theta}(\mathbf{x_{<i}})), \] where \(P_\phi(x_i^j \mid \cdot) = \texttt{SoftMax}(\texttt{Depth}_\phi(\cdot))\).

At inference time, we generate audio by first sampling a token sequence \(\mathbf{x’} \sim P_{\theta,\phi}(\mathbf{x})\) and then outputting \(\mathbf{a}’ = \texttt{Dec}(\mathbf{x}’)\), where \(\texttt{Dec}\) is the codec decoder. This describes our base modeling approach, shared with Magenta RealTime. For our codec, we use SpectroStream to compress high fidelity (\(f_s = 48\) kHz) stereo audio into tokens at \(3\) kbps (\(f_k = 25\) Hz, \(d_c = 12\), \(|\mathbb{V}_c| = 2^{10}\)).

Lowering autoregression granularity: from chunk to frame. To achieve streaming audio generation, we need to enforce two constraints:

The system must generate at least \(f_k \cdot d_c\) tokens per second
The decoder must be causal, meaning its output audio for frame \(i\) only depends on \(\mathbf{x_{\leq i}}\)

In the original Magenta RealTime, we satisfied requirement (1) by performing autoregression on chunks of frames, where each chunk is 2 seconds in duration. This design was chosen to amortize model runtime over chunk length to achieve real-time streaming. However, because the system must wait until the next chunk to inject any new user control information, the chunk duration creates a lower bound on control delay, resulting in a response time of 2 seconds at a minimum. Instead, Magenta RealTime 2 models individual frames, allowing us to reduce model response time significantly. To ensure continuous streaming generation while operating on single frames, we adopt a decoder-only architecture, using a local sliding window attention (SWA) in the temporal Transformer.

This has two key advantages: (1) the decoder-only architecture allows us to remove the sequential bottleneck introduced by the bidirectional encoder in Magenta RealTime, where the full encoder output has to be materialized before decoding can begin; (2) the rolling attention mechanism allows us to extend the context length while keeping the KV cache size fixed. At each step of the autoregressive generation, key-value entries for new tokens are written into the cache, and entries older than the window size w are evicted:

Similarly to previous work, we find that using a sliding window attention causes the model to significantly deteriorate when initial tokens are evicted from the cache. To remediate this, we make use of a learnable attention sink embedding. In order to reconcile the finite training length with the receptive field induced by the SWA mechanism, we also take care to set the attention window size such that this effective receptive field does not exceed the training crop length. Finally, we further reduce train/test mismatch and achieve better length generalization by dropping learnable positional embeddings (NoPE), after observing that RoPE hinders generalization beyond the training length. Instead, the model implicitly learns positional information by relying on causal masking and SWA, which naturally extend to arbitrary-length sequences without extrapolation issues.

Putting all this together, our model presents significant architectural differences compared to the previous version:

Model Magenta RealTime Magenta RealTime 2
Autoregressive unit 2-second chunks (25 frames × 16 RVQ = 400 tokens) Individual frames (12 RVQ tokens at 25 Hz = 40 ms)
Architecture T5-style bidirectional encoder + causal decoder; encoder processes the full chunk of conditioning before decoding begins Decoder-only; conditioning is injected at every frame, with no encoder forward pass as a sequential bottleneck
Minimum control delay ≥ 2 s (next chunk boundary)

~0.2 s (frame processing + depth decode + codec decode). See full latency diagram

Precise control through frame-by-frame conditioning

A central feature of MRT2 is responsive, multi-signal control: in addition to style control expressed through audio or text, MRT2 also supports note and drums on/off control. This is achieved by modeling the conditional distribution \(P_{\theta,\phi}(\mathbf{x} | \mathbf{c})\), where \(\mathbf{c} = (\mathbf{c}_{style}, \mathbf{c}_{notes}, \mathbf{c}_{drums})\) is formed by tokenized representations of all conditioning signals at the audio frame rate (25 Hz), concatenated together into a single conditioning vector per frame. This vector is then mapped to a multi-channel embedding and injected into the temporal decoder through streaming cross-attention, enabling the model to react to changes in any signal within a single frame (~40 ms).

At inference we enable flexible joint guidance by extending the classifier-free guidance (CFG) approach in Magenta RealTime to multiple signals. This allows us to balance the contribution of each conditioning signal separately and according to the desired level of adherence, while also supporting unconditional generation for any subset of controls.

Style control through audio and text. Similarly to Magenta RealTime, MRT2 can also be steered through audio and text via quantized MusicCoCa embeddings. During training, we freeze the embeddings associated with the MusicCoCa tokens instead of learning them from scratch. The goal is to leverage the rich, pre-trained semantic representations coming from the Residual Vector Quantizer (RVQ). By keeping these embeddings frozen, we ensure the generative model receives stable semantic embeddings, which significantly improves prompt adherence at inference time. While MusicCoCa provides a joint embedding space between text and audio, the underlying distributions associated with both modalities do not match exactly. This creates a train-test mismatch during inference, as the model has only been trained on audio embeddings, but receives text embeddings during inference. To bridge this gap, we train a generative model from which we can sample diverse audio embeddings given an input text embedding, learning the one-to-many relationship between a single text prompt and multiple valid audio signals. To ensure high performance, we employ a pixel Mean Flow (pMF) formulation, enabling high-quality one-step inference. Finally, training this mapper module on a mix of short tags and long-form captions provides flexible style control, ranging from simple tag-style inputs to highly detailed text descriptions.

Note control. We enable note control by training on (audio, MIDI) pairs. Note activity is encoded as a 128-channel pianoroll – one channel per MIDI pitch – at the audio frame rate (25 Hz). The model is trained on around 71k hours of mostly instrumental stock music from a variety of sources, with MIDI labels inferred by the MT3 transcription model. We structure the per-pitch token vocabulary to support two control modes at inference. In Auto-Strum mode, the user specifies only which pitches are active at each frame, and the model determines where to place note onsets. In Auto-Strum OFF mode, the user can additionally specify the exact timing of each note onset, giving precise attack-level control. This is achieved through a 4-token vocabulary that distinguishes between note off, generic note on, note onset, and note continuation. When Auto-Strum is off, the model receives onset and continuation tokens directly, and respects the specified attack timing. When Auto-Strum is on, onset information is replaced with an onset mask token, and the model freely chooses when to place attacks based on the active pitch information alone. To support both modes with a single model, we employ onset masking, a training-time augmentation that stochastically replaces the onset and continuation tokens of randomly selected notes with the onset mask token. This trains the model to generate musically plausible attacks when no explicit onset information is present, while faithfully following onset cues when they are provided.

Drums on/off control. The note conditioning described so far gives us control over the melodic and harmonic content of the generated audio, but leaves us with no mechanism to control the presence of percussive elements. As a result, the model can arbitrarily include drums as part of the generated audio whenever this is admissible by the style conditioning (e.g. “jazz”). This can often be undesirable if, for example, the model is played alongside other instruments or as part of a multi-track session (e.g. in a DAW). For this reason, it’s useful to optionally switch off drum generation through an explicit control. We enable this through an additional conditioning signal: at training time, we pass a frame-wise sequence of drum hits obtained by transcribing drum stems from each training example using OaF Drums. While this trains the model to respond to drum hits, we find that direct drum control is infeasible in practice, given the end-to-end response time. Instead, we leverage this control purely for switching between drum-unconditional and drumless generation, using the same multi-guidance CFG as the other signals.

Inference-time masking as creative control. Beyond providing a set of control signals to guide generation, it is crucial to have a way to compose and modulate them. We accomplish this through selective input masking coupled with CFG scales, a technique that allows us to flexibly define playing modes at inference. More specifically, we introduce a masking scheme designed to accomplish two complementary goals: (1) strengthen the model’s ability to follow the controls while remaining robust to noisy or missing inputs, (2) enable partially unconditional generation as a form of creative control. During training, we stochastically mask contiguous regions of each conditioning signal independently, varying both the masking probability and spatial scale. We find that this results in better adherence to the inputs when they are specified. Importantly, this augmentation implicitly trains the model to interpret masked regions as unspecified, opening up a new dimension of creative interaction at inference. The Auto-Strum mode described above in the Note Control section is one such example. Similarly, we employ masking over the pitch dimension of the pianoroll to give the model more or less “creative freedom” over which pitches can be active. For example, masking all pianoroll pitches except those currently pressed allows the model to freely add harmonies or embellishments, while explicitly setting neighboring pitches to “off” (silent) constrains it to play only the input notes.

Real-world control latency. While we have significantly reduced the model frame size (from 2s to 40ms) compared to the previous generation, inference time isn’t the only source of latency. Below we give a sketch of end-to-end reaction time, taking into account input and output buffers, alongside additional sources of latency introduced by external components.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

26. Samurai City

Source: https://worksinprogress.co/issue/samurai-city/
Site: worksinprogress.co
Author: wip-admin
Published: 2026-06-02
HN activity: 170 points · 34 comments
Length: 2.4K words (~11 min read)
Language: en-US

Cities are often centers of agglomeration, places where people gather to collaborate with one another. But this is not the only reason they exist. Sometimes, cities are chiefly centers of consumption, where elites gather to devour resources extracted from the rest of the country. And occasionally, they are something like prisons, where troublesome social groups are concentrated so that the authorities can keep an eye on them. Many premodern cities, like Versailles, Naples, or Imperial Rome, were a little like this. But perhaps the greatest example was Tokugawa Edo.

Between 1600 and 1868, Japan was dominated by the Tokugawa family. The Tokugawas had prevailed over their rivals after a series of civil wars, establishing a sort of dictatorship known as the Shogunate. They developed a remarkable social system, crafted to preserve their power, and with it, the peace and social stability of Japan. At the apex of this system was the city of Edo (today’s Tokyo), at times the largest city in the world, and one of the strangest urban structures in history.

Get the print magazine

Subscribe for $100 to receive six beautiful issues per year.

Subscribe

In early modern Europe, most people were tenant farmers, who paid rent to landowners. The state sometimes taxed landowners, sometimes tenants, and sometimes both through consumption taxes. In peacetime, however, the early modern state did not do very much, so taxes generally ran at just a few percent of national income.

The picture in Japan was profoundly different. The peasantry was directly taxed by the government, at rates varying from 15 to 70 percent of the harvest, with 40 percent as a rough norm. The authorities distributed most of their tax receipts to the samurai, a hereditary, quasi-noble class making up about six percent of the population. In both cases, the agricultural surplus ended up in the hands of a leisure class, but the Japanese system was structured very differently, with the surplus reaching the leisure class only through the funnel of public taxation.

Only a minority of Japan was directly ruled by the Shogunate. Most of the country was administered by various classes of daimyo: shinpan (collateral branches of the Tokugawa family), fudai (longstanding Tokugawa vassals) and tozama (formerly independent daimyo families who had submitted after the Tokugawa victory in the civil wars).

Image

Adapted from a map by Fabian Drixler, based on a 2015 exhibit at Yale's Peabody Museum.

Measured by agricultural output, about 15 percent of Japan fell under the direct control of the Shogunate. These were areas that had always belonged to the Tokugawa, or that had been conquered by them during the civil wars. About a tenth of samurai were Tokugawa retainers, who received their stipends directly from the Shogunate.

In about three quarters of Japan, the tax authorities were a different group, the daimyo. The daimyo had originally been the territorial nobility, and in the pre-Tokugawa era, the breakdown of central authority had left them as the effective rulers of their domains. After 1600 the surviving daimyo submitted to the Tokugawa and were rewarded with a role somewhat akin to that of regional governors. There were about 260 daimyo, and about nine tenths of samurai were their retainers.

Urban design as a panopticon for the nobility

The city of Edo played a crucial role in this system. The daimyo were required to maintain mansions in Edo, in which their families were obliged to live permanently. Any act of disloyalty by a daimyo would thus place his family in the gravest peril. Most women of the daimyo class passed their lives as effective hostages of the state, never visiting the domains that their husbands, fathers, and sons governed. The daimyo themselves were also required to spend alternate years or half-years in Edo, bringing with them great crowds of samurai retainers. Edo thus had a dual nature: on the one hand, it was the apex of Japanese society, in which the country’s agricultural surplus was consumed; on the other, it was a kind of prison, in which Japan’s potentially dangerous elites were contained and monitored.

Edo was zoned for social class centuries before the development of zoning in the West. Samurai and daimyo districts were concentrated on the higher ground to the west, while commoners were crowded between Edo Castle and the Sumida River.

Image

André Sorensen, The Making of Urban Japan, Cities and Planning from Edo to the Twenty-First Century. Sorensen's map was adapted from another drawn by Okata Junishiro in 1981, itself based on Tokugawa originals.

This gave Edo a peculiar demographic and economic character. For one thing, it was enormous. Japanese rice agriculture was extremely productive by premodern standards and generated a huge surplus for the capital’s benefit. Edo’s population seems to have been over a million by 1700, which would make it the largest city in the world at the time: London reached a population of a million only around 1800, while New York did not reach it until 1880.

It was also extremely top-heavy socially. Unlike the knights of the European feudal system, Tokugawa-era samurai were usually required to live in cities. The Shogun’s own samurai were permanently concentrated in Edo, while each daimyo brought hundreds or thousands of his samurai with him during his years of residence in the capital. This meant that almost half of Edo’s population at any given time were samurai.

Samurai, photographed in around 1880. While these men were dressed for the camera rather than for battle, samurai in fact made little use of the new military technologies developed after the pacification of Japan by the Tokugawa. In some ways, the Japanese army regressed technologically in the peaceful Tokugawa period, with gunpowder weapons displaced by less effective but more high-status equipment.

Image

The samurai were theoretically a warrior class, but since Tokugawa Japan was at peace, there was little real soldiering to do. Most non-military work was seen as degrading, with the exception of gentlemanly occupations like civil administration and tutoring in calligraphy. Most samurai thus lived as pensioners of the state, deriving the bulk of their income from hereditary government stipends assigned to their families at the start of the Tokugawa era.

Stipends were generous for high-ranking samurai but very modest for the majority: in 1876 the Japanese state calculated that only 5.1 percent of samurai had stipends worth more than 100 yen, equivalent to a little over $4,000 today. The result was that most samurai lived in dignified but extreme poverty. It is a testament to the primacy of status among human ends that, although some samurai surreptitiously took on side jobs to supplement their tiny incomes, very few abjured their rank to take up more gainful occupations openly. Interclass marriages were forbidden, and there was theoretically no process for ennoblement, though some wealthy commoners worked around this by arranging to be adopted into impecunious samurai families.

The High City

Edo was zoned according to social class, probably the largest-scale use of zoning before modern times. Samurai neighborhoods made up a large minority of the total surface area, concentrated in western areas that came to be known as the High City. Higher-ranking samurai had substantial homes, but most lived in extremely austere conditions: the median family lived in a tiny, two-room rowhouse with no garden and communal latrines.

The samurai shared the High City with the daimyo. Each daimyo was expected to maintain several estates in Edo, including a more compact estate near the Shogun’s castle and a more spacious garden estate further out. These were made up of single-storey buildings connected by covered walkways, set amid exquisitely landscaped gardens. Each estate was surrounded by a perimeter wall broken by just one or two richly ornamented gates. The great expense of all this was, from the Shogunate’s perspective, part of its appeal: the more resources daimyo expended on maintaining mansions and circulating between them, the less remained for fomenting trouble.

The inner High City of Edo, photographed in 1865 or 1866. Walled daimyo compounds present austere facades to the public street. Most daimyo would also have had more spacious mansions in suburban areas of the High City, with extensive gardens.

Image

These samurai and daimyo neighborhoods made up a substantial majority of Edo’s surface area. In some ways, they foreshadowed affluent American suburbs, though they would have felt quite different at street level. Physically, the closest modern parallel might be elite neighborhoods in countries like South Africa or Brazil, where fear of crime has driven the wealthy behind high walls and electric fences.

In fact, however, Edo seems to have been an unusually safe city, a fact that often struck early Western visitors. Most people had no locks on their front doors. The English writer Isabella Bird wrote that a solitary foreign woman could travel in Japan in ‘perfect safety’ and that she had never encountered ‘a single instance of incivility’, though at home she would often have been ‘exposed to rudeness, insult, and extortion, if not to actual danger’. The walls and gates of the High City may thus tell us more about elite culture and status display than they do about any distinctive security needs.

The Low City

Much of the rest of Edo’s surface area was taken up with religious complexes and institutional buildings belonging to the Shogunate. The commoners were crowded into the remainder, mostly in riverside areas known as the Low City. Though most commoners were very poor, some were richer than most samurai, and even richer than minor daimyo. Some of the greatest artistic legacies of Tokugawa Japan, like ukiyo-e prints and the kabuki theater, arose from the patronage of this class. However wealthy they might become, however, commoners’ status was axiomatically lower than that of the samurai.

A daimyo and his retinue process through the High City, as depicted by the ukiyo-e artist Hiroshige in 1863. Daimyo traveled across Japan with hundreds or even thousands of retainers, often marching single- or double-file along Japan’s narrow roads in columns that could stretch for kilometers. Note the gardens visible behind the hard external shells of the daimyo compounds, and the commoners prostrating themselves as the procession passes. Ukiyo-e pictures were mass-produced using woodblock printing and sold widely among the urban middle classes. They were later to have a profound influence on Western visual arts, from Degas through Van Gogh to Hergé’s Tintin comics.

Image

Edo’s commoners worked mostly in providing goods and services to the city’s elite. The city as a whole produced little, consuming resources from the rest of Japan and providing little in return save the arguable gift of government. No international trade took place in Edo: the government was intensely wary of destabilizing foreign influences, and by the late-eighteenth century it allowed only two Dutch and ten Chinese ships to visit Japan each year, all through the carefully controlled port at Nagasaki. (For comparison, about fifteen thousand ships arrived in British harbors from foreign ports annually in the same period.) In this as in other respects, the Shogunate’s political needs had a decidedly fitful relationship to the country’s economic growth: although the political stability that the regime provided certainly did foster prosperity, the steps it took to ensure that stability often stifled it.

The physical form of the Low City was even more remarkable than that of the daimyo neighborhoods. Commoner Edo was divided into some 1,500-2,000 fenced and gated blocks called chō. These were then subdivided into roji, alleys lined with small houses, often also gated. The Low City was thus divided up by many thousands of internal checkpoints, all of which closed at night. Edo was not under threat of attack in the Tokugawa period and the city as a whole was not fortified. The purpose of this immense labyrinth of walls and gates was to control and monitor the movement of the population.

Wealthy merchants lived in substantial houses called machiya, featuring a series of small garden courtyards around which living spaces were ingeniously laid out. In plan, machiya recall the domus house type of the urban middle and upper classes in the Roman Empire. Many machiya must have been rather agreeable houses, and some Japanese people still live in modernized machiya today. Most commoners, however, lived in nagaya, tiny terraced houses frequently built back-to-back. A standard specification for nagaya was 2.7 meters wide and 3.6 meters deep, yielding a total floorspace of only 13.2 square meters.

An enormous number of people were crammed into commoner neighborhoods. The most crowded had 58,000 inhabitants per square kilometer, about twice the population density of Manhattan today. Remarkably enough, however, their dwellings were largely single-storey. This seems to have been required by regulation, in turn motivated by fire risk or by dislike of commoner buildings towering over the mansions of the nobility. Japanese builders were perfectly capable of erecting taller structures, so the fact that these intensely crowded neighborhoods forewent the floorspace that additional storeys could have provided is not least among the paradoxes that Tokugawa Edo presents to history.

In a way, the Tokugawa system was a success. Japan experienced near-total peace between 1600 and the late nineteenth century, a remarkable achievement for a premodern society and a dramatic contrast to Europe or China, where tens of millions of people died in wars. The Tokugawa succeeded in bribing, blackmailing, and intimidating Japan’s armed elites into a quarter of a millennium of passivity, enabling steady economic growth and a remarkable artistic flowering. One might thus argue that Edo’s apparent parasitism was an illusion. Edo was indeed a gilded prison, but prisons can be useful things.

Still, it would have been nice if Japan had not needed a vast prison capital in the first place. Tokugawa Edo stands as a monument to the power of rent-seekers, producing little and demanding immense resources as a condition of civil peace. It shows how the physical form of cities may be reshaped by these demands, as governments apportion space and limit movement in line with their political needs. These forces yielded a city with tight restrictions on built density and land use, an acute housing shortage, and a huge share of privileged state stipendiaries. Edo is a particularly striking example of these phenomena. But it is far from alone.

Enjoyed this? There's more.

Get new articles from Works in Progress delivered to your inbox.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

27. Retro-Tech Parenting

Source: https://havenweb.org/2026/05/28/retro-tech.html
Site: havenweb.org
Submitter: mawise (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-04 16:02 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 307 points · 207 comments
Length: 1.0K words (~5 min read)
Language: en

I am a technologist. I enjoy the things that computers and digital devices can do–they often seem magical and amazing! As a technologist, I have a particular vantage point to see and be very uncomfortable with what companies are doing with that technology. There are catchphrases for these patterns: AdTech, Surveillance Capitalism, Rage Bait, Engagement-Optimized Feeds, Harvesting Eyeballs.

I am also a parent. As a parent, I am scared about the prospect of letting my kids loose in a digital world so aggressively dominated by these companies and patterns. But at the same time, technology was an enriching part of my childhood and continues to be an enriching part of my life and I want to share that with them. In this post, I don’t want to spend much time discussing the ways that bad tech patterns are bad, instead I want to share some of the ways I have held on to the enriching parts of technology to share them with my kids. For many of these choices, it turns out that (surprise!) my favorite solutions involve looking back in time a couple decades.

Physical media

I’m starting to fall in love with CDs again. When I was young, music came on CDs. This was a time before MP3s and before Spotify. This was a time when going to summer camp, I would pick which half-dozen CDs I wanted to bring with on the trip. This was a time of wired ear-bud headphones, sitting in school sharing a song with someone by giving them one of the two ear buds and listening side-by-side. This was a time of [Parental Advisory] labels on CDs that had objectionable language. This was a time of tiny LCD screens on portable CD players that only displayed the track number, so I sometimes knew my favorite song on a CD by number instead of by name.

I bought a mini CD boom box for the house. My oldest loves bringing it around to different rooms, plugging it in, and putting in a CD. I bought her the K-Pop Demon Hunters CD for her birthday. The local public library has CDs! CDs are awesome.

Speaking of the public library, they also have DVDs and BluRays. I remember the whole ritual of going to Blockbuster Video with my Dad to pick out a movie for family movie night. Usually he would let my sister and me pick out a few extras that we wanted to watch. That’s how I got familiar with the Three Stooges, even though it was before my time. The magic of having something to hold onto that you can bring home and put in the player next to the TV, and there is your movie!

As a parent one of the big wins with physical media is I know exactly what my kids have available to experience. If they aren’t ready for something, it doesn’t come home with us. The kids can be much more independent about watching and listening because there is no adversary inside the device they are using. Kids love that independence.

Landline Telephones

I hooked up a wired, physical telephone next to the kitchen in our house. I’m using a cheap VoIP provider with an analogue telephone adapter, but there’s a company called Tin Can that makes this really easy (no affiliation). The telephone network has retained backward compatibility as everyone moved to smartphones, so grandparents, neighbors, aunts and uncles, are all now accessible to the kids. Even better, these digitally-managed phones have excellent configuration options. I’ve whitelisted all the friends and family who get to call us, and the phone automatically blocks calls from dinner time to morning. My kids will spontaneously call up their grandparents to ask if they can go over to play, and have memorized my phone number because they like to prank call me when I’m also in the kitchen.

When I was a kid, the telephone was my bridge to friends and setting up my own playdates. It was “do you want to come over to my house?” instead of “Dad! Can you set up a playdate with so-and-so?” There is still a bit of a network effect until other families get hooked up with their own house phones, but I’m really excited about it. Kids really love that independence.

The Family Computer

I remember having friends over and going to friends’ houses and one of our favorite things to do was play computer games. This was the era of Commander Keen, and Prince of Persia. We would sit at the family computer, side-by-side, taking turns, discussing strategy. I definitely have games I want to share with my kids, but the internet is also not something I trust. I bought a used tower PC from Ebay and set it up next to the kitchen. Each kid has their own login and their own games or activities they like to explore. I also set up a pi-hole for our home network and configured the family computer to use the pi-hole for DNS. Just like the phone, I’ve whitelisted every domain that they can visit. For example: they get access to Wikipedia, but not Google. They get access to Minecraft, but we don’t play on public servers. No Youtube or Spotify, but I’ve curated some sites about how to solve a Rubik’s cube, or different ways to tie your shoes.

I showed my older kid that she could rip a CD onto the computer, and listen to it there. For now she’s just excited that she has yet another place she can listen to her favorite K-Pop Demon Hunters song, but maybe this is the start of building up her own music collection as I’ve done over the decades. Kids love being able to use a computer on their own!

I opened by calling myself a technologist. I recognize that a lot of the tools I’ve described above aren’t as accessible to less-technical parents, but the core philosophy is definitely still accessible. The dystopian parts of modern technology came to dominate because they are very convenient–but that convenience comes at a cost. Especially when kids are involved, it can be really rewarding to refuse paying that cost and sometimes even look to the past for inspiration.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

28. Queen bees emerge from special wax chambers

Source: https://cen.acs.org/materials/biobased-materials/queen-bees-special-wax/104/web/2026/06
Site: American Chemical Society
Author: Soumya Sagar, special to C&EN
Published: 2026-06-03
HN activity: 85 points · 15 comments
Length: 567 words (~3 min read)
Language: en

A honeybee larva’s ascent to royalty is shaped by more than gobbling up royal jelly; it is also dictated by her cradle. Scientists have discovered that the queen cells are made of chemically engineered, “bespoke” wax that is critical for the survival and development of future queens (Nature 2026, DOI: 10.1038/s41586-026-10534-3).

For decades, the scientific consensus held that the larvae fed an exclusive diet of royal jelly grew into fertile, long-lived queens, while their sisters who got standard fare grew into sterile workers. Although nutrition is undeniably important, researchers suspected something else was also at play.

One place to look was the cells in which queen bees are reared. These are large, vertical wax cells, totally different from the classic hexagonal honeycomb of workers.

“Honeybees invest enormous effort in building highly specialized queen cells,” Boris Baer, an entomologist at the University of California, Riverside, says in an email. “From an evolutionary perspective, it seemed unlikely that such elaborate structures existed simply as containers for food.”

Baer and his collaborators investigated the physical and chemical properties of the queen cells and worker cells of western honeybees (Apis mellifera). They used scanning electron microscopy to examine the wax’s physical structure and gas chromatography-mass spectrometry to run a full chemical audit.

The researchers found that, compared with worker cell wax, queen cell wax is richer in unsaturated fatty acids, specifically oleic acid, linoleic acid, and α-linolenic acid, and poorer in n-alkanes, such as pentacosane, and wax esters. It also has a lower density, hardness, and mechanical strength (both tensile and compressive) than its worker counterparts and exhibits a significantly higher peak melting temperature.

Using a specialized tracking system with thermal imaging and high-definition lenses, the researchers monitored the bees’ construction activities and identified a dedicated crew of queen-cell builder bees who are significantly younger than their worker-cell-building counterparts. These builders physically overheat their bodies to nearly 40 °C to process the queen’s wax and also completely alter the chemical signature of the royal nursery.

To prove the cells do play a role in raising new queens, Baer’s team grafted newly hatched queen larvae into cells capped with standard worker wax. Of the grafted queen larvae, 62.5% died. The grafting experiment was repeated with eastern honeybees (Apis cerana), and the results were quite similar.

“We suspect that developing larvae are responding to a combination of chemical cues and physical properties of the wax, much like developing embryos in other animals respond to signals from their environment,” Baer says.

Gene E. Robinson, a honeybee biologist at the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign who wasn’t involved in the research, says the work is “compelling” and an “outstanding example” of interdisciplinary research. “The evidence presented in this paper strongly supports the existence of a highly specialized group of worker bees dedicated to queen rearing,” Robinson says in an email to C&EN. The new findings align with his earlier research that found that different worker genotypes show distinct preferences for either queen or worker rearing.

“I think it’s quite interesting,” says James Nieh, an ecologist at the University of California, San Diego, who also wasn’t involved in the research. He wonders if a similar mechanism works in other bees, like those in the genus Melipona where “the workers themselves decide whether or not to become a queen.” He speculates that the answer may also lie in the chemical properties of the cells whose occupants become queens.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

29. VoidZero Is Joining Cloudflare

Source: https://blog.cloudflare.com/voidzero-joins-cloudflare/
Site: The Cloudflare Blog
Author: Evan YouSteve Faulkner
Published: 2026-06-04
HN activity: 641 points · 279 comments
Length: 1.9K words (~9 min read)
Language: en-us

2026-06-04

7 min read

VoidZero, the company behind Vite, Vitest, Rolldown, Oxc, and Vite+, is joining Cloudflare. As part of this change, all team members of VoidZero are joining Cloudflare, too.

Before saying anything else, we want to make the most important thing clear: Vite, Vitest, Rolldown, Oxc, and Vite+ will stay open source, vendor-agnostic, and community-driven. Nothing about that changes.

Cloudflare's mission is to help build a better Internet. And a better Internet is an open Internet. Developers need choice, frameworks need a neutral foundation, and applications need to be portable. It is not reasonable to expect the entire web ecosystem to build around a single vendor. The most important tools and frameworks are portable by design.

Vite is one of the few foundational tools that the whole JavaScript ecosystem agrees on. It earned that position by being fast, excellent, portable, and vendor-neutral. One of the best ways Cloudflare can help build a better Internet is by investing in that foundational open source toolchain. A toolchain that makes the Internet better for everyone, not just people who use Cloudflare or choose to host with us.

Over the last few years we've invested heavily in making Cloudflare the best place to build and run websites, applications, and agents on our developer platform. But ultimately that choice will always be yours. Run your Vite application anywhere you want.

What this means for Vite

Today's news gives Vite more resources to keep growing, while the things that make Vite what it is remain the same:

Vite remains MIT-licensed and open source.

Vite remains vendor-agnostic. Applications built with Vite run anywhere and will continue to do so.

Vite's roadmap continues to be driven by the broader Vite team and community, and continues to be developed in the open.

Evan and the rest of the VoidZero team continue to lead Vite, Vitest, Rolldown, Oxc, and Vite+.

Cloudflare is committing engineering and resources to those projects, not redirecting them.

We made the same kind of commitment when Astro joined Cloudflare earlier this year. Astro is still open source, and still deploys anywhere. The team is still shipping the roadmap they were already shipping.

This commitment matters even more with Vite, because Vite is not one framework. Vite is the foundation underlying so many: Vue, SvelteKit, Nuxt, Astro, Solid, Qwik, Angular, React Router, TanStack Start. Even Next.js now has a Vite-based implementation in vinext. Vite has become a shared foundation for the JavaScript ecosystem.

Our number one goal is to maintain the trust that has earned Vite so much adoption. Not with our words here, but by proving it every day in how we support and develop these projects.

We also want to put our money where our mouth is when it comes to our support for open source and shared ecosystem foundations. As part of this announcement, Cloudflare is committing $1 million to a Vite ecosystem fund to support maintainers and contributors, administered by the Vite core team. Vite is bigger than VoidZero or Cloudflare, and the people who have helped build it should be part of what comes next.

Vite as the foundation

The Vite and Cloudflare teams have been collaborating well before this announcement, starting in 2024 with the Vite Environment API. The Environment API lets Vite run server code in something other than Node.js during development. We worked closely with the Vite team on its design, and then built the Cloudflare Vite plugin on top of it.

When you run vite dev with the Cloudflare plugin, your server code runs inside workerd, the same open-source runtime that powers Workers in production. Durable Objects, D1, KV, R2, Workflows, Workers AI, Agents, Service Bindings, Workers RPC – all of it runs locally inside the same runtime model as production.

For a long time, the cost of developing on a non-Node runtime was that local dev felt like a worse version of production. The Environment API removed that cost without forcing anyone to adopt a Cloudflare-specific dev server. Any runtime that wants to plug into Vite can do the same thing. That kind of design – a generic mechanism in Vite with provider-specific implementations – has proven to work well and is one we want to keep building on.

We knew we were on to something when we saw adoption of the Cloudflare Vite plugin take off:

Vite's adoption curve is one of the more remarkable things to watch in the ecosystem right now. As of this writing, Vite is at roughly 129M weekly downloads. The Cloudflare Vite plugin (@cloudflare/vite-plugin) is at almost 14M weekly downloads.

If you had told us a year ago that a Cloudflare Vite plugin would reach downloads equivalent to more than 10% of Vite itself, we wouldn’t have believed you. What happened? AI happened. More software is being created than ever before, and a lot of it starts with AI-generated code. Those applications need a default stack and a place to run. Agent-coded applications are choosing Vite, and increasingly they are choosing Vite running on Cloudflare.

AI is changing how we write software

Developers used to be the only users of dev servers, bundlers, linters, formatters, and CLIs. That is no longer true: agents are using them too, constantly. They scaffold projects, run dev servers, read errors, write tests, lint and format code, deploy previews, and iterate.

A lot of AI-generated applications already start as Vite apps, because Vite is fast, well understood, and broadly compatible with what agents have seen in their training data. Fast feedback loops have always been important. They become even more critical when writing software with agents:

Fast builds, because they iterate more than humans do.

Fast tests, because they re-run the suite constantly to verify their own work.

Fast linting and formatting, because those tools become guardrails.

Clear, structured errors, because the agent has to read and act on them.

Consistent CLIs, because small inconsistencies cause big detours.

The entire VoidZero toolchain is built for this kind of loop. Vitest, Rolldown, Oxc, Oxlint, and Oxfmt are each among the fastest tools in their respective categories, and they work well when they are run over and over by an agent. Vite+ brings those pieces together into one toolchain, with one CLI, one configuration model, and fewer moving parts. That makes the development loop easier for people to understand, and easier for agents to drive reliably.

We are dogfooding this ourselves. The Cloudflare dashboard is built on Vite. Oxlint is already saving days of engineering time in Cloudflare codebases. Flue, the agent harness framework from the Astro team, is also moving onto Vite as its foundation. Flue can run agents on Node.js, Cloudflare Workers, GitHub Actions, GitLab CI/CD, and more, and the Cloudflare target now uses the official Cloudflare Vite plugin and workerd integration. Vite is becoming the default application foundation inside Cloudflare too.

Vite is becoming full-stack

A few years ago, the job of a build tool was straightforward: take source files, produce a bundle, hand it off. That is not enough for modern applications, especially in a world where some of those applications are agents themselves.

A modern application is server-rendered routes, APIs, background jobs, queues, databases, object storage, real-time, auth, plus a growing list of agents and AI capabilities. The "build" is no longer the end of the story. It is the start of a deployment that has to understand all of those pieces.

That means Vite has to become more than a build tool. It needs to understand more of the application, while staying true to what made Vite work in the first place: speed, simplicity, and portability.

Void, a deployment platform designed for Vite, has been another testbed for these ideas. It helped explore what a modern application framework should own, what deployment should feel like, and how much of the full application lifecycle can be unified around one toolchain. We have learned a lot from that work.

Now the work is putting those lessons in the right place. Some belong in Vite itself as provider-agnostic primitives: first-class abstractions and hooks for backends, APIs, agents, and deployment that any provider can implement. Other lessons belong inside Cloudflare. Cloudflare will provide a first-class implementation of those hooks on Workers and the rest of our Developer Platform.

Even though some Vite maintainers are joining Cloudflare, changes to Vite itself will continue to go through the same open contribution process as any other Vite contribution. Features added to Vite itself should not be Cloudflare-specific. They will work anywhere Vite works.

Moving Cloudflare toward Vite

The same principle shaped how we think about the future of Cloudflare's own tooling. We are not moving Vite in the direction of Cloudflare. We are doing the opposite: moving Cloudflare's application tooling onto Vite, so it is built on top of the same workflows developers already know.

We recently shipped a technical preview of cf, a new unified CLI for the whole Cloudflare platform. Vite is going to be the foundation of our CLI experience for applications. The end goal is one consistent CLI for all of Cloudflare, with the same ergonomics whether you are working on Workers, R2, D1, Agents, or anything else.

If we do this right, the Cloudflare CLI should feel like Vite, not like a separate thing bolted on next to Vite.

cf dev should be a superset of vite dev. Same speed, same hot module replacement, same plugin model, plus the Cloudflare runtime and bindings when you want them.

cf build should understand Vite projects natively, without an adapter dance.

cf deploy should make deploying a Vite app to Cloudflare simple.

If you are running Vite today, the path to Cloudflare will feel like swapping in a superset of the commands you already know. Same project shape. Same Vite workflows. The entire Cloudflare developer platform available when you want it.

What happens next

In the short term, nothing changes for Vite users or the frameworks building on top of Vite:

Vite, Vitest, Rolldown, Oxc, and Vite+ keep shipping. The VoidZero team keeps contributing and leading them.

The Cloudflare Vite plugin keeps improving.

The Environment API and the broader story of "run your server code in the right runtime locally" keeps getting better, including for non-Cloudflare runtimes.

Longer term:

We start the work on moving the Cloudflare CLI toward an experience built directly on top of Vite.

Vite will get new, clean, provider-agnostic primitives for full-stack apps and agents that work for everyone on any platform.

Over time, we intend to open-source the Void platform, so others can learn from it and build their own platforms on top of Vite and Cloudflare.

We will do all of this in public and with the community. The same way Vite has always been built.

Welcome VoidZero

Vite, Vitest, Rolldown, Oxc, and Vite+ exist because a deep ecosystem of open source contributors put years of work into them. These projects are already foundational to how the web is built, and we are grateful to everyone who helped get them here. Thank you to everyone who has contributed code, reviews, issues, docs, plugins, integrations, and support along the way.

We are excited to welcome the VoidZero team to Cloudflare, and excited to put more resources behind these projects. Our job now is to help them grow, stay open, and power the JavaScript ecosystem for everyone.

Vite keeps being Vite. Cloudflare gets to help.

If you want to try Vite on Cloudflare today, run:

npm create vite@latest

npx wrangler deploy AcquisitionsDevelopersDeveloper PlatformAIWorkers AIVite

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

30. KVarN: Native vLLM backend for KV-cache quantization by Huawei

Source: https://github.com/huawei-csl/KVarN
Site: GitHub
Submitter: theanonymousone (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-04 15:18 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 134 points · 13 comments
Length: 624 words (~3 min read)
Language: en

⚡️ Built for agentic and long-context workloads.

💡 KVarN delivers 3-5x more KV-cache capacity and up to ~1.3x the throughput of FP16, so you fit far longer contexts and serve more concurrent requests, with FP16-level accuracy.

🔌 Calibration-free, plug-and-play with vLLM. A native vLLM attention backend: add one flag, no model changes, no calibration.

🥊 Up to ~2.4× TurboQuant throughput, same capacity, higher accuracy.

Why KVarN (Variance Normalized KV-Cache)?

kvarn /kvɑːɳ/ · noun (Swedish)

A grinding apparatus used to reduce substances into smaller particles or powder, especially grains, seeds, spices, coffee beans, KV-caches.

KV-cache quantization usually comes with a catch. As the vLLM TurboQuant blog shows, existing methods buy extra KV-cache capacity but give up throughput (TurboQuant reports 40 to 52% lower throughput for 2.3-3.7x capacity), and aggressive low-bit quantization also tends to cost accuracy. Losing both speed and quality is the main reason KV-cache quantization is rarely turned on in production.

KVarN is built to keep both. On Qwen3-32B (AIME25, 16K-context burst, TP=2) it matches FP16 accuracy and beats its throughput while delivering ~4× the KV-cache capacity:

KVarN stays in the upper-right corner the blog's methods can't reach: FP16-level accuracy, FP16-or-better throughput, and several times the context.

Quickstart

KVarN ships as a vLLM fork. Install it like vLLM, then select the KVarN KV-cache dtype.

# 1. Clone
git clone https://github.com/huawei-csl/KVarN.git
cd KVarN

# 2. Install (uses the upstream precompiled wheel; KVarN kernels are Triton, JIT-compiled at runtime)
VLLM_USE_PRECOMPILED=1 pip install -e .

from vllm import LLM, SamplingParams

llm = LLM(
    model="Qwen/Qwen3-32B",
    dtype="float16",                    # KVarN runs in float16
    kv_cache_dtype="kvarn_k4v2_g128",   # enable KVarN
    block_size=128,                     # KVarN tile size
)
print(llm.generate("Explain KV-cache quantization in one sentence.",
                    SamplingParams(max_tokens=64))[0].outputs[0].text)

Serving works the same way:

vllm serve Qwen/Qwen3-32B --dtype float16 --kv-cache-dtype kvarn_k4v2_g128 --block-size 128

Note: KVarN runs in float16 compute. The tile / page size is currently fixed at 128 (one vLLM block = one KVarN tile); other page sizes are coming soon.

Tip (capacity): KVarN realizes its full KV-cache capacity when there is room to amortize a small fixed decode workspace. On multi-GPU or generous --gpu-memory-utilization setups this is automatic. On a tight single-GPU budget, vLLM's CUDA-graph memory profiler can over-reserve and shrink the KV pool; set VLLM_MEMORY_PROFILER_ESTIMATE_CUDAGRAPHS=0 (and/or raise --gpu-memory-utilization) to recover the full capacity.

How does KVarN work?

KVarN quantizes the KV cache one fixed-size token tile at a time, walking each tile through the four stages above:

Cache: the raw fp16 KV tile (channels × tokens), straight from attention.

Rotated Cache: a Hadamard rotation along the channel dimension mixes channels so that per-channel outliers are spread out, making the tile easier to quantize. The rotation is orthonormal, so attention scores are preserved.

Normalized Cache: iterative variance normalization (Sinkhorn-like) alternates column- and row-wise standard-deviation normalization in log space, equalizing variance across the tile and shrinking quantization error before any rounding happens.

Quantized Cache: asymmetric round-to-nearest at low bit-width, with the scales folded back in at read time (keys per channel, values per token).

The shipped preset spends more bits on keys than values (kvarn_k4v2_g128: 4-bit keys, 2-bit values). We chose to release this configuration because it meets the strictest accuracy bar, matching FP16, that the most demanding production deployments and vLLM require, while still delivering throughput above FP16.

Citation

KVarN is the official vLLM implementation of our paper:

📄 KVarN: Variance-Normalized KV-Cache Quantization Mitigates Error Accumulation in Reasoning Tasks (arXiv:2606.03458)

If you use KVarN, please cite:

@misc{muller2026kvarn,
      title={KVarN: Variance-Normalized KV-Cache Quantization Mitigates Error Accumulation in Reasoning Tasks}, 
      author={Lorenz K. Muller and Philippe Bich and Chiara Boretti and Hyun-Min Chang and Jiawei Zhuang and Lukas Cavigelli},
      year={2026},
      eprint={2606.03458},
      archivePrefix={arXiv},
      primaryClass={cs.LG},
      url={http://arxiv.org/abs/2606.03458}
}

License and attribution

KVarN is built on vLLM (v0.22.0) and is released under the Apache 2.0 License. The original vLLM README is preserved as README_vLLM.md.

