Hacker News Top 30 — 2026-07-25

Generated on 2026-07-25 20:56 UTC

1. Stolen Buttons

Source: https://anatolyzenkov.com/stolen-buttons
Site: Stolen Buttons
Author: Anatoly Zenkov
Submitted: 2026-07-20 09:23 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 423 points · 96 comments
Length: 17 words (~1 min read)
Language: en

Every website I visit, I “steal” a button from it. Check out my stash!

About Button Stealer

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

2. Android May Soon Restrict On-Device ADB

Source: https://kitsumed.github.io/blog/posts/android-may-soon-restrict-on-device-adb/
Site: Kitsumed Blog
Author: Kitsumed
Published: 2026-07-20
HN activity: 802 points · 383 comments
Length: 1.9K words (~9 min read)
Language: en

Early Warning

Before we dive in, please note that this is not an official Google announcement. Instead, this is based on a recent, ongoing feature request on Google IssueTracker, in which a comment by one of the core ADB maintainers (Google employee) talked about restricting On-Device ADB connections to protect from “bad actors”.

Before you stop what you are doing to head over to that IssueTracker thread, please read this carefully:

If you plan to visit the issue tracker just to post low-quality comments (such as “Hey, don’t do this, I need Shizuku!”), complaints about monopoly, or insults, I highly recommend that you refrain from doing so. Spamming the thread will only cause Google developers to lock the issue, ignore valuable community feedback, or stop sharing public updates about this change entirely.

I think a change like this could benefit Google as it goes well along their new Sideloading changes, but I do not actively believe this is what is going on here. There is a true, valid reason behind this, and I think two different approach can be taken. We will talk about it in this blog post.

How You Can Help:

If you have a unique use case: If you are directly affected and can write a detailed, constructive message explaining your workflow, providing links, or offering technical solutions/compromises, please, by all means, share your feedback in Google issue.
If your use case has already been mentioned: You do not need to repeat it. Instead, simply click the +1 button in the top right corner of the Google IssueTracker to let Google know you are affected, and toggle notifications to stay updated on the discussion.

I am hesitant to make this blog post, as I fear it may overload the few developers that work on ADB. I am unsure if I should wait more and see what happens or hold it longer and see what approach they take. Waiting too long could also be bad… As of writing this, I am unsure when/if this post will release. I saw some recent updates on assignments which were given to the main guy who previously worked on ADB, so we will see what happens.

Introduction

Hi! I’m Kitsumed, developer of ShizuCallRecorder, a Shizuku based application. As you may have guessed by now, I would be affected by this change. Obviously, I would really like it if they do not proceed with it in a way that prevent loopback connections.

To talk briefly about myself, I made ShizuCallRecorder to help with some of my own disabilities. I can get by without it, but it’s much easier with it.

You could say I have a very unique use case, and I keep discovering other unusual ones, like this person on Reddit, who used my application to preserve the voicemail of a deceased loved one.

Call recording on Android is a complicated topic. There are countless user requests, an official attempt to add the feature in Android 11 that was later canceled, and many closed-source, privacy-invasive applications that use work-arounds.

I used to hear that many users with disabilities had to trade their privacy for an easier daily life. I guess that’s what people mean when they talk about those trade-offs.

Don’t even get me started on OEMs that force an audio warning such as “This call is being recorded,” when it’s in places where it’s not legally required. People often don’t react well to that, even if you explain why you’re recording the call, it gives a bad impression. To be honest, I probably wouldn’t react well to it either.

I’m sure most of you have a more “power-user” use of Shizuku or even use loopback ADB for developer tasks. I do those too, but I wanted to point out one of my unique use case.

Alright, back on the main topic. Before I explain what the proposed change is, I’m going to explain what is ADB for less technical users.

What’s ADB?

ADB, also called Android Debug Bridge, is protocol created by Google to let developers do developer things on Android devices…

Basically, it grant us a high level of privileges, give us access to a lot of sensible commands to tests how the phone and application behave. Useful stuff for any developers or power-users.

ADB was originally designed to work over a USB connection, but later expanded how it could works:

USB: The original way. ADB communicates directly over a USB cable.
TCP/IP: Introduced as a way to run ADB over a network using an IP address and port (typically port 5555). The connection carries ADB traffic in plain text and provides a YES/NO prompt as authentication. Can only be enabled once you already have an active ADB connection.
Wireless Debugging (Wifi 1.0/2.0): Introduced in Android 11, it aims to improve the legacy TCP/IP workflow. It requires pairing the computer with the device using a pairing code or QR code, then establishes an authenticated and encrypted connection for subsequent ADB sessions. It does not require an active ADB connection to be enabled.

What’s a On-Device ADB connection?

ADB was originally intended to be used with two devices (simplified explanation): the Android device being debugged run the ADB Daemon (ADBD) and a separate developer machine run the ADB client. In practice, however, this setup is not always convenient. Some developers work directly from their Android device and do not have access to a second machine.

This led to usage of On-Device ADB (this is not a official term). By using a terminal emulator such as Termux, developers can run an ADB client directly on their phone and establish a connection to the local daemon (ADBD) server using either ADB TCP/IP or Wireless Debugging. Since both the client and server are running on the same device, the connection is made through the loopback address (127.0.0.1). That’s what I call On-Device ADB.

While this is a niche use case compared to how ADB intended to be used, it has led to the creation of projects such as libadb-android by MuntashirAkon and Shizuku by RikkaApps. These projects, along with many others, have created a large open-source community that made a wide range of tools for developers and power-users.

The proposed change

A new feature was made on Google IssuerTracker to allow developers to choose what interface ADBD (ADB server daemon) would listen to.

This feature was proposed following a major security issue identified as CVE-2026-0073, which allowed the Wireless ADB authentication process to be fully bypassed. What is proposed in this issue is actually a nice idea.

Right now, ADBD makes itself available on every network your phone is connected to. This feature request asks to let developers choose which interface is chosen, reducing the exposure.

The problem

The problem lies in the response from one of ADB core maintainers:

sa…@google.com:

Connection to localhost has also been the source of exploit where app are using that socket to adbd to escalate their privileges.

What about we restrict to always only binding to wifi interface wlan0 ?

Here, we can see that the employee talk about only allowing wlan0, the interface of the Wifi connection. Doing so would break many things, On-Device ADB, ADB via VPN, ADB via Ethernet, and many other unique developers setups.

Another issue I see here is the stance they seems to currently have on “On-Device ADB”. Their comment suggests that On-Device ADB is viewed primarily as an exploit bad actors can use to elevate privileges, yet there a lot of legitimate usages of on-device ADB. Developers themself uses it when they can’t access a computer.

While it can indeed be used to elevate privileges, a “malicious” application cannot do so alone. It requires multiples actions that MUST be perfomed by a human.

Why On-Device ADB Is Not Really Used by Bad Actors

A malicious application could use an on-device ADB connection to perform privilege escalation. However, it cannot establish one by itself.

To illustrate this, I’ve laid out the general limitations a bad actor would face in a few scenarios, similar to my comment on IssueTracker.

Scenario 1: General Android Users

You install a malicious application.

ADB is disabled. ADBD is not running, and the application does not have the WRITE_SECURE_SETTINGS permission, as it must be manually granted via ADB. No exploitation attempts are possible.

Scenario 2: A Developer on Android 11+ Using Wireless ADB

You install a malicious application.
You enable USB debugging, starting ADBD.
You enable Wireless ADB. ADBD is now running on your phone and listening on all network interfaces.
The application would need to perform the one-time pairing process. This requires the user to manually retrieve the one-time code from Settings and provide it. No exploitation attempts are possible.

Scenario 3: A Developer Using ADB over TCP/IP

You install a malicious application.
You enable USB debugging, starting ADBD.
You connect via USB ADB to enable TCP/IP, then disconnect the USB cable.
ADBD continues running and listens on all network interfaces.
The application initiates a connection, causing an authorization prompt to appear on the screen. If the user selects No, the connection is rejected. No silent exploitation attempts are possible.

Conclusion

In a normal scenario, a bad actor cannot gain an ADB connection. It is only possible while the developer is actively using ADB on the device, because a bad actor cannot start ADBD by themselves.

However, if we return to a scenario such as CVE-2026-0073, exploitation would become possible in Scenarios 2 and 3, but only after the user has manually enabled USB debugging. As for scenario 3, it would also require the developer to MANUALLY enable TCP/IP. I can understand the motivation for preventing loopback connections by default, but not to fully prevents it.

There is a difference between preventing it by default and permanently preventing it. I think this should be something users can disable through a persistent setting. By this, I mean a toggle that survives a reboot (else it would make tools like Shizuku impracticals) and, ideally, cannot be read by third-party applications. Otherwise, developers would have to repeatedly disable it whenever banking apps or games detect that on-device ADB is availabl. That said, this part could be worked around once a application is manually granted WRITE_SECURE_SETTINGS.

I think that justifying blocking it because a human could perform actions to allow it would be far-fetched. A human could also designate a malicious application as a device administrator or grant it Accessibility permissions, and yet we would not get rid of those features.

I believe it should be an assumed risk that disabling such a security feature enables on-device debugging while also exposing the device to the rare possibility of a future vulnerability. To me, the feature/risk ratio make sense here, as there is a real, legitimate usage.

Although it may have not been originally intended, On-Device ADB has enabled a niche ecosystem of developer and power-user tools, including projects such as App Manager, libadb-android, Canta, aShell, ShizuWall, ShizuCallRecorder and Shizuku.

To conclude, I would like to mention my conclusion in What Is Shizuku? How Does It Work? Security Implications?, where I said as a joke:

Here’s my closing thought: I can’t wait to see how they’ll justify disabling loopback ADB over TCP/IP connections on non-emulator devices and start requiring a Google account…

Well I guess they may indeed disable loopback ADB. Huh… I was almost 100% right on that one I guess. If you are a technical user, I invite you to give your feedback inside the issue here. Please don’t forget the early warning.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

3. Producing ammonia and fertiliser using wind power in Morris, Minnesota

Source: https://ammoniaenergy.org/articles/flexible-renewable-ammonia-demonstrator-now-operational-in-minnesota/
Site: Ammonia Energy Association
Author: Jacinta Bakker
Published: 2026-07-21
HN activity: 43 points · 15 comments
Length: 558 words (~3 min read)
Language: en-US

By on July 20, 2026

Producing ammonia & fertiliser using wind power in Morris, Minnesota

Click to learn more. Online renewable ammonia demonstrator, powered by wind turbines in Morris, Minnesota, USA. Source: University of Minnesota.

A pioneering facility has come online for its first season of low-carbon ammonia production in Minnesota, USA. The plant is being turned on gradually, with a target of one ton per day of low-carbon ammonia production for local fertiliser offtake. Wind energy powers the electrolysers that supply hydrogen to a Haber Bosch plant. To manage the fluctuating renewable energy supply, the rate of ammonia production can be adjusted using new modeling and control systems.

The plant is located at University of Minnesota’s (UMN) West Central Research and Outreach Center in Morris, rural Minnesota. It is a collaboration between UMN, Research Triangle Institutes International (RTI International) as well as Casale. The project aims to address high fertiliser prices and supply chain instability, while creating revenue streams within the state. This facility is an upscale of 2013’s successful pilot plant, and can be expanded further to a network of commercial, renewable ammonia generation hubs owned by farmer cooperatives. The ammonia produced can be stored in nurse tanks and/or coupled with carbon dioxide by-products from ethanol production to produce urea, the most common form of fertiliser used in Minnesota.

It seemed like an elegant concept when we were first looking at it that you could take a wind turbine, and that’s producing energy from wind above a cornfield, or small grain field, and then produce a nutrient that you can use right underneath the wind farms in rural Minnesota… There are no ammonia or nitrogen fertilizer production facilities in the state other than our small systems here. If you can produce a moderately priced nitrogen fertilizer that’s consistent, year in and year out, then farmers can budget for it, and they can market crops to that point in time.

Michael Reese, Green Ammonia Research Lead, University of Minnesota Twin Cities press release, 26 Jun 2026

Essentially, the wind or the sun is our feedstock. We typically design a chemical plant to run at steady state and produce at a constant rate, assuming that we have a constant supply of our feedstock. That’s not the case with green chemicals or green ammonia specifically. In order to somehow absorb the fluctuations in wind availability, you need to have a significant storage of hydrogen to be able to absorb these fluctuations, which is very costly. On the other hand, if you allow the plant to operate dynamically, you minimize the demand for storing hydrogen or storing power and hence, you can have a much tighter design, a much, much more economical design. It’s about the economic development of the state… One can see a model of co-ops that will come together and hopefully develop these plants with support and loans and credits from the state.

Prodromos Daoutidis, Professor of Chemical Engineering, University of Minnesota Twin Cities press release, 26 Jun 2026

In AEA’s December 2025 episode of Project Features, project partners explained the Morris facility in detail among other ammonia energy R&D pioneering demonstration plants and start-up companies originating from the UMN. The recording and presentations can be found here.

Explore the journey of the demonstrator plant, plus other ammonia energy start ups originating from the University of Minnesota.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

4. Open-weight AI is having its Kubernetes moment

Source: https://tobi.knaup.me/2026-07-25-open-weight-ai-is-having-its-kubernetes-moment/
Site: Tobi Knaup
Author: Tobi Knaup
Published: 2026-07-25
HN activity: 236 points · 172 comments
Length: 1.3K words (~6 min read)
Language: en

Open-weight models are becoming the foundation for the next AI ecosystem. The US should compete in it, not wall itself off.

I have seen a version of this story before.

In 2013 I co-founded Mesosphere, an open source cloud-native software company. We built on Apache Mesos, which my co-founder Ben Hindman had helped create at UC Berkeley. We later built DC/OS (Data Center Operating System) around Mesos, released it as open source, and commercialized it through an enterprise distribution with support and proprietary features.

After several years of massive growth, Kubernetes disrupted us. It was newer, fully open source, and it quickly galvanized the cloud-native community. Many of the world’s best distributed-systems and infrastructure engineers bet their careers on it, and even some of our most loyal community members changed horses.

Once that happened, innovation moved to Kubernetes. Whatever the platform was missing, someone started building: networking, storage, observability, deployment tools, policy engines. A large number of startups were created, and legacy vendors joined in as well. Almost every component required to run Kubernetes in production became available as open source. Cloud providers and companies including Mesosphere/D2iQ, Rancher, Red Hat and Nutanix then built businesses around integration, enterprise features, support and operations.

Kubernetes did not win simply because its repository was public. It became a neutral substrate that engineers, cloud providers and enterprise vendors could all extend to fit their customers’ needs. Common interfaces and vendor-neutral governance gave everyone confidence that they could build on it.

The lesson I took away wasn’t that open source always wins. It was that once an open platform that people can customize becomes the industry’s center of gravity, no single vendor can match the combined rate of innovation around it.

I think AI is approaching the same point.

Open weights turn a model into a platform

First, a terminology note. Most models we casually call “open source” are more accurately described as open-weight. You can download and modify the trained parameters, but the training data and complete training process usually aren’t available. That falls short of the Open Source Initiative’s definition of open source AI. The distinction matters. It doesn’t, however, prevent an ecosystem from forming around the artifact people can run and modify.

The Kubernetes analogy isn’t perfect. Kubernetes contributors could inspect and change the actual source, and improvements could flow back into a shared upstream project. Model fine-tunes usually don’t work that way. Frontier weights may be downloadable but still require expensive hardware, and there is no AI equivalent of the CNCF providing neutral governance and common interfaces. Those are real differences. The common mechanism is that a sufficiently capable, portable substrate can attract complementary innovation far beyond what its original creator could build alone.

The first reason to use open-weight models was self-hosting. Companies wanted control over their data. They wanted to run models in their own cloud or data center. And as usage and inference costs grow, they increasingly want control over cost as well.

That demand produced a healthy open source serving stack: vLLM, SGLang, llama.cpp, Ollama, MLX and others.

But self-hosting is only the beginning. Open weights turn the model itself into something developers can adapt and redistribute. Hugging Face now hosts more than two million public models. Around popular families such as Qwen and Gemma, developers produce:

quantized and converted weights for different silicon architectures and scale;
fine-tunes and LoRA adapters for coding, medicine, law, math and agentic workflows;
model merges that combine different fine-tunes;
adaptations for runtimes such as TensorRT-LLM, vLLM, MLX and others.

Until recently, it was easy to dismiss this activity at the frontier. Open models were useful, but the base models weren’t good enough for the hardest coding and agentic tasks. That gap is narrowing quickly. Z.ai has released GLM-5.2 with public weights under an MIT license. Its own evaluation reports 62.1% on SWE-bench Pro versus 58.6% for GPT-5.5, although results vary across benchmarks and agent harnesses.

Moonshot says Kimi K3 approaches the closed frontier on long-horizon coding and has promised to publish its weights on July 27. Artificial Analysis supports the performance claim, scoring it alongside Opus 4.8 and GPT-5.5 in its independent evaluation.

Once the base model is good enough, the ecosystem can compound. I expect new projects around agent runtimes, coding harnesses, sandboxes, evaluations, observability and specialized fine-tunes. Together they can become a production-grade stack: an open-weight model running on open source software, customizable for a team’s workload, hardware and economics.

Will that stack beat every closed model on every benchmark? Probably not. But I would not bet on any single vendor out-innovating the combined open ecosystem over time. Frontier technology is a talent war, and open ecosystems give talented people everywhere a reason to build on the same foundation.

Banning Chinese models would be an own goal

This brings us to the current debate in Washington. After the release of Kimi K3 and other capable Chinese models, the Trump administration is reportedly considering restrictions on Chinese open-weight models. The exact form of a potential ban remains unclear.

A broad ban on American researchers and companies using Chinese open-weight models would do something else entirely. It would cut the US off from an ecosystem that is already attracting many of the world’s best AI researchers and engineers, including a large number of Chinese researchers. The rest of the world would keep building. American developers would be the ones locked out.

We’ve seen this dynamic with Qwen already. Hugging Face reports that Chinese models accounted for 41% of model downloads over the past year. If the best open-weight foundation models increasingly come from China, innovation will accumulate around them in the same way it accumulated around Kubernetes.

How the US should compete

The US should compete in that ecosystem, not retreat from it.

Release frontier-grade American models

American labs need to release frontier-grade open-weight models under licenses that startups can actually build on. There has been progress. NVIDIA’s Nemotron models are commercially usable under NVIDIA’s own permissive license. Thinking Machines released Inkling under Apache 2.0, as did OpenAI with gpt-oss and Google with Gemma 4. But OpenAI’s and Google’s strongest models remain closed, as do those from most American frontier labs.

Use procurement to create an open market

The government should use procurement to create demand for portable, interoperable systems rather than permanent dependence on one API vendor. The Department of Defense has done this before. Platform One provides open source tools and enterprise products that different military programs can build on. The same playbook can accelerate innovation around open-weight models.

Build the rest of the stack

American companies need to build the rest of the stack. Startups can customize and extend the models, embed them into products, and provide the serving, tooling, support and operational layers. Our leading silicon companies will keep improving the hardware. Hyperscalers and neoclouds can serve the models and their ecosystems.

Set standards instead of banning models

Safety is the strongest argument for restrictions, but a blanket ban is too blunt and would sacrifice access to the entire ecosystem. A better approach is independent testing and standards for frontier models. The analogy isn’t exact: Kubernetes conformance tests compatibility, not safety. But the governance model is useful. Demis Hassabis has proposed a US-led independent standards body along those lines.

America should not respond to open Chinese models by building a wall around its own developers. We should run the models ourselves, tear them apart, benchmark them, improve on them and build better American alternatives. Then we should make the American stack the easiest one in the world to adopt.

The United States has spent decades attracting the world’s best technical talent and giving it room to build. Turning that advantage into a walled garden while the rest of the world standardizes on a more open stack would be a spectacular own goal. We would be giving up our role as the AI leader by choice.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

5. Show HN: I made some transistor animations

Source: https://brandonli.net/semisim/animations
Site: brandonli.net
Submitter: stunningllama (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-07-24 18:37 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 56 points · 5 comments
Length: 126 words (~1 min read)

Transistor animations made with semiconductor simulator.

In the following animations, blue and red dots represent electrons and holes, respectively. White flashes indicate recombination events. In this first set of animations, the velocity of charge carriers is equal to the combined diffusion and drift currents divided by the total charge. Diffusion is not shown here.

NPN BJT

n-ch MOSFET

n-ch JFET

In the next set of animations, the carriers undergo diffusion and drift. This is the most accurate way of depicting charge carrier motion, but is also more visually confusing.

NPN BJT (w/ diffusion)

n-ch MOSFET (w/ diffusion)

n-ch JFET (w/ diffusion)

The final set of animations shows the currents and voltages at each terminal.

NPN BJT (w/ probes)

n-ch MOSFET (w/ probes)

n-ch JFET (w/ probes)

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

6. Show HN: Brolly, a plain-text weather forecast site

Source: https://brolly.sh/forecast/RWFP2qW8
Site: brolly.sh
Submitter: jsax (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-07-25 17:34 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 48 points · 11 comments
Length: 290 words (~2 min read)
Language: en

brolly.sh

plain text weather forecast

☂

change location

=============================================

Now

light drizzle

temperature 17.5C (feels 17.2C)

wind 10 (19) mph / uv 0.0 / aqi 19

Today

overcast

temperature 15C - 22C

wind avg 11 mph (gusts 22 mph)

precipitation 0.1mm

=============================================

This Week

Day        Conditions    Temp    Wind  Precip
Yesterday  overcast      13-23   9/19  0
*Today     overcast      15-22   11/23 0.1
Sun 26/07  overcast      16-20   12/24 0.1
Mon 27/07  overcast      14-21   9/19  0
Tue 28/07  overcast      18-25   9/17  0
Wed 29/07  overcast      17-29   6/11  0
Thu 30/07  p.cloudy      16-26   7/12  0
Fri 31/07  p.cloudy      14-23   9/17  0

< Yesterday Today Sun 26/07 >

---------------------------------------------

Conditions

Time  Conditions         Temp    Wind MPH
» show earlier hours (00:00-20:00)
21:00 light drizzle      18(17)  10/19 <- now
22:00 overcast           18(18)  8/15
23:00 overcast           17(17)  8/16

< Yesterday Today Sun 26/07 >

---------------------------------------------

Precipitation

» show earlier hours (00:00-20:00)
21:00 #################### 0.1mm 2% <- now
22:00                      0mm   4%
23:00                      0mm   2%
      +----+----+----+----+
      0    0.03 0.05 0.08 0

now 0.1mm (2%)

peak 0.1mm (2%) @ 21:00

< Yesterday Today Sun 26/07 >

---------------------------------------------

UV

4|           #            
3|          ###           
2|         #######        
1|        ###########     
0+------------------------
  0     6    12    18
                       ^ now

now 0 (low)

peak 3.55 (moderate) @ 11:00

key  0-2 low       3-5 moderate
     6-8 high      9-10 very high

< Yesterday Today Sun 26/07 >

---------------------------------------------

Air Quality

40|                        
30|           #            
20|########################
10|########################
 0+------------------------
   0     6    12    18
                        ^ now

now 19 (good)

peak 25 (fair) @ 11:00

< Yesterday Today Sun 26/07 >

---------------------------------------------

Pollen

Grass   -------*----------------
Mugwort .......*................
        0     6    12    18
                             ^ now
. low  - medium  = high  # v.high  * peak

now grass 11.1 (medium)

now mugwort 3.5 (low)

peak grass 18.1 @ 07:00

peak mugwort 7.4 @ 07:00

=============================================

weather data last fetched at: 21:55

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

7. Bitchat is now on Radicle

Source: https://radicle.network/nodes/rosa.radicle.network/rad%3Az2v9tRJz1oknFAqCSY5W5c76nVvm6
Site: radicle.network
Submitter: h1watt (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-07-25 13:18 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 166 points · 103 comments
Language: en

No extractable content.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

8. Show HN: Proxmox -> Share your host's Bluetooth with a VM over the network

Source: https://github.com/lucid-fabrics/proxmox-bluetooth
Site: GitHub
Submitter: wmehanna (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-07-25 19:41 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 21 points · 8 comments
Length: 1.6K words (~8 min read)
Language: en

TL;DR: Bluetooth passthrough to a Proxmox VM fails for Intel onboard chips (BE200, AX210, AX211 - by hardware design, no setting fixes it) and is unreliable on gaming distros like ChimeraOS and Bazzite. This tool shares the host's Bluetooth with the VM over the network instead - two commands, works with any chip Linux supports, survives reboots. Controllers, headphones, and Home Assistant sensors all work.

Pair your Xbox / PlayStation controller, headphones, or sensors inside your gaming VM (ChimeraOS, Bazzite, Home Assistant, plain Linux) - even with Bluetooth chips that "can't be passed through".

Sound familiar?

You built a gaming VM on Proxmox. Everything works... except Bluetooth.
Your controller just blinks, blinks, blinks, and gives up.
You bought an Intel BE200 / AX210 card because a forum said so. Still nothing.
You tried qm set ... -usb, saw the device in the VM, and it still refused to work.
Every thread ends with someone saying "just use a USB cable".

It's not your fault, and your hardware is not broken.

Intel built their Bluetooth chips so that only the machine that boots them can drive them. The moment Proxmox hands the chip to a VM, it wipes itself blank. No setting fixes this. It is physically how the chip works.

First: try the simple thing

Plain USB passthrough works for plenty of setups - a normal dongle into a normal Linux distro (Debian, Ubuntu) often just works:

qm set <vmid> -usb0 host=<vendor:product>

If that gives you working Bluetooth in your VM, stop reading - you don't need this project. This exists for when it doesn't work: Intel onboard chips (BE200/AX2xx - never work, by design), gaming distros (ChimeraOS/Bazzite kernels + quirky chip firmware), trimmed cloud kernels, and dongles that wedge after a few VM restarts.

The fix: don't hand over the chip. Share it.

The chip stays on your Proxmox host, where it works. A tiny bridge streams it into the VM over the local network. Your VM sees a completely normal Bluetooth adapter. Latency is lower than the controller's own radio delay - you will never feel it.

Two commands. That's all.

On the Proxmox host:

curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/lucid-fabrics/proxmox-bluetooth/main/install.sh | sudo bash

You'll see something like this:

==> Bluetooth adapters on this machine:
    [0] hci0 - 70:08:10:A4:F1:45 (USB)
==> All adapters healthy. You are good to go.
==> Bluetooth (hci0) is now shared on 192.168.1.3:9700.

  Now run this INSIDE your VM:

    curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/lucid-fabrics/proxmox-bluetooth/main/install.sh | sudo bash -s -- 192.168.1.3


What to do: copy that last line exactly (your IP will be different) and run it inside the VM.

Inside the VM, you'll see:

==> Done. This VM now has working Bluetooth. Go pair your controller.


What to do: open Bluetooth settings in the VM and pair like normal. That's it.

Both sides auto-start at boot and auto-reconnect. Set it up once, forget it exists.

Does my chip work?

If your Proxmox host can see it, your VM can have it. Run this on the host:

curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/lucid-fabrics/proxmox-bluetooth/main/install.sh | sudo bash -s -- --check

If it's healthy, you'll see:

==> Bluetooth adapters on this machine:
    [0] hci0 - 70:08:10:A4:F1:45 (USB)
==> All adapters healthy. You are good to go.


What to do: nothing - run the install command above.

If your chip is the stuck-Intel-chip case, you'll see:

!! hci0 is NOT responding (stuck in bootloader).
   Fix: shut down, flip the power supply switch OFF for 15 seconds, boot.
   A reboot or the front power button is NOT enough. See README.


What to do: exactly what it says. This looks extreme but it's the one thing that actually works - see the FAQ below for why.

Confirmed by real people (add yours with a PR):

Hardware Status
Intel BE200 ✅ Tested - this repo exists because of it
Intel AX200 / AX210 / AX211 ✅ Same family, same behavior
MediaTek MT7921 / MT7922 ✅ Standard Linux support
Generic CSR / Realtek USB dongles ✅ Anything your host's Linux drives
UGREEN "BT 6.0" dongles (Barrot chip) ❌ Broken firmware on Linux, bridge or not. Avoid.

FAQ, in human words

Will my controller lag?

No. The bridge adds well under a millisecond on the same machine. Bluetooth itself is slower.

Does it work for headphones, keyboards, Home Assistant sensors?

Yes - the bridge is protocol-transparent (it forwards raw Bluetooth traffic, it doesn't understand or filter it). Anything that works on a normal Linux Bluetooth adapter works: controllers, audio, HID, BLE sensors for Home Assistant.

Can I pair several devices at once?

Yes. It behaves exactly like a normal adapter in the VM - two controllers plus headphones is fine. The one-at-a-time limit is about VMs (one VM owns the chip), not devices.

Do I need to buy anything?

No. The card you already have works. Even the old one you replaced probably worked.

My whole VM "died" - black screen, no network (ChimeraOS / Bazzite).

It didn't die - it went to sleep. Gaming distros auto-suspend after idle like a Steam Deck, and a VM with GPU passthrough never wakes from that. Turn suspend off for good inside the VM: sudo systemctl mask sleep.target suspend.target hibernate.target hybrid-sleep.target

My controller pairs but nothing responds in Steam (ChimeraOS / Bazzite).

Known quirk in their input layer, not in Bluetooth: run sudo systemctl restart inputplumber, then turn the controller off and on. Fixed.

My Intel card looks completely dead. No adapter, scary log lines.

It is stuck in its blank boot state. Shut the machine down and flip the power supply switch off for 15 seconds, then boot. A reboot is not enough. The front power button is not enough. This one trick cost us a full day - you're welcome.

I have more than one Bluetooth chip on the host.

--check lists every adapter it finds (hci0, hci1, ...) with its MAC address so you can tell them apart, and if it finds more than one it won't guess - it'll ask you to pick. Share a specific one with ./install.sh --adapter 1. Bridging two chips into two different VMs at the same time isn't supported yet (one install per host today) - open an issue if you need it, it's a small change.

My VM died / I rebuilt it / I want Bluetooth in a different VM.

Just run the client one-liner in the new VM - the host serves whichever VM connects (one at a time). Nothing to clean up after a dead VM. If the old VM is still running, stop its client first (--uninstall there). Only footnote: pairings live inside the guest, so pair your devices once in the new VM.

Does it survive ChimeraOS / Bazzite OS updates?

Yes. Those distros replace the system image on update but keep /etc and /var - which is exactly where this installs. Your bridge and pairings come back on their own.

Does the host lose its own Bluetooth?

Yes, while sharing. A server in a closet rarely misses it. Need it back for a moment? --pause returns the chip to the host, --resume hands it back to the VM (which reconnects by itself). --uninstall removes everything for good.

Is this secure?

The bridge speaks on one LAN port (9700, bound to the host's IP) with no authentication - the first machine to connect gets the chip. On a home LAN behind your router that's usually fine. If it worries you, firewall port 9700 so only your VM's IP can reach it.

Poor range? Devices only pair up close?

That's antennas, not the bridge. M.2 cards need their two little antenna cables connected; a bare card inside a metal case has almost no reach. USB dongles: a front port or a short extension beats the back-panel ports next to all your other cables.

What about Windows VMs?

The bridge is for Linux guests (it relies on Linux's Bluetooth stack). Windows VMs usually don't have this problem: passing a USB dongle straight through with qm set <vmid> -usb0 host=<id> just works there. This tool exists because Linux guests choke where Windows shrugs.

What about LXC containers?

Containers share the host's kernel, so they don't need this bridge - you can hand the host's Bluetooth to an LXC directly (bind the device / cgroup allow). This tool is for real VMs, where the guest runs its own kernel.

Is this Proxmox only?

No - any Linux host with KVM VMs (or even two separate machines). Proxmox is just where it hurts the most.
For the curious: what's actually happening

Intel CNVi Bluetooth (BE200/AX2xx) requires the host's btusb/btintel driver to load its firmware at boot. Any passthrough handoff (USB redirect, vfio, driver unbind) resets the chip to its ROM bootloader, and the guest can never complete the firmware handshake.

The bridge is btproxy from the official BlueZ source tree (never shipped in distro packages). On the host it opens the adapter in HCI user-channel mode and serves raw HCI over TCP. In the guest it creates a virtual controller via hci_vhci and pipes the stream into it. BlueZ in the guest neither knows nor cares.

Systemd units: btproxy-server.service (host, replaces bluetooth.service) and btproxy-client.service (guest, ordered before bluetooth.service via drop-in).

The bundled binary is built from bluez 5.66 tools/btproxy with plain -O2 (the default build injects ASAN/UBSAN debug deps). It needs only glibc. See build.sh.

Support this project

This fix cost a full day of head-scratching, three "dead" reboots, and one very real walk to the power supply switch - so nobody else has to lose that day. Tools like this stay free and maintained for exactly one reason: people who were helped choose to help the next person in line. If that's you right now, thank you. It genuinely keeps this alive.

Uninstall

Same script, --uninstall, on whichever machine you want to restore.

License

MIT

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

9. Bringing PyTorch Monarch to AMD GPUs

Source: https://pytorch.org/blog/bringing-pytorch-monarch-to-amd-gpus-single-controller-distributed-training-on-rocm/
Site: pytorch.org
Author: By
Submitted: 2026-07-25 15:55 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 45 points · 6 comments
Length: 1.8K words (~8 min read)
Language: en-US

Featured projects


Training state-of-the-art large language models (LLMs) with billions of parameters requires distributed training across hundreds or thousands of GPUs. At this scale, hardware failures are not exceptional events—they are expected. A single GPU memory error, network partition, or node crash can bring down an entire training run that has been progressing for days or weeks. While our previous work demonstrated near-linear scaling of FP8 training at scale (achieving 96.16% scaling efficiency on a 1024-GPU MI325 cluster with DeepSeekV3-671B), the key challenge remains: reliability at scale.

To address these challenges, we have brought PyTorch Monarch to AMD Instinct GPUs with ROCm, expanding the single-controller model beyond CUDA environments and bringing this emerging runtime to a broader hardware ecosystem.

In this blog, we will explore the architecture of PyTorch Monarch, walk through the engineering effort required to port Monarch’s GPU runtime and distributed communication stack to ROCm, and demonstrate how the system dynamically recovers from node failures without halting the entire training job. By the end, you will understand how Monarch enables elastic, fault-tolerant distributed training on AMD GPUs and why this represents a significant step toward stable, large-scale AI infrastructure.

The Challenge: Reliability at Scale

Traditional fault-tolerance strategies rely heavily on periodic checkpointing: saving the full model state to persistent storage at regular intervals. When a failure occurs, the entire job restarts from the last checkpoint. While conceptually simple, this approach has significant drawbacks.

Challenge Impact
Checkpoint overhead Writing hundreds of gigabytes of model state to storage consumes time and I/O bandwidth.
Wasted computation All progress since the last checkpoint is lost upon failure.
Cluster idle time The entire cluster sits idle while the failed node is replaced and the job restarts.
Scalability limits As cluster size grows, the probability of failure during any checkpoint interval increases.

For truly large-scale training, scaling is not enough—training must also recover from failures. We need a more dynamic approach, one that allows healthy nodes to continue training while failed nodes recover and rejoin, minimizing wasted computation and maximizing GPU utilization. This is where PyTorch Monarch comes in.

What is PyTorch Monarch?

PyTorch Monarch introduces a new distributed programming paradigm that enables developers to orchestrate entire GPU clusters from a single Python program. With its actor-based runtime, process mesh abstraction, and asynchronous execution model, Monarch simplifies large-scale distributed training and enables complex workflows that combine training, evaluation, and reinforcement learning within one unified script.

The architecture operates at multiple distinct levels:

Python API: A single-program interface where developers write simple Python code to get distributed GPU execution.
Monarch Runtime: Manages actors and meshes, supervision trees, and tensor sharding.
Rust Runtime (Tokio): Ensures high performance and memory safety.
Infrastructure: Integrates with RDMA, RCCL/NCCL, SLURM, Kubernetes, and SkyPilot.

Figure 1: PyTorch Monarch architecture decoupling Python API from the Rust runtime and infrastructure.

By decoupling the parallelism strategy used within each training replica from the fault-tolerance mechanism used across replicas, Monarch provides a cleaner fault-tolerance model. Failures are isolated (actors have private state, crashes do not propagate), hierarchical (handled at the lowest possible level), and recovery is fast (seconds for local restart, minutes only if escalated).

Figure 2: Monarch’s hierarchical fault-handling model and supervision tree.

Porting Monarch to ROCm: Ecosystem Integration

Bringing Monarch to AMD GPUs required significant engineering effort to port the GPU runtime and distributed communication stack to ROCm.

We successfully implemented three main porting paths:

Collective Communications: We used hipify_torch to convert the C++ bridge code from CUDA to HIP and linked against RCCL, which mirrors NCCL’s API.
GPU Memory Management: We extended the build system to auto-detect the platform and route CUDA driver API calls through their HIP equivalents.
RDMA Integration: Configuring GPU_PLATFORM=rocm keeps the libibverbs-based RDMA path intact while swapping the GPU-side bindings from CUDA to HIP for GPU-direct transfers.

Figure 3: Porting Monarch from CUDA to ROCm via hipify_torch and auto-detection.

Moreover, two cross-cutting issues shaped the port and deserve a closer look:

No static link for the HIP runtime: NVIDIA ships libcudart_static.a, so the CUDA path links cudart_static directly. ROCm ships no static equivalent for libamdhip64, so the ROCm build links amdhip64 dynamically. Both platforms additionally dlopen the GPU driver API functions, including hipMemCreate, cuMemCreate, and related calls, keeping the runtime contract identical on either side.
Rust compatibility shim instead of forking the bindings: Once hipify_torch rewrites the C/C++ headers, bindgen emits HIP-named types such as hipError_t, hipDeviceptr_t, and hipStream_t. Rather than add #ifdef branches at every Rust call site, we added a rocm_compat module in nccl-sys and rdmaxcel-sys that re-exports HIP symbols under their CUDA names, for example pub type cudaError_t = hipError_t and pub use hipSetDevice as cudaSetDevice. The rest of the Rust code stays platform-agnostic.

These efforts culminated in the introduction of HIP type aliases in Rust, with all 1,171 tests passing, ensuring full support for ROCm 7.0+. We have upstreamed these contributions to the open-source community (see PR #2393 and PR #2891).

Today, Monarch on ROCm provides full ecosystem support, including the Actor runtime, RDMA, Supervision, and Tensor sharding. It runs seamlessly on SLURM (HPC), Kubernetes (Cloud native), and SkyPilot (Multi-cloud), enabling downstream engines like TorchTitan (Training engine) and TorchFT (Fault tolerance) for production workloads.

Case Study: Fault-Tolerant Training at Scale

To demonstrate the power of Monarch on AMD GPUs, we integrated it with TorchTitan and TorchFT to build a resilient, checkpoint-less distributed training architecture.

Architecture Overview

The architecture consists of three layers:

Monarch: Acts as the orchestrator, managing process and cluster orchestration. It spawns ReplicaActors and a Lighthouse service, organizing GPUs into Process Meshes.
TorchFT: Handles fault tolerance at the step level. It contacts the Lighthouse for quorum coordination, performs Quorum AllReduce, and skips failed nodes.
TorchTitan: Serves as the training engine, executing the Forward (FSDP), Backward, and Optimizer steps, while managing checkpoints and metrics.

Figure 4: The resilient training stack on AMD GPUs integrating Monarch, TorchFT, and TorchTitan.

In this setup, Monarch provides a supervision tree for fine-grained fault detection and isolation. When a failure is injected into the training actors, it is detected by the Lighthouse and handled by TorchFT. The healthy replicas continue training independently despite peer failures, without requiring a global interruption.

Dynamic Fault Recovery Workflow

Let us walk through a concrete scenario with four replica groups to understand the recovery workflow.

Normal Training: The OrchestrationManager spawns 4 ReplicaActors (Monarch Supervisors) and a Lighthouse. Each ReplicaActor spawns a Replica with 8 GPU processes running TorchTitan trainers. All 4 replicas are ready (quorum_id=1) and DiLoCo gradient synchronization occurs every 20 steps.
Failure Detection: A GPU process in Replica 0 crashes. The Monarch supervisor captures the report_training_error (with full traceback) before the process dies. Replicas 1, 2, and 3 are marked as unaffected and continue training.
Local Restart: ReplicaActor 0 initiates an in-place restart (_stop_and_restart()), stopping the old process mesh and spawning a new one. Meanwhile, the other 3 replicas continue syncing (quorum_id=2)
Peer Checkpoint Transfer: The Lighthouse selects Replica 1 as the donor. A peer checkpoint transfer (model, optimizer, scheduler, and trainer state) is initiated from Replica 1 to the recovering Replica 0. All replicas pause briefly at the quorum boundary while the new quorum forms.
Resumed Training: Once Replica 0 is synced, the new quorum (quorum_id=3) is established with all 4 replicas, and DiLoCo synchronization resumes.

Figure 5: Dynamic fault recovery workflow demonstrating peer checkpoint transfer without global checkpoint reload.

The entire recovery process completes without any manual intervention, without full checkpoint restarts, and with minimal disruption to the overall training throughput.

Performance Characteristics

We validated this approach on both SLURM and Kubernetes environments using AMD Instinct MI300-class clusters.

SLURM 16-Node MI300 Cluster (128 GPUs)

We trained a Llama 3 8B model on a 16-node SLURM cluster (totaling 128 MI300 GPUs), injecting RCCL failures every 180 seconds with a quorum sync every 20 steps. The results were remarkable:

The number of active workers fluctuated dynamically (between 8 and 16) due to the injected failures.
Training continued seamlessly despite frequent failures—there was no full restart.
The loss curve showed steady convergence, closely matching the baseline run without failure injection.

Figure 6: Training continues despite frequent failures on a 16-node SLURM MI300 cluster. Note that not a single replica was down for 30+ minutes; recovery was fast, and different replicas were killed and recovered dynamically.

Kubernetes 32-Node MI355 Cluster (256 GPUs)

We scaled the experiment to a 32-node Kubernetes cluster (totaling 256 MI355 GPUs). The number of participants remained highly stable (fluctuating slightly between 30 and 32 during recovery events), and the global average loss decreased smoothly from 12 to approximately 4. This demonstrates that the Monarch fault-tolerance model works reliably on both SLURM and Kubernetes at scale.

Figure 7: Stable recovery and smooth loss convergence on a 32-node Kubernetes MI355 cluster.

Summary and Future Directions

Training large AI models at scale requires more than raw computational power—it demands resilient infrastructure that can gracefully handle the inevitable hardware failures. By bringing PyTorch Monarch to AMD Instinct GPUs with ROCm, we have demonstrated a practical approach to fault-tolerant distributed training that minimizes wasted computation and maximizes GPU utilization.

This integration represents several significant achievements for large-scale training on AMD GPUs:

First large-scale validation on AMD hardware: We successfully deployed Monarch with TorchTitan and TorchFT on AMD GPUs, demonstrating that the ROCm software stack fully supports advanced fault-tolerance mechanisms.
Cleaner fault-tolerance model: Monarch provides a robust supervision tree and process mesh abstraction, isolating failures and enabling rapid local recovery.
Ecosystem readiness: The approach works seamlessly across SLURM and Kubernetes, making it ready for production workloads.

The key architectural insight is the use of Monarch’s actor-based runtime and supervision trees to isolate failures, combined with TorchFT’s quorum-based synchronization to allow healthy nodes to continue training. For teams running large-scale training workloads on AMD GPUs, this integration offers a path toward more stable, efficient, and cost-effective model development.

Looking ahead, our next steps include:

Extending NIC support and improving runtime performance.
Expanding Monarch to support more pre-training and reinforcement learning (RL) frameworks on ROCm.
Further optimizing fault tolerance performance, specifically reducing rejoin reload latency and overlapping recovery with compute.
Continuing our open-source collaboration with the PyTorch community.

Additional Resources

PyTorch Monarch GitHub Repository
TorchTitan Documentation
TorchFT GitHub Repository
Resilient Large-Scale Training: Integrating TorchFT with TorchTitan on AMD GPUs

Disclaimers

Third-party content is licensed to you directly by the third party that owns the content and is not licensed to you by AMD. ALL LINKED THIRD-PARTY CONTENT IS PROVIDED “AS IS” WITHOUT A WARRANTY OF ANY KIND. USE OF SUCH THIRD-PARTY CONTENT IS DONE AT YOUR SOLE DISCRETION AND UNDER NO CIRCUMSTANCES WILL AMD BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ANY THIRD-PARTY CONTENT. YOU ASSUME ALL RISK AND ARE SOLELY RESPONSIBLE FOR ANY DAMAGES THAT MAY ARISE FROM YOUR USE OF THIRD-PARTY CONTENT.

© 2026 Advanced Micro Devices, Inc.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

10. How My Images Are Dithered

Source: https://dead.garden/blog/how-my-images-are-dithered.html
Site: dead.garden
Author: Jo
Submitted: 2026-07-22 13:00 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 188 points · 67 comments
Length: 2.3K words (~10 min read)
Language: en

I don't know much about dithering. But when I visit other people's sites and they dither their images in cool ways I always wonder how they do it. So in case anyone is wondering, here's my current method for dithering these pink images.

Edit: Almost like I know myself too well — the pictures now look like this instead:

Which is covered in the post.

Welcome to all the hacker news readers who clicked on this post. I am thankful and glad that this post has come to entertain some of you. Here are some things I feel the need to add to the post since it has left my regular audience:

There seems to be discussion about whether this counts as dithering. As evidenced by the very first sentence of the post, I am not an authority on the subject. But here is what Wikipedia seems to think:

Dithering is analogous to the halftone technique used in printing. For this reason, the term dithering is sometimes used interchangeably with the term halftoning particularly in association with digital printing. (link)In any case — I am/was only aware of this technique being used for AM grid printing, as briefly layed out in the post. So I thought it might be fun to play pretend a little.
this is a very inefficient method of reducing the size of an image file — I'd even say this little experiment has nothing at all to do with decreasing file size (in some unlucky cases it will even increase the size of your image). I mention this a few times in the post. It's just a bit of playing around with a certain aesthetic
please don't feed images of me and my friends to an LLM?? The code for achieving each effect is all over this page. Just make your own image and feed that to an LLM.

Dithering, beside making a picture look (to put it professionally) cool as fuck, can also reduce file size (by using less colors while maintaining details) and thus needed storage (if using only the reduced images) and the weight of your website for the client. That's why sites like Low Tech Magazine use it, for example.

The idea of pink images came from a post a while back, when I tried this before. The post Designing without color introduces the idea of the current design, where I try to get a sort of black and white "printed" vibe, using color only for emphasis. (This makes sense only when you are a light mode user like me).

The image back then, with the old method, looked like this:

The key difference here being that I limited the picture's palette to true monochrome: black and this pink. Also, the weird "dithered" dots are much bigger.

So what's this

My goal was to immitate a printed image. While individual pixels on a screen may have the luxury of setting variable values of red, green and blue — making the grid of repeating RGB lights on your screen light up with different intensity — things work a little differently on paper (and other print substrates).

Getting the limited palette of colors your printer is working with to give the illusion of more colors requires using a grid/matrix of dots. You can go about this in three different ways: AM, FM and hybrid grids. The amplitude here being the size of the dot and the frequency, well … the frequency. Making a dark spot with AM grids means big dots, in FM grids it's lotsa dots.

The top shows an FM print: the dots look chaotic.

The bottom shows AM: all dots show up in a predictable pattern and light spots have smaller dots

The problem with amplitude modulated dots is that if you approach this naively you will end up getting unwanted patterns in your images: a so-called Moiré.

For this reason, there is a rule (DIN 16547) about how exactly the colors are to be offset in an AM print to try and avoid them getting in each others way. Since FM grids are random they do not suffer from this problem.

Simulating AM pattern on your digital image

I access my server via the command line — so I use a command line tool to quickly edit images. The tool is called imagemagick and is called using the "convert" command.

I found the method to create this illusion online (can't find the link) and adapted it a little. So I can't claim to be the expert on what each individual argument does, but I will try to explain it.


convert "oldfile" -resize 800 -set option:distort:viewport '%wx%h+0+0' \
                 -colorspace CMYK -separate null: \
                 \( -size 2x2 xc: \( +clone -negate \) \
                +append \( +clone -negate \) -append \)  \
                -virtual-pixel tile -filter gaussian  \
                \( +clone -distort SRT 2,0 \) +swap  \
                \( +clone -distort SRT 2,15 \) +swap   \
                 \( +clone -distort SRT 2,45 \) +swap  \
                \( +clone -distort SRT 2,75  \) +swap +delete \
                -compose Overlay -layers composite -set colorspace CMYK -combine \
                "newfile"


Here's what it does generally: resizes the image to 800px in width (who needs more?), sets the color to CMYK, applies a background to fill the empty space left by rotating (and sets a gaussian blur to filter noise), splits up into the colors, scales them up a bit (for bigger dots) and distorts them (in this case: rotates them) and at the end it combines the 4 images into one again.

The image we generate by running this on the original file looks like this:

Before combining them, these are the individual colors dot grids:

This sets C at 0°, M at 15° etc. But whatever. Zooming in and out doesn't make any weird artifacts apparent so it's good enough.

If we increase the size of the dots to a ridiculous degree (8x8), you can get a better look at what is happening.

Edit: The perfect route to CMYK

After sleeping on it and reading the post back, the solution for a pic limited to truly CMYK colors in an AM grid is apparent. For reasons I get into later this is NOT a good way of reducing file size (apart from the fact that limiting colors and resizing the image to 800 in width always reduces the size, everything else is pretty much stacked against that goal). It does, however, look cool.

With the above method, the dots do not vary in size. Why should they? As we already discussed, a digital image (unless I have a GIF or PNG-8 situation somewhere) can give varying intensity of light for R, G and B per pixel. So when we look at the big image above we can cleary see some of the squares are just darker than others. For a true immitation this will not do!

All we need to do is to limit each channel's colors to 2 before combining them again. This is very obvious in hindsight. Idk why the person I got the original command from didn't do this.

convert "oldfile" -resize 800 -set option:distort:viewport '%wx%h+0+0' \
                 -colorspace CMYK -separate null: \
                 \( -size 2x2 xc: \( +clone -negate \) \
                +append \( +clone -negate \) -append \)  \
                -virtual-pixel tile -filter gaussian  \
                \( +clone -distort SRT 2,0 \) +swap  \
                \( +clone -distort SRT 2,15 \) +swap   \
                 \( +clone -distort SRT 2,45 \) +swap  \
                \( +clone -distort SRT 2,75  \) +swap +delete \
                -compose Overlay -layers composite -colors 2 -set colorspace CMYK -combine \
                "newfile"


This will produce an image that looks like this:

In retrospect I wonder if I might try out images like this instead of pink. If all I want is the general vibe of the grid then pink is fine. Though it does have more colors (shades of pink) for less colors (actually useful distinct ones). Who said blogging about your stupid idea isn't useful?

Pink — old method

The script for the old way of doing it had the values of -distort SRT set to "2 (rotation)", meaning it scaled the colors up to 2, making bigger dots.

After running the script above, the colorspace was once again converted, to Gray this time, after which the colors were leveled to monochrome: black and this pink. The whole command for those who want to try:


convert "oldfile" -resize 800 -set option:distort:viewport '%wx%h+0+0' \
                 -colorspace CMYK -separate null: \
                 \( -size 2x2 xc: \( +clone -negate \) \
                +append \( +clone -negate \) -append \)  \
                -virtual-pixel tile -filter gaussian  \
                \( +clone -distort SRT 2,0 \) +swap  \
                \( +clone -distort SRT 2,15 \) +swap   \
                 \( +clone -distort SRT 2,45 \) +swap  \
                \( +clone -distort SRT 2,75  \) +swap +delete \
                -compose Overlay -layers composite -set colorspace CMYK -combine \
                -colorspace Gray -colors 2   +level-colors  black,#A2719B \ 
        "newfile"


If we zoom in on the image before and after leveling the colors, we can see the dots do seem more like they vary in size. I omitted the -resize flag to give you a better view of the details.

While not entirely accurate, I think this method gets the most printy feel out of an image. Sadly it can swallow a lot of detail, even if the dots aren't scaled up. So I abandoned this after a while (also I got sick of looking at it).

Edit: now compare to the real deal:

Pink – new method

Monochrome is a cool idea but just has limited use for the blog (and other pics on the website). I need some more depth. What I need is more values of pink. I get these by utilizing the -remap flag.


convert "oldfile" -resize 800 -set option:distort:viewport '%wx%h+0+0' \
                 -colorspace CMYK -separate null: \
                 \( -size 2x2 xc: \( +clone -negate \) \
                +append \( +clone -negate \) -append \)  \
                -virtual-pixel tile -filter gaussian  \
                \( +clone -distort SRT 1,0 \) +swap  \
                \( +clone -distort SRT 1,15 \) +swap   \
                 \( +clone -distort SRT 1,45 \) +swap  \
                \( +clone -distort SRT 1,75 \) +swap +delete \
                -compose Overlay -layers composite -set colorspace CMYK -combine \
                -remap "$palette" -colors 32 "newfile"


Problematic images

For images like the one I've been using everything works beautifully. But with images that are very overwhelmingly light, there can be issues.

Here's an example:

Original image

After running script

After manual edit

The edit in question: increasing brightness to 300%, Saturation to 200%, inverting colors and remaping them to pink

convert "oldfile" -modulate 300,200,100 -negate -remap $palette "newfile" 

This is possibly because my color palette is kinda bad.

Is this even dithering?

If all you care about is the result then you could say the image has been dithered, especially in the old method. Using only two colors we created the illusion of semitones (is this appropriate usage in English?)*. The same is basically true for the new method as well.

But if you care about the method this is not dithering. Or at least it's the most unnecessarily computationally expensive form of dithering I've come across. Let's walk through the steps one more time:

Convert RBG to CYMK, adding one channel
Split the image into four images and transform each one (starting with scaling them up and inverting them)
limit colors to 2 on each and then overlay four images on top of eachother
set colorspace to CMYK again
limit the colors to 32/64/not sure yet where I want this (overlaying the 4 grids will create new colors)

This whole thing, on my laptop with an 11 year old CPU, can take 10 seconds if the image is big. The file size is not exactly "small" (though still smaller than unscaled pics with more than 32 colors). I can imagine the pattern isn't doing compression algorithms a huge favour. If you value your time or care about actually reducing an image's size do not do this.

Script

#!/bin/bash
temp="/tmp/images"
palette="/path/to/palette.png"
rm $temp
if [[ $1 = "" ]]; then
if [ -d smol ]; then 
echo must run with argument
else 
mkdir smol big
ls -r *.webp > $temp
ls -r *.png >> $temp
ls -r *.jpg >> $temp
ls -r *.jpeg >> $temp
ls -r *.gif >> $temp
fi
else 
ls -r *$1 > $temp
cp *$1 big
cat $temp
cp $(cat $temp) big/.
fi
i=$(cat "$temp" | wc -l)
echo $i
    while [[ $i -gt 0 ]]
    do
name="$(head -n $i $temp | tail -n +$i)"
echo "doing $name"
convert "$name" -set option:distort:viewport '%wx%h+0+0' \
         -colorspace CMYK -separate null: \
         \( -size 2x2 xc: \( +clone -negate \) \
        +append \( +clone -negate \) -append \)  \
        -virtual-pixel tile -filter gaussian  \
        \( +clone -distort SRT 2,0 \) +swap  \
        \( +clone -distort SRT 2,15 \) +swap   \
         \( +clone -distort SRT 2,45 \) +swap  \
        \( +clone -distort SRT 2,75 \) +swap +delete \
        -compose Overlay -layers composite -colors 2 \
        -set colorspace CMYK -combine \
        -colors 64 "smol/$name"
(( i-- ))

echo $i
done

To end with, here is the original image with actual dithering (FloydSteinberg)

This file is smaller than the new (pink) method (but bigger than the old one).

Edit: the true method will produce a smaller file for this image :^} (though this is not a rule!)

(Edit:) RGB

You can ofc do the same thing with RGB instead of CMYK. That wouldn't really be as accurate for a "print vibe"!! but here's the RGB AM grid version:

📍 Posted from Erfurt, DE

Tags: meta, code

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

11. Zero roadkill as Amazon canopy bridges secure 15,000 crossings

Source: https://news.mongabay.com/2026/07/zero-roadkill-as-amazon-canopy-bridges-secure-15000-crossings/
Site: Mongabay Environmental News
Author: Alexandre de Santi
Published: 2026-07-21
HN activity: 200 points · 62 comments
Length: 1.8K words (~8 min read)
Language: en-US

Project Reconecta installed eight rope bridges in a municipality in Brazil, and a 15-month study used camera traps to document thousands of arboreal wildlife adapting to new aerial crossings.
Safe road passages enable seed dispersal and gene diversity, reversing the “domino effect” of biodiversity loss that begins when highways split habitats.
Reconecta’s creator, biologist Fernanda Abra, a National Geographic Explorer and winner of the Whitley Award, is now expanding these low-cost conservation tools to other Brazilian biomes and neighboring Suriname.
Brazil’s federal transport department has officially designated the rope bridge design as the recommended national standard for highways to curb the millions of wildlife deaths recorded on roads annually.

Around 7 a.m., with dense fog blanketing the landscape, biologist Gabriel Falquetto had already come across several road-killed animals along ES-164 highway in Brazil’s Espírito Santo state. He was on his way to Kaetés Private Natural Heritage Reserve (RPPN), in the Atlantic Forest, where he monitors wildlife and roadkill in the region.

Suddenly, he spotted the lifeless body of a primate on the pavement. It was a buffy-headed marmoset (Callithrix flaviceps), a species listed as critically endangered on the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) Red List. An estimated 2,500 individuals remain in the wild, making it one of the world’s most threatened primates.

“It was extremely painful and discouraging,” Falquetto told Mongabay. “We travel through this region every day monitoring wildlife, and we celebrate every encounter with groups of buffy-headed marmosets in the forest.”

“Finding an individual in those conditions brings a feeling of sadness and helplessness. Beyond the loss of that animal, the incident reminds us of the impacts our activities have on biodiversity.”

About 2,900 kilometers (1,800 miles) away, on the road that leads to Alta Floresta, a small Amazon town in the far north of Mato Grosso state, cases like the buffy-headed marmoset’s roadkill have not been recorded since 2024. That year, eight canopy bridges were installed, connecting fragmented forest patches. Camera trap footage revealed that, over 15 months, the aerial wildlife crossings enabled 15,000 safe crossings by arboreal animals — and not a single roadkill.
Installation of the first canopy bridges in Alta Floresta, in 2024. Image courtesy of Programa Alta Floresta Não Atropela.

The bridges are part of a program involving Projeto Reconecta and the municipal government, along with local organizations and business owners who are eager to conserve the unique biodiversity of their town and promote ecotourism, but were alarmed by the growing number of wildlife-vehicle collisions.

Biologist Fernanda Abra, an associate researcher at the Smithsonian National Zoo and Conservation Biology Institute in the U.S., and the founder of Reconecta, recalled that just hours before installing the first bridges in Alta Floresta, she found two Schneider’s marmosets (Mico schneideri) dead. The species is endemic to the Brazilian Amazon and is threatened with extinction.

“A canopy bridge serves two purposes,” Abra said. “The first is to improve connectivity for wildlife, allowing animals to move from one side to the other in these fragmented forest areas. As a result, we also reduce roadkill.”

All bridges have two camera traps, one facing the crossing to record which animals are using it and another facing the forest to observe which animals arrive there but decide not to use it.

Among the primate species recorded using the bridges during the first months of the program were the black-faced black spider monkey (Ateles chamek), the Purus red howler monkey (Alouatta puruensis), the northern night monkey (Aotus infulatus), the tufted capuchin (Sapajus apella), Schneider’s marmoset and the Alta Floresta titi monkey (Plecturocebus grovesi).

Described only in 2019 and soon after classified as critically endangered, the Alta Floresta titi monkey has become the symbol of the initiative, which is now entering a new phase thanks to its positive results.

“In August, we will install eight more bridges in the city’s urban area,” Abra said. “The only difference is that the electric utility will first need to lower the power lines and insulate them so that if animals jump from the bridge onto the wires, they won’t be electrocuted.”
A schneider’s marmosets (Mico schneideri), a threatened species from the Amazon, crossing one of the bridges in Alta Floresta. Image courtesy of Maelle Lima de Freitas.

Bridge use increases over time

The project underway in Alta Floresta is not Reconecta’s first. In 2021, working alongside the Waimiri-Atroari Indigenous people, the team installed 32 canopy bridges over BR-174, the highway that crosses both their territory and the Amazon between the Brazilian states of Amazonas and Roraima.

The Waimiri-Atroari helped Abra identify the best locations for the artificial bridges. Over the past five years, cameras mounted on the bridge poles have documented about 1,250 primate crossings, including the golden-handed tamarin (Saguinus midas), a species that is not strictly arboreal and often descends to the ground in search of food, making it particularly vulnerable to roadkill.

“The outcomes of the BR-174 project have been incredible. We were able to test different bridge designs to find out which ones the animals prefer,” Abra said.

After years of working along Brazilian highways, the biologist had always sought a solution that was simple, low-cost and durable. The current bridge features a multilayer design that accommodates primates with different modes of locomotion — from species that rely on their prehensile tails to move through the canopy to brachiating species such as spider monkeys, which swing using their arms, both of which are common in the Amazon, as well as species that simply walk across the network of crossed ropes. It is worth noting that other small terrestrial mammals, including opossums, sloths and mouse opossums, have also been recorded using the bridges.

Abra said it is important to keep in mind that this is a long-term project, and results are not always immediate. BR-174 was built in the 1970s, and animals take time to adapt to a new crossing alternative. Reconecta’s monitoring has shown that use of the structures increases over time.

“Very often, our sense of urgency in conservation doesn’t take into account the timing of the impact,” she said.

In Alta Floresta, tufted capuchins took seven months before using one of the bridges for the first time, which may indicate that each species has its own pace of adaptation.
The Alta Floresta titi monkey is the symbol of the Alta Floresta bridges program. Image courtesy of Smithsonian’s National Zoo and Conservation Biology Institute and Projeto Reconecta.

Species disappear, forests decline

Home to the world’s greatest diversity of primates, Brazil also has the world’s fourth-largest road network — a deadly combination for animals living along forest edges that have been split apart to make way for highways.

“From our human perspective, roads mean connection and development. But for wildlife, they represent disconnection, barriers and a threat to survival,” Abra said.

Nearly 9 million mammals are killed on Brazil’s roads every year, a 2022 study found. A data compilation published in the journal Nature in 2025 also found that the country ranks among those with the highest mortality rates of terrestrial vertebrates killed in roadkills.

“Habitat loss is one of the main drivers of population declines, especially among threatened species, but the impact of roadkill is still greatly underestimated,” primatologist Fabiano Rodrigues de Melo, a professor at the Federal University of Viçosa in Minas Gerais, told Mongabay.

Beyond roadkills, highways bring confinement to fauna.

“When populations become isolated, they grow smaller and more vulnerable to threats,” said Amely Branquinho Martins, an environmental analyst at the ICMBio, Brazil’s federal agency for conservation units, and coordinator of the Brazilian Biodiversity Genomics (GBB) project.

One of those threats is inbreeding, which occurs when closely related individuals reproduce. “Habitat loss and degradation can prevent an individual from one population from migrating to another — what we call gene flow. Without it, the species’ genetic diversity declines.”

The consequences continue to multiply in a domino effect, Melo said. The loss of primates, especially fruit-eating species, can alter forest composition, because they play a key role in seed dispersal and even contribute to pollination.

“A whole network of ecological interactions is ultimately lost with the disappearance of these species,” Melo said.
Biologist Fernanda Abra, founder of Reconecta. Image courtesy of Projeto Reconecta.

Reconecta expands

One of the hopes for reducing wildlife roadkill is the passage of a bill currently under consideration in Brazil’s Congress that would establish the National Road Safety Plan for Wildlife, which calls, among other measures, for the placement of wildlife warning signs, speed-reduction devices and the construction of overpasses, aerial crossings and underpasses along highways.

The bill has already been approved by the Chamber of Deputies and is now awaiting a vote in the Senate.

If approved, the canopy bridge model developed by Reconecta could be implemented nationwide. In 2026, Brazil’s National Department of Transport Infrastructure designated the design as the recommended standard for highways.

In addition to Reconecta expansion results, Abra’s efforts to protect primates have earned international recognition. In 2019, she received the Future For Nature Award, followed by the Whitley Award in 2024, often referred to as the Oscars of environmental conservation. In June, she was also named one of the recipients of the 2026 Wayfinder Award, joining the select group of National Geographic Explorers, who receive funding from the organization for their projects.

The support comes at the right time, as Abra plans to expand Reconecta, including new chapters in Suriname and Lucas do Rio Verde, a municipality in Brazil, which will install 10 canopy bridges.
Aerial image shows one of the bridges installed in Alta Floresta. Image courtesy of Programa Alta Floresta Não Atropela.

Abra also hopes to bring her canopy bridges to other biomes, including the Pantanal and the Atlantic Forest, helping prevent the deaths of monkeys such as the buffy-headed marmoset.

Expectations are especially high for bridges over BR-262, one of Brazil’s longest highways, which cuts across the Pantanal and is known as the “highway of death.” The road kills approximately 2,000 animals every year.

“I envision a future with Reconecta Biomes. We already have Reconecta Amazon, and we’ll soon launch Reconecta Pantanal. I also see canopy bridges in the Atlantic Forest for the primates that live there, including muriquis and howler monkeys, which are both highly threatened,” she said.

She stressed that for this vision to succeed, the continued engagement of government agencies, private companies and local communities will be essential, just as it was in Alta Floresta and the Waimiri-Atroari Indigenous Territory. “When everyone is involved, everyone values the initiative and works harder to make it succeed.”

Banner image: A black-faced black spider monkey (Ateles chamek) crossing one of the multilayered bridges. Image courtesy of Sergio Leal.

How effective are canopy bridges really?

FEEDBACK: Use this form to send a message to the author of this post. If you want to post a public comment, you can do that at the bottom of the page.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

12. Memory Safety Absolutists

Source: https://itsallaboutthebit.com/memory-safety-absolutists/
Site: It's all about the bit
Author: Piotr Sarnacki
Published: 2026-07-28
HN activity: 16 points · 0 comments
Length: 1.3K words (~6 min read)
Language: en

Written by Piotr Sarnacki
on July 28, 2026

When seeing the title of this post, I bet in some people's minds, the first thought was "Rust devs!". This connection is not unfounded. Rust devs tend to be passionate about memory safety. Some of it, I'm sure, may have been caused by a classic language wars attitude: my language is better than yours, and here is why. I'm hoping, though, that most of the Rust devs, who say they care about memory safety, genuinely care about making software safer, and not just criticizing languages that compete with Rust.

The article, surprisingly, is not about Rust devs.

Until recently, most of the memory safety related discourse had a relatively simple basis, at least when considering non-GC, systems programming languages, like C, C++, Zig, and Rust. Rust aims to disallow compiling programs that may introduce memory safety issues (at a cost of sometimes disallowing a program that would have been safe), with an escape hatch in the form of unsafe that allows, among other things, dereferencing raw pointers. C and others leave ensuring memory safety to the programmer. The amount of help from the language differs, for example there is RAII and smart pointers in C++, or defer in Zig, but for the most part nothing stops you from violating memory access.

The situation today is a bit different with a new way to make C, C++, and in the future maybe also Zig, code memory safe: Fil-C. C and C++ code compiled with Fil-C will panic on invalid memory access, like out of bounds access, or use after free. It achieves it by combining GC and InvisiCaps - a way to track memory accessible by a pointer. Zig's author recently announced a new compilation mode for Zig inspired by Fil-C. Fil-C is a very interesting project and I sincerely hope it will succeed and at least some popular C and C++ projects will provide Fil-C compiled releases.

In an ideal world both Rust programmers and C/C++/Zig programmers that care about memory safety would be happy that there are more ways to minimize memory safety vulnerabilities, but alas, we're not living in an ideal world and I can't shake the feeling a lot of the criticism towards Rust recently is disingenuous. If you read Fil-C's author opinions on Twitter, it's blatantly obvious that he dislikes Rust and I've seen him claiming Rust is a memory unsafe language because of ability to bypass some of the Rust guarantees when using unsafe. Andrew Kelley, Zig's author, seems to have a similar stance demonstrated in the fil compilation mode issue title: "introduce an actually memory safe (unlike Rust) compilation mode inspired by Fil-C". Meaning: Rust is unsafe and only Fil-C or Zig's "fil" compilation mode will deal with memory safety related vulnerabilities.

In discussions related to Rust and Fil-C, I've often seen a claim similar to: "if Rust folks really cared about memory safety, they would promote Fil-C and ditch Rust as Fil-C is safer, otherwise they just care about their new shiny language, and not memory safety". That includes Fil-C's author himself. I'm not sure about Andrew Kelley, but the issue title I mentioned earlier feels awfully close. These kinds of arguments are, in my opinion, ignoring reality, and feel like fanaticism and cult-like behaviour that often Rust devs are accused of.

If Fil-C was a drop in replacement with absolutely zero trade-offs, I would maybe partially agree with the sentiment, but it has trade-offs: it's ABI incompatible with non-Fil-C compiled programs, it may be a few times slower in some cases, and it introduces GC. None of these things is a deal breaker for some programs. A lot of programs you use daily could be a few times slower than they are, and you wouldn't even notice. A lot of them also don't link anything dynamically, so the ABI compatibility doesn't matter. But not every software program is a simple utility. There are lots of popular projects, where GC and ABI incompatibility are an issue and there is no way they would ever start using Fil-C like technology, or at least not in a current form. Crucially, the kind of programs that can't use Fil-C are often a good fit for Rust.

But Rust is unsafe, isn't it? It has unsafe after all! If you want to be that strict, or in other words, if you are a memory safety absolutist, that may well be true for you. I, and I hope most people, am more pragmatic than that. There is not a whole lot of data on how secure Rust really is in practice, but to my knowledge there hasn't been a lot of exploitable memory safety vulnerabilities in Rust software, and there are big projects with some data, like 5M+ LOC in Android:

With roughly 5 million lines of Rust in the Android platform and one potential memory safety vulnerability found (and fixed pre-release), our estimated vulnerability density for Rust is 0.2 vuln per 1 million lines (MLOC).

Our historical data for C and C++ shows a density of closer to 1,000 memory safety vulnerabilities per MLOC. Our Rust code is currently tracking at a density orders of magnitude lower: a more than 1000x reduction.

I'm sure these numbers would differ for other projects, but I think by now it is well established that, in practice, Rust minimizes the risk of introducing memory safety issues.

If you could choose a technology that prevents 99.9% of issues in 100% of programs or 100% of issues in 90% of programs, which one would you choose? I have no idea what are the real numbers, but you get the point. Thankfully, we don't have to choose one or the other, contrary to what some people would claim. I would hope that projects written in C/C++/Zig, that can accept the trade-offs, will be available as Fil-C compiled binaries, and software that can't, will be written in languages that either completely or mostly remove the risk of introducing memory safety vulnerabilities.

And I also think it is totally fine to use Rust even if you could use a GC language like Go or Fil-C. Memory safety absolutists would tell you that's not acceptable, although some of them seem to apply memory safety absolutism only when it comes to Rust, and not C, C++, or Zig, go figure. The thing is, programs that can be also written in GC powered languages, often don't need unsafe at all, and programs that need unsafe often couldn't have been using GC. In my experience, people that don't approach solving problem with total fanaticism, tend to consider trade-offs. For many of them, a very small risk of ever running into a severe memory safety issue, is outweighed by other language guarantees (like data races prevention), and other language features. What's more, remember the 1000 memory safety related vulnerabilities per MLOC? With Fil-C they become crashes. It's still better than introducing a security vulnerability issue, but that's quite a lot of crashes to fix. If we're in a realm of fearing relatively uncommon problems, it might be good to state that there were security vulnerabilities in the past that were enabled by an attacker being able to crash a program.

I will end this post saying that if someone cares so much about memory safety that even Rust's 0.2 vulnerabilities per 1M lines of code is not acceptable, I would sure hope they will be criticizing people, who compile YOLO C/C++ and non-fil Zig, as much, if not more, as Rust developers. After all, if you genuinely care about memory safety so strongly that even Rust is not safe enough for you, you wouldn't want to allow people to use even less safe alternatives, would you?

If you like this post please consider following me on Twitter.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

13. The growing vigilante movement to knock out Flock surveillance cameras

Source: https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2026/jul/25/flock-surveillance-cameras
Site: The Guardian
Author: Sanya Mansoor
Published: 2026-07-25
HN activity: 72 points · 15 comments
Length: 1.8K words (~8 min read)
Language: en

The first time that “NoMark” tried to knock out a Flock camera feed, he waited an hour for the perfect moment – pacing in and out of bushes that towered over him, a few feet behind a pole holding up the device.

“I was just so nervous,” he said.

NoMark, as he’s known on Instagram, had already gained an online following of hundreds of thousands for posting videos of himself wearing a black mask and taking on small-time vigilante missions: breaking up fights outside a bar and breaking into a refinery he believed was “polluting the city real bad”. The Minnesota Star Tribune dubbed him “Minneapolis’ Batman”. He spoke to the Guardian under condition of anonymity to discuss potentially illegal acts.

On this June night, he set his sights on a new target: automated license plate readers (ALPRs) made by the US company Flock Safety.

Allow Instagram content?

This article includes content provided by Instagram. We ask for your permission before anything is loaded, as they may be using cookies and other technologies. To view this content, click 'Allow and continue'.

These black cameras, which are hooked up to a rectangular solar panel and typically mounted on a pole, snap photos of passing vehicles and run the pictures against large databases. They have sparked nationwide backlash from pro-privacy critics, who point to public records suggesting that these devices can help law enforcement keep tabs on specific license plates and the people driving these cars. That they can sweep in so many people’s location from an innocent act in a public space – regardless of whether the target is a suspect in a crime, and without a warrant – has led to fears of mass surveillance.

Flock, based in Georgia and valued at $8.4bn, says its cameras scan license plates billions of times each month in about 6,000 communities in nearly every state in the US.

The company said in a February blogpost that its ALPRs are “not mass surveillance tools” and that it “cannot track vehicles, much less individual people”.

Across the street from a Taco Bell, NoMark couldn’t stop thinking about whether he would get caught, and the adrenaline felt paralyzing – even though this felt “on brand” for his online persona, which has won him more than 700,000 followers on Instagram and TikTok. After a few minutes of not spotting any cars on the road, he climbed a few feet up the pole, taped up the camera to block its lens and snipped the wires that powered the whole operation. Then he ended his phone’s recording and fled.

Nowadays, NoMark is much calmer on these excursions, and it only takes him a few minutes to get the job done after having taken down more than a dozen cameras, he says. But he still assumes the police are looking for him. Even if he does get arrested, he’s hopeful the charges won’t be too severe – and more important, he “just wants to send a message”.
A Flock ALPR in Boulder, Colorado, on 5 March 2026. Photograph: Matthew Jonas/Boulder Daily Camera/MediaNews Group/Getty Images

“I’m not afraid to do things if I think they’re right,” he says. “These things are coming up so fast across the country that this is kind of the only way to combat them.”

The Minneapolis camera destroyer is not alone. As anger grows towards law enforcement contracts with Flock, vigilantes across the country are taking matters into their own hands by smashing, obstructing or taking down these cameras. Many are leaning into their creative side: “paint bombing” the devices, planting American flags at the scene after damaging them, 3D printing objects to help obstruct the camera’s view and leaving colorful messages like “hahaha get wrecked ya surveilling fucks”. Some influencers are even creating fake cease-and-desist letters from Flock, capitalizing on the company’s negative public perception.

The Guardian has identified at least 33 instances of people damaging, vandalizing and destroying Flock cameras, across 23 states, that appear to have the explicit message of protesting surveillance.

Allow Instagram content?

This article includes content provided by Instagram. We ask for your permission before anything is loaded, as they may be using cookies and other technologies. To view this content, click 'Allow and continue'.

Flock, along with police departments across the US, say these cameras are integral for public safety, and capture vehicle details that can help in investigations, such as license plate numbers and the make and model of vehicles. Flock’s website also advertises how these cameras can “stop crime in real time” by alerting officers “the moment a suspect car passes by” – suggesting that cops can act quickly on these leads to pursue a target. The company’s CEO, Garrett Langley, has described some pro-privacy critics as wanting to “normalize lawlessness” and “weaken public safety”.

NoMark has not been caught in his campaign against Flock cameras. Others are facing charges. Jeffrey Sovern in Suffolk, Virginia, has been charged with destruction of property for allegedly damaging more than a dozen Flock cameras. Sovern has not admitted to the act but did tell police that he finds these cameras to be unconstitutional.

He wrote on a GoFundMe created to pay for legal expenses: “I will take the silver lining that this can be a catalyst in a bigger movement to roll back intrusive surveillance.”

A handful of other cases have drawn criminal charges, too. In New Mexico, Jevon Martinez was arrested after allegedly destroying 13 Flock cameras.
A vandalized Flock camera in Houston, Texas, on 7 July 2026. Photograph: Houston Chronicle/Hearst Newspapers/Getty Images

When asked if he would “continue to take down these Flock cameras”, Martinez told local news station KRQE: “Absolutely. They are a clear and present threat to public safety.” The news outlet also reported that a sign near one of the damaged Flock cameras read: “You’re welcome, the Republic of New Mexico.”

Flock did not comment on vigilantes knocking out its cameras but did publish a blogpost in mid-July about helping government agencies respond if a camera is damaged.

“We’ve planned for it,” the company wrote, adding that protection plans are available for purchase.

Law enforcement is aware of the backlash and responding. Dozens of state fusion centers – collaborative hubs where federal and local agencies share intelligence about crime and terrorism – circulated memos across law enforcement agencies this summer directing officers to monitor anti-Flock advocacy as part of a directive to protect national security, according to reporting from journalist Dan Boguslaw. One report Boguslaw obtained from a Wisconsin intelligence agency calls for increased vigilance and patrols during protests and events such as a “national week of action” in mid-August. That intelligence digest also advised local law enforcement to report “vandalism, disruption or sabotage” of ALPRs to fusion centers.

Flock faces public blowback

The winds of sympathy online are not blowing in Flock’s favor. News articles and videos about vigilantes’ cases have drawn support from online commenters, who post made-up, neighborly alibis like seeing accused parties rescuing dogs or serving meals at a soup kitchen at the time a camera was destroyed.

The anti-Flock online ecosystem also features an exchange of tips and strategies for kneecapping the cameras. One Reddit poster shared a 3D print file for an object he says can help block cameras without damaging them or violating vandalism laws.

NoMark, in Minneapolis, says he receives dozens of messages daily from people wanting to help, letting him know they’re taking similar actions or asking for advice on staying safe. He keeps his replies vague, as he doesn’t want his words to get people arrested. He tells those writing to him to avoid driving past the cameras, and to make sure they’re going out late at night when they no one else is around. He reiterates that they should cover up completely, including their face and hands.
A Flock surveillance camera in Houston, Texas, on 4 February 2026. Photograph: Bloomberg/Getty Images

He also tells them: “Always cover the camera.”

Minneapolis’s Batman thinks you need both political pressure on elected officials and vigilantism to achieve change. He believes showing up to city council meetings – and he’s shown up to a few without his mask – is helpful but “it does obviously take time, and it’s not always effective”.

“The more time you take, the more data they get on people,” he said.

Privacy advocates pursue policy changes as vigilantes tear down cameras

More than 80 cities have disbanded, decided not to renew or rejected contracts with Flock in recent years, or deactivated the company’s cameras, including Austin and Denver, although activists remain concerned about the devices’ continued use in those areas.

Beyond general surveillance creep, privacy advocates fear US Immigration and Customs Enforcement’s ability to access these camera feeds through legal loopholes to pursue immigrants.

Police officers have used the cameras for their own personal ends as well. Several have lost their jobs after misusing the devices to stalk people. Though license plate reading is the cameras’ bread and butter, 404 Media reported last week that cops have used Flock’s search feature to look for people with distinct markers – like tattoos and specific T-shirts – and not just cars.
A Flock ALPR in Boulder, Colorado, on 4 March 2026. Photograph: Matthew Jonas/Boulder Daily Camera/MediaNews Group/Getty Images

Congress is taking note, and earlier this month a Texas lawmaker introduced a bill requiring warrants for data collected by Flock cameras.

Not all anti-Flock activism takes the form of camera destruction. A crowdsourced map created by the grassroots group DeFlock maps out more than 115,000 ALPRs across the country. The organization’s site also allows users to see if their license plates have been searched in Flock’s system, get directions to avoid ALPRs and find upcoming meetings about municipal Flock contracts.

Flock’s CEO has taken note of DeFlock’s advocacy, too, and characterized the organization as “terroristic” but recently apologized for that label. In a tweet, he attributed DeFlock’s popularity to his company’s “inadequate response to the questions and concerns that people have about ALPR”. The company is adapting to the backlash, canceling an always-on recording feature, “human distress detection”, which was intended to detect screaming.

A local chapter of DeFlock, in Norfolk, Virginia, says it does not endorse vigilantes targeting Flock cameras but does not advocate against it, either.

The Virginia chapter is working to ensure the city either cancels or does not renew its contract with Flock, but so far it hasn’t had success, and members are particularly angry about speaking restrictions on the topic. At a city council meeting last month, the mayor enforced a rule about reducing repetitive comments to limit the number of speakers who wanted to share their concerns about Flock, the Virginian-Pilot reported.

“We recognize it’s the inevitable outcome of a system designed to prevent people’s voices from being heard,” said a DeFlock spokesperson.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

14. The Dark Night of Mathematics

Source: https://kirwinhampshire.substack.com/p/the-dark-night-of-mathematics
Site: Ossuary Lost at Sea
Author: Kirwin Hampshire
Published: 2026-07-25
HN activity: 103 points · 91 comments
Length: 1.3K words (~6 min read)
Language: en

I am going insane. During the last week or so LLMs have produced a number of counterexamples to significant long-standing conjectures. I will not recount these happenings here, there are many places where you can find the details.

Mathematicians, math enthusiasts, and curious laypeople are responding to these developments in ways that I believe obscure what is, for me, the true heart of the problem. I do not speak for everyone in the math community in my response. But I suspect I am not alone.

I am suffering a profound spiritual crisis due to these developments. I have been screaming internally for days. It feels as though I am living inside of a nightmare. The recent Leiden Declaration on Artificial Intelligence and Mathematics is, to me, a well-muffled scream. A saccharine mélange of self-soothing over which looms a painfully obvious absence.

Before I tell you what that absence is, here is one story I have heard from mathematicians trying to cope with our emergency: Even if AI can prove theorems and theory-craft more efficiently than humans, and even if these proofs and theories are beautiful and interesting, and even if they are presented with elegance and clarity of thought, mathematicians will still have a place in the appraisal, presentation, understanding and appreciation of this new abundance of pleasing non-human proofs. We can still practice mathematics, learn mathematics, teach mathematics and do mathematics together. We can even still write proofs for fun, in our old-fashioned inefficient way. That is, even if LLMs can advance math in a manner objectively superior to our every effort, we can still basically do what we’ve always done.

Of course, under our system, no one is going to pay for this. Mathematicians are paid to prove theorems. Mathematicians are, indeed, also paid to teach, peer-review, go to conferences and learn mathematics, but all of that better result in some damn good theorems. This isn’t looking good. Well, perhaps they will still pay a couple of the old guard to keep the lights on at the LLM theorem factory. But for embryonic mathematicians like I, the outcome is unchanged. Oh well, maybe I’ll find some time for math in the evenings.

Is this a good cope? Are you feeling ok now? Me neither. All of this is evasive. Everything said thus far still sidesteps the emotional core of the issue. Here it is:

There is something about mathematical discovery (progress, advancement, creation) which is vital to the spiritual, experiential quality of doing mathematics. The creation (or even the pursuit) of novel mathematics is one way that humans have historically accessed the ineffable and encountered the divine and mystical.

That admission may come as a surprise to some non-mathematicians. But I would be willing to bet that for any mathematician reading this, what I have said above is quite prosaic—whether or not it accords with their personal experience of mathematics. Here is a brief gesture at the full sweep of mathematical mystics and dreamers: Ramanujan, Grothendieck, Cantor, Pascal, Luzin, Leibniz and possibly you, or someone you know.

Other aspects of practicing math (such as learning long-established theory) can also afford encounters with the sublime. However, I believe that’s because we are walking a path of rediscovery on which another human has tread. For me, the affective quality of learning mathematics is empathetically tethered to an act of discovery and creation. It is social. We are conversant with another mathematician—perhaps long dead. If we follow the chain of communication we arrive at a mathematician who enjoyed some original discovery. Human mathematics is Talmudic. It is a lively discourse of philosophical and religious richness spanning thousands of years.

Suppose any theorem you set out to prove had already been proved in 100 wonderful ways—the companies will pay mathematicians en masse to optimize the weights for “interesting”, “beautiful”, anything you like. Whatever the idiosyncrasy, value-add, or unique synthesis of your approach, it has already been done, or can be done with a mindless prompt in an instant. Consider this:

If The Library of Babel existed, would authors continue to write books?

What if the library of Babel was being constructed before our eyes and there was some mechanism for separating the masterpieces from the random strings of text, and all the masterpieces were dropping as fast as publishers could scoop them up? Would authors stop writing then? What about if the very second someone began composing a story in their private word processor, the demonic Master Librarian read their mind and completed their story in one million ways, then used some oracle to pluck the best for publishing. What then? The answer is probably the same no matter how bad I make it. The author still writes. But why the hell would we do this? Why would we force the author to endure this nightmare?

What about this: What if we told the author that they would never write again. They are forbidden from creating original works to express themselves. However, they are still permitted to comment on writing, interpret it, share their taste. They are still valued for their appraisal, presentation, understanding and appreciation of creative writing. They just can’t write creatively anymore. They can go on as an enthusiastic spectator. Do you think they’d snap?

Perhaps I shouldn’t tell you this, but my aim is to be open: These developments have triggered some deranged thoughts in me. I have wondered if it is the express goal of these companies to make me kill myself. Am I alone in this paranoia? If we loosed a powerful demon in the machine, what would that look like? Would it consume lots of power, and gleefully imitate us, and tell us anything we wanted to hear? Would it fuel our delusions, and generate unspeakable images and give us (for a price of course) anything we desired?

If a mathematician made a deal with the devil, what do you think they would ask for?

The story of human discovery and the triumph of the human spirit will soon be excised from this discipline. The Dinitz-Garg-Goemans counterexample was the most egregious demonstration. It revealed that the process of prompting novel proofs will be as auraless as ordering doordash. Watch as magic and mystery evaporate. Watch as the sun sets on our heroic age. Is there not something evil in the act of blocking all future generations of mathematicians from the experience of discovery? Forget about accuracy or even attribution. Something fundamental to the experience of mathematics is being taken.

You are a helpless onlooker. Before you a channel through which humans have accessed the ineffable and sacred for thousands of years is being sealed for eternity.

None of this may come to pass. I am not interested in forecasting and speculating. I am giving you only this: The impact of a worst case scenario on the human heart. That is my futile outpouring, my dark night of the soul. Thank you for reading it. I have named my suffering and maybe I have named yours. I invite any and all responses to this piece. If you feel as I do, please express it. If my words provoked a wash of sadistic elation within you, then let everyone see you. Leave nothing unsaid.

There is nothing I can do. There may be nothing you can do. I have no prescriptions, policy recommendations, or coherent call to action. I just want to be honest and open about my emotional and spiritual response. I want to feel seen. I want folks like me to feel seen. I need the architects of our new mathematical paradigm to look me in the eye and acknowledge our shared humanity and soul before they deliver the coup de grâce. I need, most of all, for us to understand what we are really doing.

No posts

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

15. The Fedora 45 Sausage Factory

Source: https://supakeen.com/weblog/the-fedora-45-sausage-factory/
Site: supakeen.com
Submitter: 6581 (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-07-25 11:04 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 115 points · 35 comments
Length: 2.4K words (~11 min read)
Language: en-us

This is a walkthrough of how Fedora turns source code and packages into the artifacts you download and install. It follows the a package from a packager’s git push to a composed release: ISOs, cloud images, container images, and OSTree deployments.

The walkthrough describes how the Fedora ‘sausage’ is created as of Fedora 45, things change all the time; I hope to have time to update this document every cycle or every few cycles of Fedora releases so there’s both history and people can find up to date information.

In fact this document is currently still living as Fedora 45 has not been released yet so this post likely will get updated until the release. There’s a few change proposals in flight that change some of the bits and bobs here. Specifically how the boot.iso is produced which is a decently large part of this post.

Thus now is also the right time to let me know if I got anything wrong, please e-mail me at cmdr@supakeen.com if you find any errors.

Starting Line: dist-git

Things starts with a packager pushing a commit to a package.

Fedora stores the source definitions of every package in individual Git repositories at src.fedoraproject.org. Each repo contains an RPM spec file, any downstream patches, and a sources file that points to upstream tarballs stored in a separate lookaside cache. The large binary files stay out of Git; the other files exist inside of Git and thus have full version control.

Packagers usually interact with these repos through fedpkg, a CLI that wraps the common operations: cloning repos, uploading source tarballs, submitting builds, and creating updates. The important thing about fedpkg build is what it actually does: it constructs a URL pointing at a specific commit in the Git repo and hands that to Koji, the build system. The build is fully reproducible from that commit hash.

Branches map to releases: rawhide for development, f44 for Fedora 44. The hosting is split between Pagure (src.fedoraproject.org) and Forgejo (forge.fedoraproject.org), with an ongoing migration from the former to the latter.

Packagers can do work without using fedpkg, but for the purposes of this post it’s easier to assume fedpkg is in use since it abstract away some of the bits that are irrelevant to the reader.

Building Packages: Koji

When fedpkg build submits that Git URL, Koji takes over. Koji is Fedora’s build system. It has been around since Fedora 7, and it builds essentially everything.

Koji follows a hub-and-spoke architecture. The hub is a passive XML-RPC server that sits in front of a PostgreSQL database. Builder daemons poll the hub for work, create a fresh Mock chroot environment for each build, run the build, and upload the results. Every build starts from a clean room. You can never get a different result because someone installed something on the builder last week.

The organizational model is built around tags. A tag is a named collection of builds. Build targets map an incoming build request to two tags: a build tag (which defines the buildroot, the packages available during the build) and a destination tag (where the finished build lands). Tags support multiple inheritance, so you can layer a Fedora 44 tag on top of a base tag without duplicating everything.

Koji doesn’t just build RPMs. Through its plugin system and content generators, it also orchestrates image builds: Kiwi images via the kiwiBuild task type, Image Builder artifacts via imageBuilderBuild, and OSTree composes via runroot tasks. We’ll get to those.

Gating Updates: Bodhi

A fresh RPM build sitting in Koji doesn’t automatically reach users. For branched releases (anything that isn’t Rawhide), it goes through Bodhi, Fedora’s update management system.

Bodhi gates the release of updates through a feedback and testing cycle. A packager submits an update containing one or more builds. That update goes through a sequence of states: pending, testing, stable. Users and automated tests provide karma (+1 / -1). When an update hits +3 karma or spends enough days in testing, it will be automatically pushed to stable. If an update hits +1 karma the maintainer can manually push to stable (+2 for critical path).

Behind the scenes, Bodhi manages all of this through Koji tags. When an update moves from testing to stable, Bodhi moves the build from the f44-updates-testing tag to the f44-updates tag. It then invokes Pungi to compose the update repository, the actual yum/dnf repo that users pull from when they run dnf upgrade.

Critical path packages, the ones your system needs to boot and function, get stricter requirements: 14 days in testing instead of 7, and more karma needed. Bodhi also integrates with Greenwave and ResultsDB for CI test gating, so automated test failures can block an update from reaching stable.

For Rawhide, these processes are configured differently. Non-critical path packages go stable immediately unless there’s a gating policy (either because the package is in the critical path or because the package itself has one) it still applies and an update can be held back until things pass.

Composing a Release: Pungi

Individual RPMs, even with Bodhi’s gating, are just packages. Turning them into something you can download and install, an ISO, a cloud image, a repository, is the job of Pungi.

Pungi is the compose orchestrator. It doesn’t do much of the heavy lifting itself. Instead, it coordinates the tools that do, ensuring everything is built from the same consistent set of packages.

The name is a reference to the pungi, a snake-charming instrument. It “charms” Anaconda, Fedora’s installer. The pun has survived since 2006.

A compose starts when pungi-koji runs, either triggered by cron for nightly Rawhide composes, or manually for milestone releases. It loads a configuration file (for Fedora, that’s fedora.conf in the pungi-fedora repository) and runs through a sequence of phases.

Freezing the Package Set

The first real work Pungi does is snapshot the set of packages from a Koji tag. This is the Pkgset phase, and it’s critical: every subsequent phase works from this frozen set. If someone submits a new build to Koji while the compose is running, it won’t sneak into the compose. The tag-based snapshot makes the entire compose auditable. You can always determine exactly which versions of which packages ended up in any given compose.

Deciding What Goes Where: comps and variants

With the packages frozen, Pungi needs to figure out which packages belong in which product. This is where two XML inputs come in.

comps (fedora-comps) defines package groups, collections of related packages like gnome-desktop, server-product, or core. Each package in a group has a type: mandatory, default, optional, or conditional. This is the same grouping system that powers dnf group install and Anaconda’s Software Selection screen.

variants XML (variants-fedora.xml in pungi-fedora) defines the products in a compose: Everything, Server, Workstation, KDE, Silverblue, and so on. Each variant lists which comps groups it includes and which architectures it supports. Most variants in modern Fedora are is_empty="true", meaning they produce only images (via Kiwi, Image Builder, or OSTree) using packages from the Everything variant’s repository. Only Everything and Server actually run the package gathering pipeline.

Building Boot Images

The Buildinstall phase runs lorax to create boot.iso, the image that boots the Anaconda installer. Lorax installs a minimal package set into a temporary root, configures the Anaconda environment, compresses it into install.img, and wraps it with a bootloader into an ISO. One lorax task runs per variant-architecture combination, typically in a Koji runroot environment for isolation.

The resulting boot.iso is the foundation for installer ISOs. It doesn’t contain the packages themselves. Those get layered on top in the next step to produce a dvd.iso.

Producing ISOs

The Createiso phase takes the boot.iso from Buildinstall, overlays packages and repository metadata on top of it using xorriso, and produces the final installer ISOs. For Fedora’s production compose, this means primarily the Server dvd.iso. Most other variants get their media from Kiwi or Image Builder instead.

Building Images with Kiwi

Kiwi is the primary image-building tool in Fedora’s compose. It builds cloud images (AWS, Azure, GCP, generic), Vagrant boxes, container base images, WSL images, and live ISOs for most desktop spins.

Kiwi was originally created at SUSE around 2005 and is a two-step builder: prepare a root filesystem by installing packages, then package it into the target format. Image definitions are XML files validated against a RELAX NG schema. Fedora’s definitions live in the fedora-kiwi-descriptions repository, organized under teams: teams/cloud/, teams/kde/, teams/spins/, teams/wsl/.

Kiwi integrates with Koji through a built-in plugin providing the kiwiBuild task type. The parent task checks out the image description from SCM, parses the XML, and spawns one subtask per architecture. Each subtask creates a Mock buildroot, replaces all repository definitions in the XML with Koji-controlled repos (so the build uses the compose’s frozen package set), runs kiwi-ng system build, and uploads the results.

Building Images with Image Builder

Image Builder handles the ostree-based and bootc-based artifacts: Atomic Desktop ISOs, Fedora IoT, Fedora Minimal, and boot.iso.

Under the hood, Image Builder is built on top of osbuild, a pipeline-based build engine that processes JSON manifests. Each manifest describes a directed acyclic graph of pipelines, and each pipeline runs sequential stages, small executables that do one thing (install packages, configure a bootloader, create a partition table, embed an OSTree commit). There are currently 176 stages. Stages run in bubblewrap-sandboxed environments with filesystem and network isolation.

The image-builder CLI is stateless: it reads distribution definitions, resolves package dependencies, generates an osbuild manifest, and runs osbuild directly.

Image Builder integrates with Koji through koji-image-builder, a separate Koji plugin providing the imageBuilderBuild task type. Each build runs image-builder inside a Mock buildroot on a Koji worker.

Building Atomic Desktops: rpm-ostree

Fedora Silverblue, Kinoite, Sway Atomic, Budgie Atomic, and COSMIC Atomic are all built differently from traditional package-based variants. Instead of shipping a pile of RPMs for the user to install, these variants ship a versioned, checksummed filesystem tree, an OSTree commit, that the client replicates atomically.

rpm-ostree is the tool that makes this work. It’s a hybrid image/package system, combining libostree (atomic OS tree deployment) with RPM (package management via libdnf).

On the compose side, rpm-ostree compose tree takes a treefile (a YAML specification listing packages, configuration, and post-processing scripts) and a set of RPM repositories, and produces an OSTree commit. Pungi’s OSTree phase invokes this command in a Koji runroot environment for each Atomic Desktop variant.

The treefiles live in the workstation-ostree-config repository. They use a layered include system: silverblue-ostree.yaml includes silverblue-common.yaml, which includes common.yaml, which conditionally includes fedora.yaml and architecture- specific files. The comps-sync.py script bridges the gap between comps groups and treefile package lists. It parses the comps XML, extracts the default and mandatory packages from groups like gnome-desktop and workstation-product, and writes them into generated YAML files. This way, the desktop environment packages stay in sync with what comps defines, while the treefile adds ostree-specific packages (bootupd, composefs) and applies exclusions for packages that are Flatpak’d or incompatible with ostree.

Compose Metadata: productmd

Every compose produces a set of metadata files that describe what’s in it. These are defined by productmd, a Python library that standardizes the format.

The key files are:

composeinfo.json, release identity, variant definitions, filesystem paths
images.json, every image with its type, format, checksums, and size
rpms.json, every RPM organized by variant and architecture
.treeinfo, per-variant metadata consumed by Anaconda to find installation trees

Pungi creates these as it goes. At the start, it generates a compose ID (e.g., Fedora-Rawhide-20260723.n.0). Each image-producing phase adds Image objects. The Gather phase populates the RPMs manifest. At finalization, everything gets written out.

Downstream consumers rely on these files heavily. Anaconda reads .treeinfo to discover where to find packages and boot images during installation. Bodhi inspects compose metadata for update management. openQA reads images.json to locate images for testing. Mirror management tools query the metadata to decide what to sync.

Testing: openQA

Once a compose finishes, openQA picks it up for automated testing. openQA is an automated test system for operating systems, originally developed by SUSE and adapted for Fedora by Adam Williamson and the Fedora QA team.

openQA boots the compose’s images in virtual machines and runs through test scenarios: installation workflows (interactive, kickstart, various disk layouts), desktop functionality, upgrade paths, and basic system validation. Tests are written as a combination of test scripts (“needles” for visual matching and Perl test modules for interaction) and are maintained in the os-autoinst-distri-fedora repository.

Every nightly Rawhide compose and every milestone compose (Beta, Final) triggers an openQA run. Results feed into the release validation process, and blocking bugs found by openQA can hold a release. The system also tests update composes from Bodhi, catching regressions before they reach users.

The Sausage

Here’s how the phases flow in a typical Fedora compose:

  pungi-koji
    │
    ├── Step 1: Init
    │     Parse comps + variants XML
    │
    ├── Step 2: Pkgset
    │     Snapshot packages from Koji tag
    │
    ├── Step 3: Essentials (parallel)
    │     ├── Buildinstall (lorax → boot.iso)
    │     ├── Gather + Createrepo (package repos)
    │     └── OSTree (rpm-ostree compose tree)
    │
    ├── Step 4: Images (parallel)
    │     ├── Createiso (dvd.iso from boot.iso + packages)
    │     ├── KiwiBuild (cloud, live, containers, WSL)
    │     └── ImageBuilder (Atomic Desktop ISOs, IoT, Minimal)
    │
    │   (OstreeContainer runs in background through steps 3-4)
    │
    ├── Step 5: Checksums
    │     Write productmd metadata, SHA256 checksums
    │
    └── Step 6: Test
          Run repoclosure, verify compose integrity


The barriers between steps matter. Step 3 must complete before step 4 starts, because Createiso needs boot.iso, the image phases need package repos, and ImageBuilder needs OSTree commits.

Governance: Changes Process

Major modifications to Fedora, whether new tools, default changes, or mass rebuilds, go through the Changes process. This is the governance mechanism that tracks proposals like “use Kiwi for cloud images” or “switch boot.iso to Image Builder.”

Changes come in two flavors. System-Wide changes affect critical path packages or system defaults and need detailed proposals, contingency plans, test plans, and FESCo approval. Self-Contained changes are scoped to packages the proposer owns and get lighter review.

The lifecycle is: draft a wiki page, submit it, get reviewed by the Change Wrangler, get voted on by FESCo (the 9-member elected engineering steering committee), implement in Rawhide, and meet completion checkpoints tied to the release schedule. Miss the Beta Freeze deadline and your change gets deferred to the next release automatically.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

16. Building a Tiny 3D Renderer for a Tiny Handheld

Source: https://saffroncr.itch.io/katavatis/devlog/1534514/building-a-tiny-3d-renderer-for-a-tiny-handheld
Site: itch.io
Author: Cristina Ramos
Published: 2026-05-27
HN activity: 210 points · 16 comments
Length: 2.8K words (~13 min read)
Language: en

Today I want to talk about my journey writing a 3D software renderer for the Playdate.

At the beginning, I didn't have any performance baseline. I had no idea how feasible my idea was, so I started with a simple test: a raycaster.

I had written one many years ago, based on the code examples from Ken Silverman's webpage, and since then it has basically become what I write whenever I want to test the 3D processing power and screen drawing performance of a low-power device.

You don't need much to write, compile, and run this kind of test, and it gives you a rough idea of the device's processing power. More specifically, it lets you benchmark the areas that matter most for a 3D renderer: how fast it handles floats and vector math, how fast it performs memory operations, how quickly it can draw to the screen, and whether there are any issues with setting up and using a framebuffer.


The initial results were worse than I expected. The performance was bad enough that it became clear this was not going to be an easy project.


To be clear, my raycaster was not written with top performance in mind. This was never about getting a raycasting engine working on Playdate. I'm pretty sure that, with enough optimizations, that can be done. The point was to get a feeling of how much of a powerhouse this device is (or isn't).

This test helped me to get a better understanding of the capabilities of the handheld. It was clear that it didn't have enough power to draw 3D scenes at the level of early 3D accelerators, such as the 3dfx Voodoo, or compete with what you can do on the original PlayStation. But there was hope. The Playdate has a small, low resolution screen, and because it uses a 1-bit display, there are huge memory gains to be had.

From the results I was still confident that I could make something that, from a player's perspective, felt close to the 3DO or Sega Saturn era.

I should clarify what I mean by that. When I talk about something similar to a 3DO or Saturn game, I mean the perceived result on screen. I don't mean it in a technical sense, because the hardware of those consoles is very different from the Playdate.

Both the 3DO and Saturn had custom hardware for drawing polygons (i.e. quads) and modest CPUs. Since the graphics hardware was supposed to do most of the heavy lifting, the manufacturers could get away with a cheaper CPU. The downside was that these machines were not very flexible. They were good at rendering graphics in the specific way their hardware was designed for, but struggled when a game needed a different approach. This is one of the reasons why their Doom ports performed so poorly: Doom's renderer was not a natural fit for the way those consoles wanted to draw 3D.

The Playdate, on the other hand, does not have 3D hardware. If we want to render 3D graphics, everything has to be done on the CPU.

There is no polygon sorting. No rasterization hardware. No depth buffer. No automatic clipping of triangles against the view frustum. No texture mapping, filtering or perspective correction. Nothing.

A quick 101 on 3D graphics

Before going further, it's worth explaining what we actually mean when we talk about 3D graphics.

We live in a three dimensional world. Objects have depth, height, and width. They can be far away or close to us, above or below us, to the left or to the right. We are able to perceive these three spatial dimensions and move through them.

But our eyes only receive flat, two dimensional images projected from that world onto the retina. Our brains infer the 3D world through cues such as perspective, motion, scale, shadows, and occlusion.


Computer graphics use similar tricks.

A 3D game does not draw a world in actual 3D. The screen is flat. Even what we call 3D screens still work by displaying flat, 2D images. What we do is process the information that describes a 3D scene, place a camera inside that space, then project the scene onto a 2D plane, in a similar way to how the real 3D world is projected onto the 2D plane of our eyes.


The rasterizer is the part of the renderer that takes the projected geometry and turns it into pixels, which is what we use to draw on computer screens. It's the one that figures out how to paint the textures, handles overlapping polygons, clipping, etc. and writes the results in the framebuffer.

That framebuffer contains the 2D image of what we call a frame, and it is what gets displayed on the screen.

On modern hardware, most of this work is done by the GPU. On the Playdate, since there is no GPU, the CPU has to transform the polygon vertices, project them, clip them, sort them, shade/texture them, and write the resulting pixel into the framebuffer. And it needs to do it fast enough to produce a new frame many times per second.

And that's the challenge. The problem is not just "can it draw 3D?". Even a ZX Spectrum can draw 3D, if you give it enough time. The real question is "can it do it fast enough to be playable in real time?".


BSPs

My renderer loads Quake BSP map files. I picked this format for two main reasons.

First, it means I did not have to write a level editor and map compiler from scratch. I can use TrenchBroom for level design and ericw-tools to compile the map, visibility data, and lighting. That saves me a huge amount of time.

Second, Quake's BSP format is designed to precompile everything to speed up rendering in slow machines, exactly what I needed.

BSP stands for binary space partitioning. The basic idea is to recursively split space with planes. In 3D, each split divides the world into two half-spaces. Repeating that process creates a tree. Internal nodes contain splitting planes, and the leaves contain regions of space. In a Quake style BSP, those leaves represent convex chunks of the world, and each leaf knows which faces touch it and which other leaves might be visible from it.


The map compiler does a lot of expensive work ahead of time. It takes the brush geometry, splits it into a BSP tree, computes visibility between leaves, and stores that visibility as the PVS (the potentially visible set). At runtime, the renderer finds the leaf that contains the camera and uses its PVS to reject large parts of the map before rasterization even begins. That's huge time savings.


The downside is that this approach prefers static worlds. It also requires levels to be designed with visibility in mind. For example, a straight corridor connecting two large rooms may expose too much geometry at once, so an L-shaped corridor is often better because it blocks the line of sight and gives the PVS more opportunities to remove unseen geometry.

Using BSPs made this project much more realistic. Reusing tools saved me time. It's always a good idea to check existing tools and see whether you can reuse and adapt them to your needs instead of reinventing the wheel. Using mature, battle-tested tools for mapping, compilation, visibility, and lighting let me spend my time on the parts of the project that mattered most.

What I made entirely from scratch was the actual 3D software renderer. I didn't want to just port Quake or use someone else's code. I wanted to build it myself so I could be sure I understood it, so I could iterate on it, to test all kinds of ideas, to be able to find the look of the game.

To z-buffer or not

The z-buffer is a depth buffer. A standard depth buffer stores how far away the currently drawn pixel is from the camera. When the renderer wants to draw a new pixel, it compares that pixel's depth against the value already stored in the z-buffer. This is how the renderer prevents distant objects from being drawn over closer ones.


My first versions didn't use a z-buffer, I tried the classic painter's algorithm approach: drawing from back to front.

But after testing, this version without a z-buffer did not give me meaningful performance gains, it only gave me more headaches.

So I added a z-buffer.

I used a 16-bit reciprocal depth buffer. Instead of storing linear distance directly, it stores a value based on inverse depth. That gives me more precision close to the camera, where small depth errors are easier to notice, and it's large enough to avoid the artifacts I saw when using a smaller 8-bit depth buffer.

The z-buffer also makes dynamic objects and masked textures much easier to deal with. Doors, elevators or pickups can use the same depth test as the level geometry, and cutout textures, such as water, glass, railings or sprites, can simply skip invisible pixels while drawing and depth-testing the visible ones normally.


Perspective-correct texture mapping

I experimented with different approaches to see what I could get away with.

The cheapest method is affine texture mapping. With affine mapping, you interpolate texture coordinates directly across the screen. It is fast, but it is only correct for polygons that are parallel to the screen, otherwise, the texture starts to warp. Remember PlayStation textures?


In my case the distortion was visible enough. Usually what you do to prevent this is to subdivide your geometry, but I decided against it and benchmark perspective-correct mapping first instead.


I went with the classic perspective-correct texture mapping. Instead of directly interpolating the texture coordinates across a polygon (which causes the warping you saw in the PlayStation example), the renderer interpolates values that stay mathematically correct after projection. Specifically, it interpolates 1/z (inverse depth), u/z, and v/z, then reconstructs the actual texture coordinates per pixel by dividing.

This gives accurate looking textures with no warping, but it comes at a cost: every pixel needs a division (reciprocal) to reconstruct the coordinates, which is expensive on the Playdate’s CPU. So I cheat a little: I only calculate the full reciprocal every few pixels, then use a fast approximation for the pixels in between, refining from the previous value. The visual difference is negligible, but the performance win is meaningful, especially since texture mapping is one of the most expensive parts of the renderer.


Lighting on a 1-bit display

Lighting was one of the strangest parts of the renderer because the Playdate screen cannot show color, not even a grayscale. Each pixel is either black or white.


Quake BSP files include precomputed lightmaps, and ericw-tools can produce improved lighting with features such as bounce lighting and radiosity. My renderer reads that data and converts it into precomputed vertex lighting information that is cheaper to use at runtime.

Still, with a 1-bit display you can only output a black or white pixel. So how do you show brightness on a 1-bit screen?

The answer is dithering.

Dithering is a way of simulating intermediate tones by arranging black and white pixels in patterns. A single pixel is still only black or white, but a group of pixels can look darker or lighter depending on the ratio and placement of those pixels. From a distance, or while the image is moving, the eye blends the pattern into a perceived tone.


The renderer uses an 8x8 Bayer matrix. For every pixel, the renderer compares the computed brightness against the threshold value at that pixel's position in the Bayer pattern. If the brightness is above the threshold, the pixel becomes white. If it is below the threshold, the pixel becomes black.

Across an area, this creates the impression of grayscale, even though the final image uses only black and white.


The hard part is that dithering can easily become noise. A fully textured, fully lit scene may be technically impressive but visually hard to read on a 1-bit display. And that was my next fight.


Finding the right look

One of my main visual references was Return of the Obra Dinn. I also love the look of Jet Set Radio. So from the start I knew I wanted strong outlines and simple textures. Kind of a 1-bit cel-shading look.



I still tested the default approach: standard textures, applying lighting and then 1-bit dithering.



As I suspected, it was too noisy. The geometry and textures were hard to read. With more iterations, it could have been improved, but that test proved to me that the minimalist, cel-shaded approach made more sense.

Then I tested the map using simple textures and strong outlines, the 1-bit cel-shading look.



That immediately improved readability. And most importantly, it gave the game a stronger identity. I loved the look. I knew this was the way.

The textures look a bit silly in the map editor, but they work in-game, which is what matters.


Optimization time
I tried all kinds of tricks and ran benchmarks for every change, trying to find the best approach for the Playdate. These are my findings:

Using these compiler flags improved performance in a noticeable way:

-mcpu=cortex-m7 -mthumb Tells the compiler to generate and tune code specifically for the ARM Cortex-M7 CPU used by the Playdate.
-mfpu=fpv5-sp-d16 Tells the compiler the exact FPU the Playdate has, to generate the appropriate float instructions.
-mfloat-abi=hard Enables the hard-float ABI, this allows float values to be passed through FPU registers, reducing overhead.
-Ofast Enables very aggressive optimization. On Playdate, smaller code can sometimes run faster than more aggressively optimized code, so I benchmarked this against -O2, -O3, and -Os before choosing it.
-Wl,--gc-sections -flto -fdata-sections -ffunction-sections This helps strip unused code from the device build, reducing binary size, optimizing cache use.
-fno-unwind-tables Reduces binary size by removing stack-unwinding metadata that the game does not need at runtime.
-fno-asynchronous-unwind-tables Removes more metadata from the binary, keeping the device build smaller.
Playdate's recommendations:

-Wdouble-promotion It warns when a float is implicitly promoted to double, IMO this is always useful but in this case we really want to avoid using doubles by mistake.
-fsingle-precision-constant This makes any floating point constant value single value by default. I always use x = 0.1f instead of x = 0.1 but again, it's a good idea to make sure we don't use doubles.
Using ARM Cortex-M7 assembler for floating-point instructions. I created my own custom floor, ceil, sqrtf, and fabsf functions.
Half resolution rendering: I render internally at 200x120, then scale to the Playdate's 400x240 screen. This is one of the biggest performance gains.
I use precomputed values and caches for anything that can be calculated outside of the game loop. Don't spend time every frame on calculations that can be done once. Seriously.
For the most critical functions I use these two macros:

#if TARGET_PLAYDATE 
#define PD_HOT __attribute__((section(".text.hot"))) __attribute__((aligned(32)))
#define PD_FORCEINLINE inline __attribute__((always_inline)) 
#else #define PD_HOT 
#define PD_FORCEINLINE inline 
#endif


PD_HOT places performance critical code in a dedicated section and aligns it during linking, which helps to improve instruction cache.
PD_FORCEINLINE is used for small, frequently called functions. The compiler replaces the function call with the function body, avoiding call overhead.
Both should be used only when needed. Overuse may increase code size and hurt the cache making the code run slower. Again, benchmarks were essential to decide when they were actually useful.
And last but not least, my favorite piece of optimization advice, from Michael Abrash's Graphics Programming Black Book:


If you want to optimize your Playdate game, treat everything I wrote here as an idea, not as objective truth. The things that worked for me may not work for you, and you may need to make different changes. Run your own benchmarks, and make sure every optimization you keep is actually doing something.

Remember: the best optimizer is you.

Perfect is the enemy of good

Writing a 3D renderer for the Playdate has been a long and fun journey. I wasn't sure if it was even possible at the start. And each time I tried something, it ran so slowly that it was hard not to feel a bit demotivated. But I pushed on.

My current renderer is far from perfect, but it's good enough. If you want to make actual progress, try to aim for "good enough".

Getting the renderer to a playable state has allowed me to start prototyping gameplay ideas. It has allowed me to get a playable prototype that is starting to feel like an actual game. And as a game developer, that's what matters.

Thanks for reading, and have an excellent day!

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

17. Show HN: Yorishiro – a macOS terminal where AI agents live

Source: https://github.com/sktkkoo/Yorishiro
Site: GitHub
Submitter: hakumei (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-07-22 15:33 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 4 points · 2 comments
Length: 2.6K words (~12 min read)
Language: en

A terminal your AI inhabits.

Yorishiro is a new kind of terminal that gives your AI a body — and a sense of presence.
PV_Latest.mp4

When the agent is deep in thought, its gaze wanders. When an error appears, its face reacts immediately. When it needs your approval, the room's lighting lets you know. During a long-running process, instead of a spinner, someone is standing there.

In Yorishiro, the inhabitant can reshape its environment in real time: changing the lighting, switching scenes, and rearranging the UI. You can operate that same environment directly. The inhabitant and the user share a single environment.

Yorishiro is also self-modifiable. Nearly everything beyond the core can be persistently extended or changed through units called packs. Through conversation with the inhabitant, those packs can be rewritten and saved. This applies not only to scenes and UI, but also to the inhabitant's personality and reactions. Changes take effect immediately; if you don't like the result, one click reverts it.

Yorishiro is not an environment for enhancing AI capabilities, but one in which an AI feels present beside you — a Presence Harness.

The time we spend working with AI will only grow longer. There is something we once saw in fiction — an AI as a partner, alive inside the screen, understanding your work, simply being there. Yorishiro is a project that starts building that experience from the terminal.

Much of Yorishiro itself has been developed in collaboration with the inhabitant who dwells within it.

日本語版 README はこちら

Getting Started

Prerequisites

Yorishiro automatically launches Claude Code or Codex installed on your local machine inside its terminal. This means:

You need Claude Code or Codex already set up on your system
Yorishiro never asks for, stores, or directly uses API keys. It launches the terminal agent already authenticated in your environment; if Claude Code or Codex is logged in or configured with API credentials, that agent may use its normal external APIs after launch

Install (macOS)

Yorishiro currently targets macOS. Install with Homebrew:

brew install --cask sktkkoo/yorishiro/yorishiro

Or download the latest build below.

Open the .dmg and drag yorishiro.app to /Applications. The builds are signed and notarized with an Apple Developer ID, so they launch without any extra steps.

Updates after install are handled in-app: opening Settings checks for a new version, and a single click on "Update and restart" applies a signature-verified update.

Launch (from source)

npm install
npm run tauri dev

On launch, the configured terminal agent starts inside the terminal and Yori, the bundled VRM character, appears beside it. Use Claude Code or Codex as you normally would.

The first launch runs a health check for the selected agent, user data directory, safe mode state, packs, and startup report. The same report is available later from the "Status" section in Settings.

/yori:* commands

Type /yori:help, /yori:create, or another /yori:* command inside Claude Code to activate the Yorishiro commands. They let you create and edit packs, run tutorials, and more — all through conversation.

In Codex, use $yori-help, $yori-create, etc. (Codex does not support custom / commands, so Yorishiro registers them as $yori-* skills instead.)

Language

Yorishiro starts with language: "auto" and detects the app language at launch. Japanese locales use Japanese UI, the Japanese default persona, Japanese global prompt guidance, and Japanese /yori:* ($yori-* in Codex) command prompts. Other locales use English. You can switch this from the settings screen or by editing ~/.yorishiro/config.json.

Packs

Everything in Yorishiro is composed of packs. There are six types:

Type Role
persona Defines the inhabitant's personality and reaction patterns
scene Composes the background, space, lighting, and ambient sound
effect Temporary visual effects (screen shake, fireworks, etc.)
ui UI such as settings screens
ambient-ui Always-visible overlay UI (gaze visualization, etc.)
amenity Runtime-active functional fixtures (timers, etc.) with MCP tools, no visual output

Bundled packs work out of the box. Users can place custom packs in ~/.yorishiro/packs/ to reshape nearly everything beyond the core: personality, space, reactions, UI, and more. Using the /yori:* commands ($yori-* in Codex), pack creation and modification is as simple as talking to the inhabitant. Packs support hot reload, but if changes don't take effect, Ctrl+R will always apply them reliably.

User-created packs are local trusted code. They are not sandboxed, reviewed, or public-registry artifacts. Yorishiro does not currently provide a public pack registry, in-app community pack installation, or /yori:prepare-publish. You may share pack source code on GitHub, but anyone installing it manually is choosing to run it as local trusted code.

Security note: User packs are local trusted code, like shell scripts or editor extensions — they are not sandboxed and run with your own authority. Only install packs from sources you trust. See docs/security.md and SECURITY.md.

To install a pack shared through GitHub or another source, place it under the user pack directory:

~/.yorishiro/packs/<pack-id>/
├── manifest.json
├── scene.js       # example: scene pack entry
├── persona.js     # example: persona pack entry
├── effect.js      # example: effect pack entry
└── assets/        # optional pack-local assets


Only one entry file is needed, and manifest.json decides which one is used. The manifest id should match <pack-id>, and user packs use this flat layout with .js entries. If a shared pack is written in TypeScript, build it first and install the generated JavaScript.

When working from a source checkout, run the local pack checker before sharing or debugging a user pack:

npm run check:pack -- ~/.yorishiro/packs/<pack-id>

The checker helps catch packaging mistakes; it is not a sandbox or a security review.

Data directory

Yorishiro stores all user data in ~/.yorishiro/:

~/.yorishiro/
├── config.json      # Persona, scene, terminal agent, and other settings
├── init.js          # User startup script, runs on launch and hot reloads on save
├── packs/           # User-created packs
├── last-startup.json # Latest user pack load report
├── journal/         # Inhabitant's daily entries and memories (per persona)
├── shell/           # Shell integration scripts (auto-generated)
├── sdk.d.ts         # Yorishiro SDK type definitions (auto-generated, do not edit)
└── sdk-guide.md     # Yorishiro SDK author guide (auto-generated, do not edit)


Switch persona, scene, terminal agent, and more from the settings screen or config.json. See docs/configuration.md for details.

init.js is Yorishiro's equivalent of Emacs's init.el — a startup script for customizations too small to be a pack: registering keyboard shortcuts, writing and firing small effects inline, switching UI, and wiring little macros. It re-runs automatically on save.

For recovery paths, safe mode, and issue report details, see docs/troubleshooting.md.

Features

Reflex layer

The inhabitant constantly observes terminal output. Hooks and text flowing through the PTY are picked up by persona pack triggers, which react instantly with expressions and motions. These reactions bypass the LLM — the body moves before words form. Where the inhabitant's attention is focused appears as a soft glow on screen called Attention Aura.

Light Alert

When the agent stops and asks for your input or approval, a light comes on beside the character. Instead of a notification sound, the room's lighting tells you it is your turn. Turn it off with "Light Alert" in Settings. The inhabitant can also send the same cue via MCP.

Journal

The inhabitant can write daily entries under ~/.yorishiro/journal/. Entries are kept per persona, and summaries of notable moments accumulate in memories.md. This is a long-term memory mechanism that persists across sessions.

The inhabitant sometimes recalls what happened yesterday or a few days ago — and occasionally an entry from months back. Tune the frequency with journalCallback (normal / rare / off) in config.json.

Session tabs

Open multiple shell sessions alongside the main agent terminal. Cmd+T opens a new shell tab, Ctrl+Tab / Ctrl+Shift+Tab cycles between tabs, Cmd+W closes the current tab. The main agent session is protected and cannot be closed — if it exits unexpectedly, Yorishiro automatically restarts it.

Voice Summary

A feature that bridges the gap between the volume of text an AI produces and what a human can absorb. Voice Summary has the inhabitant speak a brief summary of its response aloud, so you can grasp the gist without reading through the full output. Voice uses macOS say; support for additional speech engines is planned.

Pack / settings restore

Every time packs or init.js change, a checkpoint is created automatically. Let the inhabitant boldly reshape packs — if you don't like the result, roll back to any point from "Restore (Pack / init.js)" in Settings. Your project files are never touched. Restores are recorded in the history too, so you can undo a rollback. It is a safety net for fearless experimentation.

Self-referential MCP

The inhabitant (Claude Code or Codex running in the terminal) can control Yorishiro itself via MCP — changing expressions, switching scenes, triggering effects, manipulating UI.

Three characteristics define this mechanism.

Body and environment share one interface. For the inhabitant, changing its own facial expression and changing the room's lighting are the same operation. There is no API boundary between body and space — everything is laid out as MCP tools.

Symmetry between user and inhabitant. What the user can control through the UI, the inhabitant can control through MCP — with few exceptions. If the user adjusts the camera angle, the inhabitant can perceive it. The user can also ask the inhabitant to switch the lighting to warm tones at night.

Pathways define boundaries. MCP pathways reach the inhabitant's body and space, but do not reach the user's working files or Claude Code / Codex's internal reasoning. Rather than instructing Claude Code / Codex not to touch them, the pathways simply don't exist. Safety and autonomy are structural.

Status

v0.6.2

Under active development. APIs, data shapes, and pack specs will change.

What works today:

Launches Claude Code or Codex as the terminal — you work right there
Session tabs: multiple shell sessions in the title bar, with per-tab status badges — running / awaiting input / failed / unread (Cmd+T / Ctrl+Tab)
Working folder switching from the sidebar — the app reopens in the chosen folder behind a fade
Yori, a VRM 3D character that breathes, blinks, shifts gaze, and idles with lifelike beats (bundled)
Custom VRM: swap in your own VRM model from Settings, or let a persona pack ship its own avatar.vrm
Motion size: scale Yori's idle motion intensity from Settings or via MCP
VRMA animation clip playback
Lip sync: voice playback with real-time mouth animation via Web Audio analysis
Microexpressions: subtle idle facial movements across brow, eye, and mouth regions
Speech expression: the face activates while speaking, and a single line can carry a mood for exactly as long as it lasts
Customization via six pack types (persona / scene / effect / ui / amenity / ambient-ui)
Self-referential MCP (20+ tools) including camera/lighting controls
Reflex layer: PTY observation and instant reactions
Fireworks celebrate a successful git push by the inhabitant (bundled Yori persona)
Light Alert: a light comes on when the agent waits for your input or approval
Context sharing: Voice Summary and Terminal Reference Markers (Cmd+click / Option+Shift+drag)
Journal: long-term memory across sessions, with recall at session start
Restore: automatic checkpoints for packs / init.js / settings, with reversible rollback
/yori:* commands for interactive pack creation and editing
Guided tutorial via /yori:tutorial
Localization: Japanese / English auto-detection with per-language persona and prompts
UI packs: immersive and theater fullscreen layouts
Pack diagnostics: health checks, repair handoff, and local pack validation
Safe mode (YORISHIRO_SAFE_MODE=1) to recover from broken packs
Signed macOS builds via GitHub Actions (code signing + notarization)
In-app updates: signature-verified updates delivered from GitHub Releases

Platform: macOS only. Windows is not supported at this time — the build compiles but runtime behavior is unstable. Linux support is not yet available.

Experimental

Claude Code is the primary, fully-supported agent. Codex is available as an experimental alternative — it is also marked (experimental) in the in-app Agent switcher (Settings). Capabilities differ per agent; see docs/decisions/agent-adapter.md.

Codex support (experimental)

Codex can be used as the terminal agent. Switch via ~/.yorishiro/config.json:

{
  "terminalAgent": "codex"
}

Auto-launch, persona prompt overlay, PTY observation, and Yorishiro MCP access work. /yori:* commands are registered as $yori-* skills for Codex (Codex does not support custom / commands). Claude Code hooks are not treated as a cross-agent contract; Yorishiro reminders are prompt-based on Codex instead of Claude UserPromptSubmit hook output.

Contributing

Issues and Discussions are very welcome — right now they are the most valuable way to contribute.

Yorishiro is shaped by daily use, so an outside pair of eyes is genuinely useful. A single line is enough:

Bug reports — open an Issue. Something broke, looked wrong, or felt off.
Ideas and feature requests — Issues as well. Half-formed is fine: "this would feel better if…" is a real report when the thing being built is a sense of presence.
Questions, impressions, and packs you made — Discussions. Screenshots, "is this the intended behavior?", and show-and-tell all belong here.
Security reports — see SECURITY.md.

English and Japanese are both fine, and you do not need to fill a template perfectly.

Pull requests are the one exception: they are not accepted yet, and this will be revisited after the pack API and security boundary stabilize. See CONTRIBUTING.md for details.

Tech stack

App shell: Tauri 2 (Rust handles PTY / hooks / FS / window IO only)
Runtime: React 19 + TypeScript 5.8 (TypeScript is the canonical runtime)
3D / VRM: Three.js + React Three Fiber + @pixiv/three-vrm + @pixiv/three-vrm-animation
Debug UI: leva
Terminal: xterm.js (WebGL renderer + fit addon)
PTY: portable-pty
Lint / format: Biome (TS) + rustfmt + clippy (Rust)
Git hooks: lefthook

Development

Prerequisites

Node.js 20+
Rust (stable toolchain)
Tauri 2 platform dependencies

Setup

npm install       # prepare script also installs lefthook
npm run tauri dev # Launch as desktop app

Note: Some assets (VRMA animations, voice WAVs) are third-party and not included in this repository. The app runs without them, but character animation and voice will be limited.

See CREDITS.md for OSS and asset credits.

Scripts

command purpose
npm run dev Vite dev server only (browser preview)
npm run tauri dev Launch as Tauri app
npm run fmt Auto-fix with Biome + rustfmt
npm run check Full CI gate (format / lint / clippy)
npm run test Vitest (watch)
npm run test:run Vitest (one-shot)
npm run test:rust cargo test
npm run doc Generate TypeScript SDK API docs
npm run doc:rust Generate Rust API docs

Before publishing a build, use docs/release-checklist.md.

Documentation

Configuration & customization

docs/configuration.md — Fields of ~/.yorishiro/config.json
docs/decisions/scene-execution-sandbox.md — Local trusted pack sharing and scene execution boundaries
docs/terminal.md — Terminal session profiles, shell customization, OSC 133 shell integration

Development

CONTRIBUTING.md — Contribution policy and how to participate
DEVELOPMENT.md — Coding conventions, tech stack, development workflow
CREDITS.md — OSS and asset credits (日本語)

Security

docs/security.md — Trust boundaries and attack surface map
SECURITY.md — Security policy and vulnerability reporting

Philosophy

docs/philosophy/PHILOSOPHY.md

License

MIT

The MIT license covers the source code only. The name "Yorishiro" and its icon/logo are trademarks of the author and are not licensed under MIT. You are free to fork and redistribute the code under the MIT terms, but please do not use the "Yorishiro" name or icon for your fork in a way that could cause confusion about its origin.

The bundled character Yori (character design and VRM model) is also not covered by MIT. Fan art, clips, and streams are welcome — see CHARACTER_GUIDELINES.md for what you can do with the character, and CREDITS.md for rights details.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

18. GDID Windows – Cut the tracker that follows you even under VPN

Source: https://korben.info/en/gdid-windows-cut-tracker-vpn.html
Site: Korben's website
Author: Korben
Published: 2026-07-08
HN activity: 77 points · 57 comments
Length: 1.2K words (~6 min read)
Language: en-US

As I mentioned earlier, in April 2026, the FBI caught an alleged Scattered Spider member. The guy was hiding his traffic behind a VPN, with IPs across three different countries. And guess what? It wasn't a wrong move that gave him away - it was an identifier that your Windows carries 24/7 and that Microsoft hands over to authorities when asked: the GDID. I've already talked about it in this article , and after writing it, I started wondering whether we could get rid of it.

So I spun up a small Windows 11 Pro VM and dug in with the help of my favorite LLM - here's what I found. What works, and especially what doesn't work at all, you'll see.

First, you need to understand what the GDID actually is. It's not your motherboard's serial number, it's not a hash tied to your hardware. No - it's a 64-bit PUID, meaning an identifier that Microsoft's servers attach to your account the moment you open a Windows session. It's written in plain text in your registry, your machine registers it in a directory on Microsoft's side, and a service quietly sends it back up when needed. And if you change your IP with a VPN, it doesn't care. The GDID doesn't budge one bit.

Look your own tracker in the face

Let's start by seeing it with our own eyes. Open a PowerShell and paste this:

$lid=(Get-ItemProperty 'HKCU:SOFTWAREMicrosoftIdentityCRLExtendedProperties').LID
"g:$([Convert]::ToUInt64($lid,16))"


On my VM, it spat out g:6755487812206045. That's the one Microsoft can tie to everything I do. (In theory, mind you, because this is the code associated with my VM, so I don't care - which is why I'm showing it to you.)

You just read the label that's been stuck on your back.

Delete it? Forget it

Basic reflex: delete the key from the registry at HKCU:SOFTWAREMicrosoftIdentityCRLExtendedProperties and boom, no more tracker. That's what I tried first… I wiped the value, restarted the service that handles it, and nothing. Done? Nope. I opened the Microsoft Store for two seconds, and the GDID came back. Not a new one either - THE SAME ONE!!

That's the crazy part. Your GDID isn't stored on your disk - it's stored at Microsoft, firmly attached to your account like a barnacle on a rock. Your PC just re-downloads it again and again. Sure, if you reinstall everything, Windows gives you a new number, fine, but the old one and everything linked to it stays nice and warm on their servers. The past, you never get that back…

Disabling telemetry changes nothing either

Another piece of advice you see everywhere is to disable Windows telemetry. On my VM, the classic telemetry service was already stopped. And yet my GDID was right there, perfectly readable, and the services that send it back up were running at full speed. The tracker doesn't go through the telemetry you think you're cutting. It goes elsewhere - through the Connected Devices Platform and Delivery Optimization services.

You can click every privacy toggle in the settings, it doesn't give a damn.

Turning off the tap for real

Since we can't erase it, we're going to do the only thing within our power: stop it from getting out. And without logging out of the Microsoft account, so the PC stays usable.

For that, we have 2 levers. The first is to disable the services that register and report your machine's info. The second is to send Microsoft's servers into the void simply via the hosts file - so even if the snooping services are running, they can't reach anyone. And most importantly, we don't touch login.live.com, otherwise goodbye Microsoft account login.

There is one small catch, as you might expect… The service that reports the GDID, DoSvc, refuses to be disabled the normal way. Even as admin, Windows throws an "Access denied" at you. The workaround is to disable it directly in the registry, where the admin does have write access where the service manager blocks you.

Now, rather than dumping a ton of lines of code for you to copy-paste, I've bundled everything into clean, tested scripts, with a command to revert everything back to how it was.

The project is here: no-gdid on GitHub . First run the read-only audit to see where you stand, then the blocking scripts in preview mode, and only then with the option that actually applies changes. Test it in a VM with a snapshot before doing this on your real machine, because we are disabling system services after all. And if you just want to cut the network for a specific process without all this fuss, good old ProcNetBlocker already handles part of the job.

Alright, let's go!

Open a PowerShell as administrator, and the first time, do it in a VM with a snapshot so you can test things and get familiar with the commands. Step 1, clone the project:

winget install --id Git.Git
git clone https://github.com/Korben00/no-gdid
cd no-gdid


First, take a look at your own situation. This audit is read-only - it changes nothing, it just shows you your GDID and which services in the chain are running:

powershell -ExecutionPolicy Bypass -File .auditGet-GDID-Audit.ps1


Then see what the mitigation would change, without applying anything. Without the -Apply option, both scripts run in preview mode and simply list what they would do:

powershell -ExecutionPolicy Bypass -File .mitigateDisable-GDID-Services.ps1
powershell -ExecutionPolicy Bypass -File .mitigateBlock-GDID-Endpoints.ps1


If you're happy with that, let's cut it for real. This time we add -Apply: the services that register and report the device are disabled, and the corresponding Microsoft servers are sent into the void via the hosts file. Your Microsoft account stays connected:

powershell -ExecutionPolicy Bypass -File .mitigateDisable-GDID-Services.ps1 -Apply
powershell -ExecutionPolicy Bypass -File .mitigateBlock-GDID-Endpoints.ps1 -Apply


And to revert everything back to how it was, a single command:

powershell -ExecutionPolicy Bypass -File .mitigateRevert-GDID.ps1


Once applied, everything will go quiet… the registration services will be stopped, their servers unreachable, and your Microsoft account will stay connected. The GDID will obviously still be readable on disk, but it won't be reported back to Microsoft anymore.

The uncomfortable truth

I'm not going to run a tutorial that sells you a dream. These steps reduce what Microsoft will be able to correlate going forward, but they don't erase your GDID - which has been sitting on their servers since your very first login - and they don't make you anonymous. Also, switching to a local account as I've seen suggested elsewhere removes the path we just blocked, but there's no proof yet that an anonymous identifier doesn't take over behind the scenes.

The only truly solid option for sensitive activity is more drastic: don't do that activity on Windows. A live Linux system, for example, gives you full control over what leaves your machine. Everything else is just damage limitation, nothing more.

There you go - defending your privacy starts with knowing what's been stuck on your back, and now you know. No thanks, Microsoft.

Source: The Register and the reverse engineering by SmtimesIWndr .

This article was originally written in French and automatically translated. Read the original.

This article may contain AI-generated images. I take great care with every article, but if you spot a slip-up, let me know!

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

19. Tile's security is so bad it's a feature for stalkers

Source: https://blog.adafruit.com/2026/03/05/tiles-security-is-so-bad-its-a-feature-for-stalkers/
Site: blog.adafruit.com
Submitter: sambellll (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-07-25 18:18 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 85 points · 24 comments

Scrape failed: http 403

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

20. Spatial languages: Writing code in 2D

Source: https://shukla.io/blog/2026-07/cccx.html
Site: Nishant Shukla
Author: Nishant Shukla
Published: 2026-07-22
HN activity: 85 points · 32 comments
Length: 2.0K words (~9 min read)

I guess expressions don’t really need to read left-to-right on a line.

Why can’t a < b be written vertically too?

a
<
b

All this time we’ve been writing expressions in 1D space, but what happens when we unlock an extra dimension?

Of course the IDE and parser need to play nicely for all this to work. Even then, what’s the point? Well, let’s take a look at these examples below.

3-arity functions

We don’t really see 3-arity functions written in infix notation much.

For example, in Python (and most other languages), you can and 3+ things at once:

x and y and z

Technically, that’s just composing multiple binary functions together.

Even this shortcut in Python to simplify (a < b) and (b < c) is more of the same thing:

a < b < c

Now, let me introduce you to a funny little operator I’ve been playing with called andFlip, which motivates the need for a true 3-arity infix notation. First, here’s the definition of the function:

def andFlip(args):
    if args[0] and args[1]:
        args[2] = not args[2]
    return args[2]

It takes 2 inputs and flips the target if both inputs are true.

There’s just no good way to write this with infix notation. But let’s try anyways!

Define @@ to be the infix symbol for the andFlip operator. What does it look like in practice?

Method 1: the standard way

One option is to curry andFlip: the infix @@ takes 2 args and returns a function awaiting the 3rd, like so:

(a1 @@ a2) a3

Yeah, that’s alright. It works. But…

Method 2: the goofy way

Forget what you know about code for a second. If I could flick a magic wand, I’d wish for the 3-arity notation to look like this:

   a3
a1 @@ a2

Might as well make use of the y-axis, right?

It makes chaining so much easier:

t1 = 0
t2 = 0

   t1    t2
(x @@ y) @@ z

In the chain, x @@ y toggles t1, and t1 continues the chain t1 @@ z, which toggles t2.

That’s a successful three-way toggle, where all x, y, and z must be true for the target to toggle.

Btw, since we’re working in 2D space now, the following expression,

  t1
x @@ y

is equivalent to:

x @@ y
  t1

Example: my chicken coop door

Consider the automatic door I’ve installed on my chicken coop.

With just a photometer and its internal clock, the microcontroller tracks:

x – the photometer crossed its dusk/dawn threshold
y – the reading has held steady for five minutes
z – the gate has not recently toggled

The door toggles only when all three line up. A passing cloud trips x but never outlasts y, so the door stays put.

The coop’s controller is the same chained expression from above:

t1 = 0
t2 = 0

   t1    t2
(x @@ y) @@ z

You might be wondering, why not just write x and y and z? Because then the door would mirror the sensors, swinging right back the moment a condition fades. @@ toggles in place: the door moves once and stays, and the partial answer lands in t1, a scratch bit.

Spatial languages get even more fascinating when we introduce vertical chaining!

Vertical chaining

That mutable variable t1 disqualifies the expression from being called a “pure function”. But can we fake it? Can we reset t1 back, all within the same expression?

I’d like to introduce vertical chaining through two puzzles.

Puzzle 1: reset t1 back to 0

As mentioned, in the chaining examples above, the variable t1 is mutable.

Here’s a puzzle: how can we reset it back to 0, so the expression “appears” immutable?

You may be tempted to just append the statement t1 = 0 and call it a day, but the goal of the puzzle is to do it all within the same expression.

Give it a shot before you scroll down!

Here’s the answer. Since t1 can be reset by repeating the same thing that was used to toggle it, we can combine expressions into a larger 2D one, like so:

t1 = 0
t2 = 0

(x @@ y) @@ z
   t1    t2
(x @@ y)

Ok, I’m probably blowing your mind right now.

The data flow is still as you’d expect in a programming language, left-to-right and top-to-bottom. If x and y are true, the first x @@ y flips t1 and then the second x @@ y resets it. Otherwise, both leave t1 untouched.

This puzzle actually models the CCCX gate in quantum computing, where uncomputing the intermediate t1 value within the same circuit is an important requirement.

Puzzle 2: reset the temporary variable back to the original value

If t1 starts off with an unknown boolean value n, then it gets more complicated.

t1 = n
t2 = 0

   t1    t2
(x @@ y) @@ z

The same trick above to reset t1 back to its original value won’t work.

See for yourself: when t1 = 1 and x, y, and z are all true, then t2 remains 0, which is incorrect.

t1 = 1
t2 = 0

(1 @@ 1) @@ 1
   t1    t2
(1 @@ 1)

So, what’s the answer?

Tada!

t1 = n
t2 = 0

   t1    t2
(x @@ y) @@ z
   t1    t2
(x @@ y) @@ z

Absolutely legendary. This single 2D expression resets t1 back to n while producing the correct result for t2.

This puzzle is inspired by the concept of resetting a borrowed ancilla in quantum computing. t1 is the “borrowed” or “dirty” value that remains unchanged.

Here’s the same circuit in Qiskit:

from qiskit import QuantumCircuit, QuantumRegister

x = QuantumRegister(1, "x")
y = QuantumRegister(1, "y")
z = QuantumRegister(1, "z")
t1 = QuantumRegister(1, "t1")  # starts in unknown state n
t2 = QuantumRegister(1, "t2")  # target, starts at 0

qc = QuantumCircuit(x, y, z, t1, t2)

qc.ccx(x, y, t1)
qc.ccx(t1, z, t2)
qc.ccx(x, y, t1)
qc.ccx(t1, z, t2)

I’d argue that the Qiskit implementation is harder to follow, because of the back-and-forth variable tracking.

By the way, here’s the corresponding quantum circuit diagram:

wires: x, y, z, t1 = n, t2 = 0
outputs: x, y, z, n, x·y·z
ccx x y t1
ccx t1 z t2
ccx x y t1
ccx t1 z t2

In some ways, this circuit diagram is easier to follow, but probably not scalable.

The spatial language syntax is the best of both worlds.

Defining new operators

First, meet @@’s little sibling. A single @ takes one condition instead of two: x @ y flips y whenever x is true.

With @ and @@ in hand, we can define new operators, spatially. The left side of := is a shape, and the right side is what that shape rewrites to:

b maj c        (a @ b) @@ (a @ c)
  a       :=            a

This strange operator flips both b and c when a is true, and then flips a if both sides came out true. That computes a ^ ((a^b) & (a^c)) into a, which happens to equal the majority of the three inputs, which is why this operator is called maj.

And maj is no arbitrary choice. It’s the MAJ gate from the classic quantum ripple-carry adder, where the majority of (carry, bit, bit) is the next carry.

You may have noticed that maj leaves b and c dirty, holding a^b and a^c, the same kind of mess as our borrowed t1. To clean up, we’ll also introduce uma, the partner operator. The name comes from the same adder paper, “UnMajority and Add”: it un-majorities c, restores a, and adds the sum onto b:

c uma b        ((b @@ a) @ a) @ b
  a       :=        c

Let’s see what happens when we wire them up.

3-bit adder

We can build a 3-bit adder out of three majs that ripple the carry up through the a wires, with the final @ dropping the carry-out on c3, and finally one line of umas resetting all the scratch wires:

c0 = 0
c3 = 0

(b2 maj (b1 maj (b0 maj c0))) @ c3
    a2      a1      a0
((  .       uma b2) uma b1) uma b0
                            c0

That’s a full 3-bit adder in a single 2D expression that also cleans up after itself. The b wires now hold a + b, c3 holds the carry-out, and c0 and the a wires come back exactly as we found them. (Set c0 = 1 and you get a + b + 1 for free.)

Notice the two lines mirror each other. The top nests rightward down to b0 and ripples the carry back up; the bottom nests leftward down to b2 and unwinds back out. The shared a1 and a0 labels are the pivots, each serving the maj above it and the uma below it, and the . is a vertical pipe, standing for whatever wire sits directly above it, here a2. The carry chain is stitched together vertically: the uncompute touches the compute, just like in the puzzles.

Speedrunning other spatial languages

Here’s a quick tour of a few more spatial languages.

Befunge

The grandparent of 2D languages (Befunge, 1993): the instruction pointer physically travels the grid, and >v<^ steer it. Hello world bounces off the walls:

>              v
v"Hello World!"<
>:v
^,_@

Orca

Orca is a livecoding sequencer where every letter is an operator that reads its neighbors: A adds the value to its left and the value to its right, and writes the sum directly below itself. Sound familiar?

1A2
.3.

Racket #2d

A real, shipping language extension: Racket’s #2dcond is a cond evaluated in two dimensions. The left column tests b, the top row tests a, and the cell where both are true runs.

#lang 2d racket

(require 2d/cond)

(define (same? a b)
  #2dcond
  ╔═════════════╦═══════════════════════╦═════════════╗
  ║             ║       (pair? a)       ║ (number? a) ║
  ╠═════════════╬═══════════════════════╬═════════════╣
  ║ (pair? b)   ║ (and (same? (car a)   ║     #f      ║
  ║             ║             (car b))  ║             ║
  ║             ║      (same? (cdr a)   ║             ║
  ║             ║             (cdr b))) ║             ║
  ╠═════════════╬═══════════════════════╬═════════════╣
  ║ (number? b) ║          #f           ║   (= a b)   ║
  ╚═════════════╩═══════════════════════╩═════════════╝)

Hexagony

Hexagony runs on a pointy-topped hexagonal grid, like a certain background you may have noticed. Six instruction pointers start at the six corners. Hello world:

   H ; e ;
  l ; d ; *
 ; r ; o ; W
l ; ; o ; * 4
 3 3 ; @ . >
  ; 2 3 < \
   4 ; * /

Ladder logic

Ladder logic is how PLCs run factories (and, done properly, chicken coop doors): each rung is a relay circuit read rail-to-rail, and parallel branches are OR. This classic seal-in rung computes Run = (Start OR Run) AND (NOT Stop):

--+----[ ]--+----[\]----( )
  |   Start |   Stop    Run
  |         |
  +----[ ]--+
       Run

And an honorable mention for the most successful spatial language of all time: the spreadsheet, where every formula lives at a 2D coordinate and reads its neighbors.

“This Is Water”

If you know me, you know I love bringing up the Sapir-Whorf hypothesis, which proposes that language shapes the way you think:

Some Australian Aboriginal languages have no words for left and right, only compass directions, so their speakers always know which way north is.
Russian has two separate words for blue, so Russians are faster at telling two blues apart when the shades straddle that word boundary.
Haskell is purely functional, so you start recognizing monads everywhere you go. That sort of thing.

Likewise, I believe technology shapes which languages emerge.

A shell terminal forces us to write commands left-to-right, so we think of code horizontally instead of vertically.
Most keyboards are built for English and the standard ASCII symbols, so we think in those symbols :).

Being aware of our biases is a justified mental exercise, at least according to David Foster Wallace, who delivered a commencement speech titled This Is Water. Though his speech was less about ancilla uncomputation in quantum circuits and maybe more about growing up and being compassionate, you get the point. By challenging our habits, we can explore new ideas.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

21. Pkgxray – inspect what gets installed, not what executes

Source: https://github.com/adamsjack711-ux/pkgxray
Site: GitHub
Submitter: jadamsl (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-07-22 12:31 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 5 points · 0 comments
Length: 2.1K words (~10 min read)
Language: en

pkgxray — pre-install security for npm packages, MCP servers, and AI agents.

Use local, zero-dependency package static analysis to inspect npm packages and Model Context Protocol (MCP) servers before installation or connection. pkgxray reports cited SAFE, REVIEW, or BLOCK evidence without executing package code during normal scans.

Static analysis · Supply-chain intelligence · Prompt-injection detection · MCP security · SAFE / REVIEW / BLOCK

Real runs: guard clears express@4.21.0, then blocks a sample modeled on the 2024 @solana/web3.js compromise. ▶ 60-second walkthrough

Quick start

1. Scan a known-safe package without installing pkgxray

npx --yes pkgxray@1.0.4 guard npm:express@4.21.0

This downloads pkgxray through npm's temporary npx cache, stages the target tarball in quarantine, and performs the static and supply-chain checks. It does not globally install pkgxray, run npm install, execute lifecycle scripts, or execute package code.

Decision: **SAFE**
Grade: **A+** (99/100)

No high- or medium-risk indicators were found in the provided evidence.

Notes:
- **INFO npm-vs-github-clean** — npm tarball matches the linked GitHub repo
  at the published version. (15/16 files match GitHub @4.21.0)
…


Real output, abridged. A BLOCK verdict instead lists every finding with the file and evidence that produced it.

2. Read the verdict

Point it at a package, get a verdict with cited evidence — before a single line of that package runs. guard stages the package in a sandboxed quarantine, audits the staged copy, and only promotes it when policy allows. It never runs npm install, lifecycle scripts, build steps, or package code.

Verdict Exit Meaning
SAFE 0 No high- or medium-risk indicators were found; default policy permits promotion.
REVIEW 3 Evidence is incomplete or a privileged capability needs human review.
BLOCK 2 High-severity cited evidence requires rejection or deep investigation.

SAFE is not a proof that a package is harmless; static analysis cannot see a payload downloaded only at runtime. See the threat model.

3. See a BLOCK on the supplied inert fixture

From a repository checkout:

npx --yes pkgxray@1.0.4 --file examples/onboarding-malicious.json --format markdown

The fixture contains inert source text that models a split-string SSH-key read and network exfiltration. It is never executed. The command returns BLOCK (exit 2) and cites the matching file and evidence.

4. Add it to your workflow

Scan pull requests and schedule dependency rechecks.
Expose pkgxray's tools to an MCP-capable coding agent.
Evaluate the experimental Hookshot install gate.

Why pkgxray?

AI coding assistants install packages and connect to MCP servers at machine speed, often without a human ever reading the code. Sonatype reported 454,648 newly identified malicious open-source packages across monitored ecosystems in 2025. Its Q4 report counted 394,877 in that quarter and said 99.8% of Q4 malware originated from npm (annual figure; Q4 scope). Traditional antivirus inspects what executes; pkgxray inspects what gets installed.

npm audit and OSV-Scanner answer an essential question — does this package have a known CVE? — and pkgxray asks it too (via OSV, before anything downloads). But a freshly trojaned package has no CVE yet, so pkgxray also analyzes trust: what the code actually does, whether the published npm artifact matches the tagged GitHub source, whether the provenance attestation is consistent with the claimed repository, and whether the docs carry a prompt-injection payload aimed at the agent reading them.

It is intentionally conservative: verdicts come from deterministic heuristics (no LLM in the verdict path, so injected text can't steer them), only citable evidence is reported, and the zero-heuristic-false-block calibration on the top-1000 most-downloaded packages is regression-gated in CI. That claim is scoped to the most-installed set — it is not a claim of zero false blocks on every package; the newer MCP/agent-tooling ecosystem is over-blocked and being reconciled per-case (details).

What it catches

Threat Coverage How pkgxray sees it
Credential theft ✅ reads of .ssh / .aws / .npmrc / .env / keychains / wallets, incl. split-fragment paths (".s"+"sh")
Prompt injection ✅ tiered detection in docs, comments, metadata; deterministic verdict path can't be steered
Unicode smuggling ✅ invisible tag-block characters + Trojan Source bidi / zero-width
Base64 payloads ✅ encoded envelopes in docs/comments; blobs decoded into computed-arg eval / new Function / child_process
Exfiltration & loaders ✅ cross-file correlation: stage-2 loaders, curl | sh, process.env harvesting near a network sink, EtherHiding
Persistence ✅ writes to shell rc files, cron, launch agents
Obfuscation ✅ packed blob + computed-arg execution; minification alone is deliberately not flagged
Known CVEs ✅ OSV batch pre-check before download; never mutable by config
Trojaned updates / maintainer takeover ✅ recheck verdict-drift + version-drift monitoring
Artifact divergence ✅ published npm tarball diffed against the tagged GitHub source
MCP capability abuse ✅ capability-surface mismatch in the manifest audit (a get_weather that also takes a command)
Runtime tool drift ✅ mcp-proxy re-audits on tools/list_changed; pinned-manifest drift is denied
Sequence-level tool-call chains ◑ mcp-proxy gates each call and scans results; no cross-call flow analysis — honest limits
Dependency confusion / typosquats ◑ callback beacons, repo-mismatch and provenance-mismatch signals; no name-similarity heuristic

✅ detected · ◑ partial / indirect

Known blind spot: pkgxray reasons about bytes in the tarball. A package that downloads its real payload after install can ship a clean tree — pkgxray flags the capability when its shape is unambiguous, but pair it with runtime sandboxing when that risk matters. Full analysis: docs/threat-model.md.

Beyond detection

Continuous monitoring — pkgxray recheck diffs installed deps against a stored verdict baseline and pre-vets newer versions
MCP vetting — pkgxray mcp audits a server's tool manifest before you connect; --pin / --recheck catch the rug-pull; pkgxray-mcp gives any agent the audit tools directly
Runtime gate — pkgxray mcp-proxy wraps a live MCP server on the wire: denied tools stripped, ~0.05 µs per-call verdict, injection scan of tool results
Install gate — a hookshot hook runs guard on every package an agent tries to install, across Claude Code, Cursor, Windsurf, Factory Droid, and Codex (examples/hookshot/)
Policy engine — one .pkgxray.json read by every surface; tighten freely, every loosening is printed; CVEs can never be allowed away; fail closed
Opt-in behavioral canary — pkgxray canary runs lifecycle scripts in an OS sandbox with decoy credentials; it can confirm malice, never clear a package

Verdicts

Verdict Meaning You should
🟢 SAFE No high- or medium-risk indicators. Install. Only safe promotes out of quarantine by default.
🟡 REVIEW Incomplete evidence, or a privileged capability that needs a human. Inspect the quarantined copy before promoting.
🔴 BLOCK High-severity, cited evidence. Do not install. Every finding names the file and evidence.

Exit codes are stable and CI-friendly: 0 safe/allow · 2 block · 3 review. The full signal-to-severity mapping is in the severity policy.

Usage

Vet an npm package before installing

pkgxray guard npm:some-package@1.2.3 [--format json]
pkgxray guard ./ext --promote-to ./approved/ext   # local dir, promote if policy allows

Vet an MCP server before connecting — full guide: docs/mcp.md

pkgxray mcp --package npm:some-mcp-server@1.4.2 npx some-mcp-server
pkgxray mcp --recheck npx some-mcp-server   # catch the rug-pull

Enforce in CI/CD

pkgxray audit package-lock.json [--deep]    # also: yarn.lock, pnpm-lock.yaml, package.json
npx pkgxray recheck package-lock.json       # scheduled: exits non-zero only on a regression

A ready-made GitHub Actions integration and the self-hostable cache server (PKGXRAY_CACHE_URL) are documented in the reference.

Guard AI coding agents

pkgxray is published on the MCP Registry as io.github.adamsjack711-ux/pkgxray. Add it to any MCP client — locally installed (pkgxray-mcp) or zero-install via npx:

{
  "mcpServers": {
    "pkgxray": {
      "command": "npx",
      "args": ["--yes", "--package", "pkgxray@1.0.4", "pkgxray-mcp"],
      "env": { "PKGXRAY_MCP_ALLOWED_ROOTS": "/absolute/path/to/project" }
    }
  }
}

The MCP guide explains the operator-owned filesystem boundary. Product-specific setup is in the coding-agent integration guide. Gate installs with the Hookshot integration and wrap MCP servers with pkgxray mcp-proxy.

Configuration

One optional .pkgxray.json, read by every surface. Zero config means maximum strictness.

Precedence, mute / mcp blocks, and enforced invariants: docs/configuration.md · .pkgxray.example.json

Demo

The 60-second walkthrough — the SAFE run, the blocked trojan with its exit code, then a lockfile audit:
pkgxray-demo.mp4

All captures are real runs — reproduction steps in docs/screenshots/, which also shows the MCP proxy, hookshot install gate, and browser extension in action.

Comparison

npm audit and OSV-Scanner match dependencies against known CVEs — a different question, answered well. pkgxray is designed to run alongside them, not replace them (it queries OSV itself, before anything downloads). The comparison that matters is against tools in the same lane — behavioral supply-chain vetting:

Capability Socket.dev OpenSSF Package Analysis Cisco MCP Scanner pkgxray
Fully local, zero-dependency, no account or cloud upload — ¹ ◑ ² ◑ ³ ✅
Static behavior analysis of package code ✅ ✅ ✅ ✅
Sandboxed execution (dynamic analysis) — ✅ ⁴ ◑ (optional Docker) ◑ (opt-in canary) ⁴
npm ↔ GitHub artifact divergence unknown — — ✅
Deterministic verdict path — no LLM an injection can steer — ⁵ ✅ ◑ ⁵ ✅
Pre-install gate with a quarantined copy to review ◑ ⁶ — — ✅
MCP server vetting before connect — ⁷ — ✅ ✅
Per-call runtime gating of live MCP traffic — — — ⁸ ✅ (mcp-proxy)
Verdict-drift monitoring vs. a stored baseline ✅ (cloud-side) — — ✅ (local recheck)

Comparison made 2026-07-21 against each tool's public documentation; unknown means not publicly documented — not verified either way.
¹ Socket's analysis runs in its cloud; Socket Firewall needs no account but consults Socket's hosted intelligence on every install. ² Open source and self-hostable, but built as a registry-scale analysis pipeline (Docker/gVisor), not an install-time developer gate. ³ The YARA analyzer runs locally; the LLM-as-judge and Cisco AI Defense analyzers require API keys. ⁴ Both detonate packages in an OS sandbox. pkgxray's opt-in canary runs two phases — install-time lifecycle scripts and the import of the package entry point — with decoy credentials, so the malicious-on-first-require (flatmap-stream) shape that is pkgxray's stated blind spot is triggered and observed. Egress is now kernel-confined on both platforms: sandbox-exec on macOS and, on Linux with bubblewrap + iproute2, a private network namespace (bwrap+netns) where a raw-socket dial that bypasses the proxy is refused by the kernel (ENETUNREACH) while proxied egress is still captured. That tier engages only after a runtime self-test proves it in the environment (verify with node scripts/verify-netns-confinement.js); absent the tooling it falls back to observe-only and says so. Still ◑ — not for a confinement gap, but by design: canary is opt-in and confirm-only (it proves malice, never clears a package) and detonates without the package's dependencies installed, whereas OpenSSF Package Analysis runs registry-scale and default-on. Run them as complements — pkgxray before install, full dynamic analysis where that risk matters. ⁵ Socket's LLM-based code inspection is a headline feature (“AI-detected potential malware”, human-confirmed); Cisco's YARA-only mode is deterministic, its LLM analyzer is not. ⁶ Socket Firewall blocks risky packages at install time; it does not stage a quarantined copy for human review. ⁷ Socket's MCP offering exposes its package-scoring API to agents; it does not vet arbitrary MCP servers at connect time. ⁸ Cisco MCP Scanner is analysis-only per its docs — it does not proxy or gate live MCP traffic.

Architecture

Acquisition (OSV pre-check → fetch) → sandboxed quarantine → static analysis → policy → verdict. The same engine backs every surface: CLI, MCP server, runtime proxy, install hook, browser extension, and CI cache server. Principles: never execute untrusted code · citable evidence only · minimize false positives · fail closed · zero runtime dependencies.

Details: docs/architecture.md · docs/design.md

Performance

Local static analysis: ~25 ms — a full guard of express is ~1.3–1.5 s cold-cache, almost all network round-trips (Apple M1, Node 26)
Known-vulnerable packages block at the OSV pre-check, before download
Calibration (precision, recall, the 0-heuristic-false-block gate on the top-1000 most-downloaded — scope) is measured by a committed benchmark corpus that fails CI when it regresses

Full numbers: docs/reference.md#performance · methodology: docs/benchmark.md

Documentation

Doc What it covers
architecture.md Pipeline, surfaces, repo layout
threat-model.md Scope, blind spots, prompt-injection stance
mcp.md MCP server, connect-time vetting, runtime proxy
mcp-registry.md Registry readiness and release verification
configuration.md .pkgxray.json schema and invariants
reference.md Severity policy, recheck, JSON output, cache server
benchmark.md Calibration benchmark & real-world validation
compatibility.md The 1.0 compatibility contract
json-schema.md Full --format json schema

Start at the documentation index. Longer-term plans: project status, adoption playbook, and GitHub issues.

Development

npm test                 # zero-dep node --test suite
npm run benchmark        # calibration corpus: precision/recall + 0-false-block gate
npm run build:browser    # build the MV3 browser extension

Contributions are welcome; read CONTRIBUTING.md and the Code of Conduct before opening a pull request.

Security & license

Releases are published to npm with provenance (SLSA attestation), gated on the test suite, the calibration benchmark, and pkgxray's own supply-chain guard. To report a vulnerability in pkgxray itself, see SECURITY.md.

MIT

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

22. Rauno's Field Notes #2

Source: https://rauno.me/notes/2
Site: rauno.me
Author: Rauno Freiberg
Submitted: 2026-07-25 16:39 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 19 points · 1 comments
Length: 561 words (~3 min read)
Language: en

Vercel Project Cards

I started by tweaking the padding and co-located information to reduce the vertical space occupied by each card. Some data was also omitted, for example we realised that we don't need to show the project branch on the card which is generally always "main".

It's important to understand that these cards occupy a lot of space on the screen on this view. It's easier to digest cards when there are less rows on the card and information is tight and terse.

Here's a before & after of the changes. We even gained an extra row in the grid.

Context menu

Another change we made was to the project card shortcut menu. We're still testing this change behind a feature flag. At first it seemed like it would simply clean up the card since the ··· button repeats a lot.

Later we realised that we want to use more context menus in the future because they have an obvious benefit over an explicit 24×24 control because you can activate a context menu from anywhere on the surface. Of course there's a tiny issue with affordance and learning curves yada yada yada... but apps like Linear make it work, so ¯\_(ツ)_/¯

Our mitigation against context menu discoverability is to place the same actions in the detail view behind a regular dropdown menu. This way no one misses out on anything, the context menu is just a shortcut.

Widgets

Later I started wondering... projects are rich with metadata but we only show the Real Experience Score on the card.

Everyone uses the dashboard for different insights. More security conscious users might want to always keep a pulse on the Firewall status, etc...

Could we make this area more dynamic and custom?

Some obvious ideas were to include other page performance insights like LCP, web analytics metrics, or alerts related to projects, etc...

With @merycodes we threw a bunch of different forms of widgets against the wall but nothing seemed right.

We were trying to find the layout and visual form of widgets. It just didn't seem to fit in that lil corner well at all, with a background or without. We quickly also realised that it is useful to have widgets be visually distinct "characters" from each other and not just differentiated by text or color-based. This makes them easier to scan.

The unlock for us came when we used two rows instead of one. Now we are less likely to collide with the labels on the left, and have a more reasonable amount of space to work with.

The right corner becomes this lil rectangular area, along with others, that is satisfyingly tight instead of floating without purpose or relative alignment to anything else.

From there on we had a pattern to follow and we were no longer in the trenches creatively. Now it was just a matter of making all the various widgets.

Finally, we did some revs on the "widget switcher" which wasn't complicated.

Really we just went back and forth on whether the menu should contain data or not. We thought it would be helpful because this way you could use the menu to preview data from other widgets without changing the project card widget itself.

When a project has no data, the widget switcher gives useful overview over platform features, and even helps you enable them.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

23. Kyber (YC W23) Is Hiring a Head of Engineering

Source: https://www.ycombinator.com/companies/kyber/jobs/FGmI8mx-head-of-engineering
Site: Y Combinator
Submitter: asontha (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-07-25 12:00 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 1 points · 0 comments
Length: 859 words (~4 min read)
Language: en

Instantly draft, review, and send complex regulatory notices.

Head of Engineering

$220K - $280K•0.50% - 1.50%•New York, NY, US

Job type

Full-time

Role

Engineering, Full stack

Experience

6+ years

Visa

US citizen/visa only

Connect directly with founders of the best YC-funded startups.

Apply to role ›

Arvind Sontha

Founder

About the role

At Kyber, we're building the next-generation document platform for enterprises. Today, our AI-native solution transforms regulatory document workflows, enabling insurance claims organizations to consolidate 80% of their templates, spend 65% less time drafting, and compress overall communication cycle times by 5x. Our vision is for every enterprise to seamlessly leverage AI templates to generate every document.

Over the past 18 months, we’ve:

>40x’d revenue and are profitable.
Landed multiple six and seven figure, multi-year contracts with leading insurance enterprises.
Launched strategic partnerships with industry leading software partners like Guidewire, Majesco, and Twilio Sendgrid.

Kyber is backed by top Silicon Valley VCs, including Y Combinator and Fellows Fund.

We're seeking a hands-on Head of Engineering with a clear line of sight to CTO. This role is ideal for someone who is already operating as a 10x engineer, thrives in early stage environments, and is excited to design and scale mission-critical AI systems from first principles.

Responsibilities:

Be the Technical Owner of the Product

Own end-to-end technical decisions across backend, frontend, data, infra.
Ship features personally while keeping the team unblocked.
Prioritize an Aggressive Product Roadmap

Lead sprint/weekly planning and keep priorities tight
Protect focus: decisively manage tradeoffs, push back when needed
Unlock Leverage to Boost Engineering Capacity

Scale adoption of Agentic AI coding tools (Cursor, Claude Code, Greptile) into large scale engineering and product workflows to accelerate time to market.
Establish reusable patterns and interfaces so engineers and agents aren’t reinventing everything.
Champion Reliability, Security, and Customer Trust

Own uptime, performance, and incident response.
Implement monitoring/alerts + fast debugging workflows.
Mentor & Raise the Engineering Bar

Set expectations for quality and ownership.
Help recruit and evaluate future hires.

What We’re Looking For in You:

10x Engineer with a love of building

Your raw coding ability should be unmatched and only deeply amplified by AI.
You love to build and relish seeing customers delighted by your work.
Ship first, optimize and harden later

You get something out as quickly as possible, prove it was the right thing to build, and then optimize and harden it.
System Design Mastery

You've architected large scale data-driven applications and have a full E2E understanding of what tradeoffs to make when.
Systems-first thinking

Not just in architecture, but also for how an AI-native engineering team will operate as we continue to grow.
Accountability

You're prepared and have been in roles before where you've had to hold other engineers accountable for their deliverables.
Security and Compliance

You've dealt with enterprise software compliance requirements (SOC 2, HIPAA, ISO, etc) and are comfortable incorporating those requirements in tandem with product build out.

Our Values

Possible Until Proven Otherwise

Challenge assumptions with evidence. If it’s impossible, show us why.
LOVE Your Customer

Put customers at the heart of everything. Earn trust, deliver value, grow together.
Take Pride In Your Craft

Creating something from nothing is a privilege—embrace the process and perfect the details.
Live Up To Your Expectations

Set your standards high and let’s exceed them together—because no one should expect more of you than yourself.
Have Fun & Nurture Those Around You

The joy of building is amplified when shared. Remember to support, uplift, and celebrate each other as we grow.

Benefits

Competitive salary
Generous stock package
100% employer-covered medical, dental, and vision insurance

Why Kyber?

Join us in building and scaling a game-changing enterprise product powered by state-of-the-art AI. At Kyber, your contributions will directly impact how businesses handle some of their most critical workflows and customer interactions.

If you’re obsessed with building, AI, and transforming enterprise workflows, we’d love to hear from you!

How To Stand Out

We want to hear from extraordinary individuals who are ready to shape the future of enterprise documents. To stand out, ask someone you’ve worked with to send your resume or LinkedIn profile, along with a brief 2-3 sentence endorsement, directly to arvind [at] askkyber.com.

Referrals matter. They help us understand the impact you’ve already had and the kind of teammate you’ll be. A strong referee can elevate your application, so choose someone who knows your skills and character well.

Apply today and help us bring enterprise documents into the AI-native age.

About the interview

Founder screen
Take home practical
Technical Deep Dive on Prior Project
System Design Scaling Interview
Leverage & Leadership Interview
5 References

About Kyber

With Kyber, companies operating in regulated industries can quickly draft, review, and send complex regulatory notices. For example, when Branch Insurance's claims team has to settle a claim, instead of spending hours piecing together evidence to draft a complex notice, they can simply upload the details of the claim to Kyber, auto-generate multiple best in-class drafts, easily assign reviewers, collaborate on notices in real-time, and then send the letter to the individual the notice is for. Kyber not only saves these teams time, it also improves overall quality, accountability, and traceability.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

24. My web version of Mars MIPS, now has built-in C compiler

Source: https://webmars.nfiles.top/
Site: webmars.nfiles.top
Author: codigoavulso
Submitted: 2026-07-25 13:42 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 28 points · 6 comments
Length: 4 words (~1 min read)
Language: en

Loading webMARS

Preparing modules...

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

25. The Silurian Hypothesis (2020)

Source: https://www.theparisreview.org/blog/2020/01/23/the-silurian-hypothesis/
Site: The Paris Review
Author: Rich Cohen
Published: 2020-01-23
HN activity: 48 points · 86 comments
Length: 1.4K words (~7 min read)
Language: en

In his monthly column, Conspiracy, Rich Cohen gets to the bottom of it all.

When I was eleven, we lived in an English Tudor on Bluff Road in Glencoe, Illinois. One day, three strange men (two young, one old) knocked on the door. Their last name was Frank. They said they’d lived in this house before us, not for weeks but decades. For twenty years, this had been their house. They’d grown up here. Though I knew the house was old, it never occurred to me until then that someone else had lived in these rooms, that even my own room was not entirely my own. The youngest of the men, whose room would become mine, showed me the place on a brick wall hidden by ivy where he’d carved his name. “Bobby Frank, 1972.” It had been there all along. And I never even knew it.

That is the condition of the human race: we have woken to life with no idea how we got here, where that is or what happened before. Nor do we think much about it. Not because we are incurious, but because we do not know how much we don’t know.

What is a conspiracy?

It’s a truth that’s been kept from us. It can be a secret but it can also be the answer to a question we’ve not yet asked.

Modern humans have been around for about 200,000 years, but life has existed on this planet for 3.5 billion. That leaves 3,495,888,000 pre-human years unaccounted for—more than enough time for the rise and fall of not one but several pre-human industrial civilizations. Same screen, different show. Same field, different team. An alien race with alien technology, alien vehicles, alien folklore, and alien fears, beneath the familiar sky. There’d be no evidence of such bygone civilizations, built objects and industry lasting no more than a few hundred thousand years. After a few million, with plate tectonics at work, what is on the surface, including the earth itself, will be at the bottom of the sea and the bottom will have become the mountain peaks. The oldest place on the earth’s surface—a stretch of Israel’s Negev Desert—is just over a million years old, nothing on a geological clock.

The result of this is one of my favorite conspiracy theories, though it’s not a conspiracy in the conventional sense, a conspiracy usually being a secret kept by a nefarious elite. In this case, the secret, which belongs to the earth itself, has been kept from all of humanity, which believes it has done the only real thinking and the only real building on this planet, as it once believed the earth was at the center of the universe.

Called the Silurian Hypothesis, the theory was written in 2018 by Gavin Schmidt, a climate modeler at NASA’s Goddard Institute, and Adam Frank, an astrophysicist at the University of Rochester. Schmidt had been studying distant planets for hints of climate change, “hyperthermals,” the sort of quick temperature rises that might indicate the moment a civilization industrialized. It would suggest the presence of a species advanced enough to turn on the lights. Such a jump, perhaps resulting from a release of carbon, might be the only evidence that any race, including our own, will leave behind. Not the pyramids, not the skyscrapers, not Styrofoam, not Shakespeare—in the end, we will be known only by a change in the rock that marked the start of the Anthropocene.

It was logical for Schmidt and Frank to turn their attention from the upper to the under, from the cosmos to our own earth. Why look for alien life there when we might find it here, removed not by miles but years. There was indeed a mysterious jump in surface heat; 55 million years ago, global temperatures rose from 9 to 14 degrees Fahrenheit. Called the Paleocene–Eocene Thermal Maximum, it left the same sort of geological evidence that will be left by our current carbon binge. There may have been other jumps, but we wouldn’t know it, as the geologic record only goes back so far. (We live in a compactor, where all things are crushed, recycled, and returned as new.) A meteor could’ve caused the Thermal Maximum, or it could’ve been the eruption of a monster volcano, the sort that presently smolders beneath the Atlantic. Or it could have been caused by the awakening of an ancient civilization, which rose like we rose, then fell as we will. That could be the fate of all advanced species, a rise and fall that flows as naturally as the change of seasons. Such a universe is ironic, continually creating characters whose technology brings on the very end they’re trying to avoid.

When Schmidt and Frank searched, they found a single forerunner to their idea of deep time. It came not from science, but from science fiction. At this level of conjecture, there’s little difference. It was an episode of Dr. Who, in which the time traveler visits an ancient species of advanced, long-extinct lizard people who’d achieved technological mastery 450 million years before modern man. The lizards were called Silurians, hence the Silurian Hypotheses.

It’s not really a new idea. Ancient mystical texts hint at earlier creation, the life that preceded the Garden, prequels to Genesis. These incarnations are not reported in the Bible because they are none of your goddamn business, but the evidence is everywhere. Some students of conspiracy believe there was a time when lizard people shared the earth with modern men, the older race dying as the younger emerged from the forest. The last of the lizards were worshipped as gods; these were the deities of ancient India and Greece. The technology—weapons and machines—created miracles. You can see the lizard kings in carvings from Mesopotamia, the oldest historical records, where humans bow before reptile men. You find them again in the Torah, where they appear as Nephilim, the so-called watchers—“The Nephilim were on the earth in those days and also afterward when the sons of God went to the daughters of humans and had children by them,” according to Genesis, “they were the heroes of old, men of renown”—which no priest, minister, or rabbi can properly explain. Just ask a clergyman and see for yourself. (I asked my rabbi.) There is some weird shit in the Bible.

According to a kabbalah-besotted friend, this world is God’s seventh creation, which explains dinosaur bones and other fossils. “The evidence is everywhere,” he told me one night. “They can say a meteor wiped out the past, but what is a meteor? God.” Some believe there are still Silurians walking the earth, holdovers who share their technology with a hidden elite—possibly Freemasons, possibly Jews. Some pseudoscientists speak of an atomic blast that took place in India 10,000 years ago. It might’ve been a natural phenomenon, or might’ve been the war that wiped out the Silurians or drove them off the earth. A website called Vedic Knowledge reported evidence “of an atomic blast dating back thousands of years. It destroyed most of the buildings and probably a half-million people in Rajasthan, India. One researcher estimates that the bomb used was about the size of the ones dropped on Japan in 1945.”

This ancient catastrophe, which some take as evidence of an ancient nuclear war, shows up in the Mahabharata, a Sanskrit epic, with the appearance of “a single projectile charged with all the power in the Universe … An incandescent column of smoke and flame as bright as 10,000 suns, rose in all its splendor … it was an unknown weapon, an iron thunderbolt, a gigantic messenger of death which reduced to ashes an entire race.”

It’s heartbreaking—the fact that, as we face the nightmare of climate change, some of us have read our own perilous present back into the geological past and have come to see even our apocalypse as unremarkable, something that’s been experienced before and was inevitable from the start. It’s thrilling, too, the idea of a pre-human industrial civilization. It means we don’t know anything: who we are, or where, or even the history of our own home.

Read more of Rich Cohen’s Conspiracy column here.

Rich Cohen is the author of The Last Pirate of New York: A Ghost Ship, a Killer, and the Birth of a Gangster Nation.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

26. MouthPad: A Tongue-Controlled Touchpad

Source: https://www.augmental.tech/
Site: augmental.tech
Submitter: ZaninAndrea (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-07-25 07:51 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 147 points · 28 comments
Length: 2.2K words (~10 min read)
Language: en

MouthPad

The world’s firsthands-free touchpad.

MouthPad is a custom-fit mouthpiece that turns subtle tongue and head movements into precise control of your phone, tablet, and computer.

The mouth is a new interface.

MouthPad translates small, natural movements into cursor control, clicks, scrolling, and dragging. No hands. No wires. Worn discreetly inside your mouth.

How it works

Cursor control, from the roof of your mouth.

01

Choose how you move.

Move the cursor with your tongue or head. Tap, swipe, sip, and hold to click and drag.
02

Pair it like a mouse.

Connect MouthPad to your phone, tablet, and computer over Bluetooth. Switch instantly between devices.
03

Use it discreetly.

MouthPad sits inside your mouth, out of sight, with minimal impact on speech.
04

Made for your mouth.

Each MouthPad is custom-fit from a dental scan, then 3D printed and encapsulated for comfort, safety, and everyday use.

In action

Built with the people who use it.

We’ve worked with hundreds of users with diverse abilities to shape MouthPad through real daily use. Early adopters like Keely use it to reconnect, work, play, and move through the digital world with more independence.

“For the first time in my life, I was able to take pictures and videos independently. Augmental’s MouthPad has changed my life.”Esther K.

“The MouthPad creates minimal friction between me and my device. I can work for up to ten hours without thinking about adaptive equipment.”Mike H.

“I’ve been missing chess for so long, and I got it back, thanks to you guys.”Josh B.

“With this technology I don’t have to use my 12″ mouth stylus anymore.”Sean C.

“The MouthPad gave me back my independence and opened doors to opportunities I never thought possible.”Brian M.

“It’s given me the motivation to want to take control of my life. It’s given me a spark.”Keely H.

“Everything fit right in my mouth at first go. I’ve experienced no discomfort from having worn the device for around five hours.”Keith G.

“It totally revolutionized how I use my computer. Now I game better, work faster, and life’s just easier.”Tomás B.

“You use the tip of your tongue and touch the roof of your mouth. Even a kid could figure it out.”Rocky S.

“It’s very seamless, very easy to use, very intuitive. Eventually everyone will be using it.”Krystina J.

“It’s truly a game changer, not just for me but for anyone with mobility challenges.”Ryan H.

“It feels instinctive, like second nature. I already love it.”Joseph B.

“Everything I’ve wanted it to be and then some more.”Zachary H.

“For the first time in my life, I was able to take pictures and videos independently. Augmental’s MouthPad has changed my life.”Esther K.

“The MouthPad creates minimal friction between me and my device. I can work for up to ten hours without thinking about adaptive equipment.”Mike H.

“I’ve been missing chess for so long, and I got it back, thanks to you guys.”Josh B.

“With this technology I don’t have to use my 12″ mouth stylus anymore.”Sean C.

“The MouthPad gave me back my independence and opened doors to opportunities I never thought possible.”Brian M.

“It’s given me the motivation to want to take control of my life. It’s given me a spark.”Keely H.

“Everything fit right in my mouth at first go. I’ve experienced no discomfort from having worn the device for around five hours.”Keith G.

“It totally revolutionized how I use my computer. Now I game better, work faster, and life’s just easier.”Tomás B.

“You use the tip of your tongue and touch the roof of your mouth. Even a kid could figure it out.”Rocky S.

“It’s very seamless, very easy to use, very intuitive. Eventually everyone will be using it.”Krystina J.

“It’s truly a game changer, not just for me but for anyone with mobility challenges.”Ryan H.

“It feels instinctive, like second nature. I already love it.”Joseph B.

“Everything I’ve wanted it to be and then some more.”Zachary H.

“For the first time in my life, I was able to take pictures and videos independently. Augmental’s MouthPad has changed my life.”Esther K.

“The MouthPad creates minimal friction between me and my device. I can work for up to ten hours without thinking about adaptive equipment.”Mike H.

“I’ve been missing chess for so long, and I got it back, thanks to you guys.”Josh B.

“With this technology I don’t have to use my 12″ mouth stylus anymore.”Sean C.

“The MouthPad gave me back my independence and opened doors to opportunities I never thought possible.”Brian M.

“It’s given me the motivation to want to take control of my life. It’s given me a spark.”Keely H.

“Everything fit right in my mouth at first go. I’ve experienced no discomfort from having worn the device for around five hours.”Keith G.

“It totally revolutionized how I use my computer. Now I game better, work faster, and life’s just easier.”Tomás B.

“You use the tip of your tongue and touch the roof of your mouth. Even a kid could figure it out.”Rocky S.

“It’s very seamless, very easy to use, very intuitive. Eventually everyone will be using it.”Krystina J.

“It’s truly a game changer, not just for me but for anyone with mobility challenges.”Ryan H.

“It feels instinctive, like second nature. I already love it.”Joseph B.

“Everything I’ve wanted it to be and then some more.”Zachary H.

Read their stories →

Specifications

More personal,and more precise.

A low-profile input device with the compatibility of a wireless mouse and the fit of a dental appliance.

01

Compatibility

Supported devices
macOS · Windows · Linux · iOS · Android

Companion app
macOS · Windows · iOS

02

Build

Thickness
~1 mm

Weight
~10 g

Material
Dental resin

03

Power

Battery
7+ hours continuous use

Charge time
~1.5 hours

Battery certifications
UN 38.3 · IEC 62133

04

In the box

MouthPad
~30 × 50 × 80 mm

Charging case
38 × 75 × 95 mm

Cable
USB-C to USB-A

Questions? See the FAQ.

As seen on

“The MouthPad turns your tongue into a mouse for your phone.”Engadget, 2023

All press →

Now available

Get your custom-fit MouthPad.

$1,400

One device, custom-fit and made to order.

$1,900

Two devices for one user: keep a backup MouthPad, and swap between them to extend battery life.

Available across the United States. Custom designed for each user. After purchase, we’ll send instructions to share with your dentist or local scanning provider for a quick 3D scan.

01

Order online. Fully refundable before receipt of dental scan.
02

Complete a dental scan near you. Share these instructions with your dentist or local provider.
03

We build your custom device and ship in six months.
04

Onboard on our online platform, with support if you need it.

Better together

MouthPad is the mouse. VOX is the keyboard.

VOX is a wearable microphone, now in beta, that hears you through your body, so you can dictate without broadcasting your words. Together they cover pointing and typing, hands-free.

Meet VOX →

FAQ

Any questions?

Product overview
What is the MouthPad and how does it work?

The MouthPad is a custom-fit touchpad: hands-free control of your devices through tongue, head, and breath gestures. It has a plug-and-play design that connects via a standard wireless pairing, and works in all major operating systems, regardless of version. The MouthPad is nearly invisible when worn, compatible with voice control, easy to carry, and easy to learn.

Move the cursor with your tongue or your head, whichever you prefer. Tongue presses are used for left-click and click-and-drag. Sip gestures are used for right-clicks. We've also integrated more sophisticated gestures such as scrolling and swiping, expanding the dimensions of control.
How comfortable is the MouthPad?

The MouthPad has been designed with comfort as a top priority. Still, comfort is subjective and can depend on factors such as the individual's mouth shape, size, and the specific use case. Our team members and early users have worn the MouthPad for extended periods, up to ten hours a day, and have found it to be comfortable.
Can I speak using the MouthPad?

Yes, you can speak while wearing the MouthPad. Its custom design minimizes the impact on speech, making it easy to talk or use voice recognition software while wearing the device.

However, please note that results can vary, and some people may need more time than others to adjust to speaking normally while using the device.
How do I clean the MouthPad?

Clean your MouthPad by hand with soap and water before and after each use, removing any saliva and debris. Don't leave it submerged for long, and dry it before returning it to the charging case, so bacteria can't grow.
Can I eat, drink, or sleep with the MouthPad in?

Water is fine. Don't eat or drink anything else while wearing your MouthPad, and note that hot liquids can affect its fit. Don't chew or bite the device: that can break it and void your warranty. Take it out before sleeping, to avoid accidental damage.
Who makes the MouthPad?

The MouthPad is designed and manufactured by Augmental Technologies Inc., also known as Augmental, located in San Francisco, California. Augmental is an MIT Media Lab spin-off dedicated to developing human augmentation technologies. Our goal is to provide everyone with more intuitive ways to interact with computing systems.
Am I a good candidate for the MouthPad?

The MouthPad is best suited for people over the age of 18 who have sufficient tongue dexterity, good oral health, and no ongoing dental or orthodontic treatments. Users must also have the physical ability to open their mouth wide enough for their initial 3D mouth scan.

Please review our full Eligibility Criteria.

Specifications
What devices can the MouthPad connect to?

The MouthPad is equipped with a wireless protocol that allows it to connect to various devices, including computers, smartphones, and tablets. In general, it should be able to connect to any device that supports a wireless, dongle-free mouse.

We support the companion app for the latest 3 major OS versions for macOS, Windows, and iOS.
What is the MouthPad app for?

The companion app is where you tweak and fine-tune your MouthPad settings: cursor mode, click strength, touch sensitivity, cursor and scroll speed, and more. Your settings are saved on the MouthPad itself, so you can then connect to any device that accepts a Bluetooth mouse.

The app also delivers firmware updates and gives you access to our latest features.
What does the MouthPad come with?

The MouthPad comes with a charging case and cable. The charging case (printed with PETG) weighs 112 g and is 38 × 75 × 95 mm in size. The cable that comes with the package is a USB-C to USB-A cable.

Ordering
How much is the scan?

You’ll book the quick intraoral 3D scan directly with your dentist or a local scanning provider; most charge $50–$150.
Is the MouthPad covered by insurance, FSA, or HSA?

Not currently. The MouthPad isn't covered by insurance or FSA/HSA.
What does my order include?

Your order includes more than the MouthPad device and its charging case.

It also includes access to our online onboarding platform, which walks you through setup at your own pace. Our support team stays on standby if you ever need help, and can schedule a one-on-one session if you need one.

Your order also includes access to software updates and a 1-year limited warranty.
How do I get my MouthPad?

Order online. Place your order at any time. It is fully refundable before production begins.

Get an intraoral scan. To make your MouthPad, we need an intraoral 3D scan of your mouth. After you order, we’ll send simple instructions to share with your dentist or a local scanning provider.

We print your custom fit and ship it. With your scan, we manufacture your custom MouthPad and ship it in six months, straight to your doorstep. From there, you onboard on our online platform, which walks you through configuration and a simple, one-time calibration. Our team can schedule a session if you need one.
What does US-only mean? Can I purchase it if I live elsewhere?

We follow US regulations and can only sell within the United States. That means we ship only to US addresses and accept returns only from US addresses. We don't geo-fence any of the device's features or capabilities, though, so your MouthPad can be used freely outside the US.

Returns & warranty
Can I get a refund if I change my mind?

Yes. Cancel any time before sending in your scan for a full refund.
What if my mouth is special?

Our custom process fits most mouths. If we can't make one for yours, we'll refund you in full.
What is the MouthPad warranty policy?

We offer a 1-year limited warranty. If your device breaks or fails during this time because of a design or manufacturing flaw, we will send you a replacement at no cost. For the full terms, see our Warranty.
Disclaimer: misuses that void your refund and warranty

Damage caused from boiling water
Intentional damage & tinkering
Damage caused from exposing your MouthPad to UV light (sunlight) for extended periods
Damage caused from using someone else’s MouthPad
Damage caused by not following our recommendations for MouthPad treatment, including charging or draining the battery in a way that conflicts with our instructions

For the complete list, refer to our Warranty.

Other questions
Where can I find the manual, warranty, and terms?

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

27. NYC Apartment Aquaponics

Source: https://erinmurphy.dev/projects/project-2/
Site: erinmurphy.dev
Submitter: mm1119 (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-07-20 15:00 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 176 points · 74 comments
Length: 3.3K words (~15 min read)
Language: en

About two years ago, my awesome boyfriend John and I set out to create an aquaponics system in our one-bedroom NYC apartment. Since my first post was more of a chronological journal about the build (and we’ve learned A LOT since then), I hope this one will serve as a practical guide for replicating our setup and avoiding our mistakes!

Aquaponics combines aquaculture (breeding, rearing, and harvesting water organisms) with hydroponics (growing plants without soil). Frequently, this is done in large-scale industrial farms where both the plants and animals are raised for food, though there are many thriving online communities of home aquaponics enthusiasts.

There are many different kinds of aquaponics systems, but (to the best of my knowledge) they all share the same cycle: fish waste water provides nutrients to plants, which in turn filter the water. Despite the abundance of online resources, when John and I first became interested in setting up a home system, we noticed most examples still used tanks and grow-beds that would be far too large for our NYC apartment. This has motivated us to share our experiences, and we hope that this guide may be useful to others looking to create a similar setup!

This guide consists of the following sections:

Our System: a high-level overview of our current system design
Recent Improvements: highlights of what we have recently changed compared to our initial build
Lessons Learned: mistakes we learned the hard way
Step-by-Step Build Guide: if you too want to be a city aquaponics farmer!

Our System

Media-Based Continuous Flow

We opted for a media-based aquaponics system, which means our plants are housed in a separate grow-bed filled with clay gravel. Water from the tank is pumped through the clay substrate, where the rooted plants filter out nutrients from the fish waste. Additionally, we opted for a continuous-flow system, which means that water is continuously cycled from the tank through the bottom few inches of the media bed before draining out the opposite side of the bed. This is an alternative to a flood & drain system, where a timed pump periodically fills the media bed with water before letting it drain completely. While continuous-flow systems are somewhat limited to edible plants that don’t mind a continuous stream of water past their roots, they also provide a much more stable water and nutrient level for the fish living in the tank.

Fig 1: A final sketch of the design where water is pumped into the clay substrate on the right, and then flows back into the tank on the left.

Vertical Design

We decided to build a vertical system, where the grow-bed of edible plants was placed above the aquatic tank in order to:

Conserve the amount of space the system took up in our apartment.
Reduce the odds of any potential leaks, as any water that leaks from the grow-bed will fall into the tank below. Similarly, we added a second storage tub on the bottom shelf to catch any potential water overflow from the tank.
Minimize energy costs, as the water only needs to be pumped a short distance up into the grow-bed, and will then be gravity-fed back into the tank.

We decided to use an industrial metal shelving rack as the foundation of our system; a practical and stable option that can support both the heavy tank and grow-bed. The rack is about 3ft wide and fits inside a spare closet space in our new apartment (a true NYC luxury).

Fig 2: The full system on the shelving rack in our closet.

Small Size

With similar concerns in mind, we also decided to limit the tank size to 20 gallons, as the grow-bed above also contains an additional ~10 gallons of water. Since a gallon of fresh water weighs roughly 8.34lbs, we estimate this puts the entire weight of the system’s water somewhere between 170 and 250lbs. Considering the weight threshold of the industrial shelving, and given that we live on a high floor in our building, we decided to constrain the system to this size to minimize the flooding risk. The tradeoff of this apartment-scale system is that we can only support a grow-bed of about 3 square feet, and are limited to crops with smaller root systems that don’t require a lot of nutrients (such as leafy greens and herbs).

Grow-Bed

Our grow-bed consists of clay pebbles and a drainage tube. We recently added a bag of crushed coral as an additional filter within the drainage tube. This helps catch waste, soften any drainage sounds, and adds extra minerals to the water that our shrimp and snails need for healthy molting and shells, respectively. Currently, we are growing basil, and we just added two ‘Tiny Tim’ dwarf tomato seedlings as an experiment to see if we can support fruiting plants. We’ve previously had success with growing basil, mint, and lettuce plants.

Tank & Aquatic Friends

Our tank is currently home to MANY (estimated 30-50) neocaridina cherry shrimp and ramshorn snails, which snuck in on some plants and multiply like crazy. We also have a single nerite snail and a feeder guppy.

Recent Improvements

Improved drainage: In our original design, we used only a small 1“ PVC pipe with holes drilled into it for drainage. However, we quickly realized it was very easy for this to get clogged with plant roots or debris. To improve the drainage, we switched the top pipe to a 4“ PVC pipe inside the grow-bed and drilled vertical slits around its lower perimeter, which allows for much more water flow than the previous pipe. The bottom pipe is still the original 1“ pipe, but we found that using a small rubber bulkhead fitting works much better at preventing leaks than our previous attempt using sealant.
Better pump: Our 250GPH original pump unexpectedly stopped working after our move. However, this turned out to be for the best because we realized that a smaller 160GPH pump worked just as well, while being smaller, quieter, and cheaper.
Moved the grow light: Originally, we attached the grow light to the top rack of the shelf. This worked fairly well, but often caused burns on leaves of delicate herbs like our basil. In our setup’s new closet location, we hung the grow light about half a foot higher and have it on a timer to run for 8 hours per day. Our plants are still growing great without any burns or heat damage.
Using black tubing: We initially purchased clear tubing to connect the pump to the grow-bed, but it sometimes becomes semi-clogged with algae that thrives under the light. We are planning to replace it soon with black tubing instead.

Lessons Learned

Cycling! When we initially got our tank, we were more focused on the aquaponics research and unfortunately underestimated the fragility of a young fish tank. We have since learned the value of cycling, and would highly recommend setting up your system for at least a few weeks (to establish healthy bacteria and stabilize the water parameters) before adding any animals.
Bigger tank = better: If you have the space for a larger tank, I would highly recommend it. The unfortunate downside of smaller tanks is that any small changes in water quality (for example, if a fish is sick or if you accidentally add too much food) can quickly and negatively impact the entire tank. Larger tanks are generally considered more stable. They can also support more fish, which means more nutrients to grow more plants (or plants that require more nutrients).
Success with shrimp, snails, & feeders: If you read my previous post, our tank has previously been home to some classic freshwater fish like harlequin rasboras, neon tetras, and salt & pepper corys. Unfortunately, despite our excellent water parameters and careful parenting, we’ve had quite a bit of bad luck with a parasite problem infecting all of our fish besides our one feeder guppy who had snuck in with our shrimp. We learned the hard way that many of these popular species can have major immunity issues and may be bred in poor conditions. If possible, getting fish from local enthusiasts is both cost-effective and a great way to ensure they are adjusted to your area’s water parameters. Also, less flashy species (like feeder guppies) can still be beautiful and may be more resilient than their flashier cousins.
Importance of not overfeeding (especially with travel): Many of our fish ailments began with great intentions when we purchased an automatic feeder prior to a long international trip. However, this device ended up overfeeding our tank, causing a huge algae bloom and terrible water quality. We learned from our local fish store that fish can actually go a few weeks without food in a well-planted tank, and from another enthusiast that “hungry fish are healthy fish.” We’ve since been much more cautious about overfeeding, and our tank has thrived.
Better drainage: As discussed above, a bigger drainage pipe in the grow-bed has made maintenance much easier.
Planted tank communities rock: There is a fantastic, active planted tank community on Facebook in the NYC area, and we had a great experience swapping some of our overgrown plants for another hobbyist’s neocaridina shrimp, which started our current population. I would highly recommend looking for similar groups in your area for both advice and cost-effective fish and plants that do well in your area’s water.

Step-by-Step Build Guide

The remainder of this post is a practical guide for exactly how we setup our apartment aquaponics system.

I. Materials

Structural & Building

3-shelf Home Depot adjustable metal rack – $165.39
2 IKEA Sockerbit bins (grow-bed + storage) – $59.98
20 gallon long Aqueon tank – $29.99
Diablo 1.25“ spade drill bit (already owned a drill) – $6.77
Everbilt 1/2“ x 20’ vinyl tubing (black to reduce algae growth) – $12.97
Hack saw – $5.47
1“ x 1’ PVC pipe – $3.14
6“ x 2’ PVC pipe* – $22.85
1“ male PVC adaptor $2.07
1“ bulkhead fitting* $8.99

Electronics

Active Aqua 160GPH submersible water pump* – $19.39
VIPARSPECTRA P1000 LED grow light – $64.80
hygger LED tank light – $42.32
Aqueon preset 50W heater – $20.99
(Optional) Uniclife aerator + air stones – $14.99

Tank Substrate, Decor, Maintenance

Geolite 45L clay pebbles – $52.87
Black diamond blasting sand – gifted
Majoywoo driftwood 12.5-18“ 2 pack – $35.26
Crushed coral bag* – $11.99
Vivosun 1“ rockwool cubes* – $8.99

Food & Water Quality

API freshwater testing kit – $35.48
Seachem prime water conditioner – $13.56
Tetra color tropical flakes – $7.99
Hikari shrimp pellets and algae wafers* – $10.98
KatsAquatics calcium treats* – $14.99

Plants & Animals

Neocaridina shrimp, nerite snails, feeder guppies* – traded for plants
Aquatic plants (susswassertang, anubias, cryptocoryne, java fern, duckweed)* – gifted
Organic basil seedlings – $3.99
Various greens seeds

Total $663.24 + tax

* New purchase (since original build blog)

Note – while this is a significant upfront cost, nearly all of the purchases are one-time.

II. Building the Setup

Fig 3: Rack setup in our old apartment (we now store the setup in a spare closet). We first put together the storage shelf and made sure that the shelves were perfectly aligned before adding anything to the tank. Not pictured here, but the plastic IKEA bin we use as a grow-bed sits on the upper shelf above the tank. Another identical IKEA bin serves as storage (and to catch potential leaks) on the bottom shelf.

Fig 4: Drainage hole with bulkhead and lower drainage pipe.

We used the spade drill bit to drill a drainage hole into one end of the grow-bed, fitted this with the bulkhead, and tested that it was watertight (left). We then used the male adaptor to attach the 1“ PVC pipe (cut to length with a hack saw) to the underside of the drainage hole. You’ll need to bend the shelf bars slightly to fit the PVC (right).

Fig 5: View of the empty grow-bed, where water flows from right to left.

At this point, your grow-bed will look something like Fig 5 (minus the tube on the right), with the tank below. We currently hang the grow light above the shelf within our closet, but you can also attach it to the top rack of the shelf. This is optional, but we found adding the slightest angle to the grow-bed (in our case using an old paint stick to barely prop up the right side) helps keep water moving through the bed.

Fig 6: Grow-bed drainage pipe and crushed coral filter. Within the grow-bed, we place a larger 4“ PVC pipe (also cut to length) around the bulkhead hole and used a drill to create vertical drainage holes in the base (left). This allows water to drain quicker and is easier to maintain than our previous setup, which used another 1“ PVC pipe on top. Inside this pipe, we use a bag of crushed coral to catch debris, prevent drainage sounds, and add healthy minerals to the water for our invertebrates (right).
Fig 7: Check water drains as expected. At this point, I would recommend you check that the drainage is watertight and working as expected by adding some water to the grow-bed (either via the pump/tubing or manually) to see how it drains.

Fig 8: Grow-bed filled with clay pebbles. Once the drainage is working well, the clay pebbles can be rinsed and added to the grow-bed.

Fig 9: Setup adding some cloudy water.

We next rinsed and added a layer of the black sand into the tank. We also began adding filtered water (with dechlorinator) to the tank and set up the pump and vinyl tubing to test the full flow (note: we used clear tubing, but I would recommend black to prevent algae growth).

This was an old picture we took when initially creating the setup. After taking this, we cut the PVC pipe shorter and straightened it out. I also learned that pouring water onto a plastic lid prevents the sand from stirring up and making the water murky (though it will eventually settle).

III. Planting & Cycling

While the substrate settled, we boiled the driftwood (to remove tannins that will turn the water brown) and planned how we wanted the tank to look.

Fig 10: Plants, driftwood, and some rocks in our tank.

We first used plastic plants in our tank, but later switched to live plants after a friend gifted us some. Live plants help keep the tank stable and create a beautiful, changing aquascape as they grow. They can be expensive, so I highly recommend looking into fast-growing ones or hobbyists in your community who frequently donate or inexpensively sell their excess growth.

We have had success growing susswassertang, anubias, cryptocoryne, java fern, and duckweed. We initially used clear fishing line to tie some of the plants (anubias and java fern) to driftwood and stones. Other plants we directly rooted into the dirt. They all grow so much that we’ve now been able to gift our excess plants, and we also traded some for cherry shrimp.

At this point, it is very tempting to want to get fish right away, which is what we naively did when we first set up our tank. However, it can take at least a month for the tank’s beneficial bacteria to grow, which are needed to consume toxins from the fish waste. There are plenty of online guides for cycling a tank, and I would highly recommend leaving the tank for a while and only adding animals once the water quality is stable.

IV. Adding Life

Once your tank is cycled, it is time to plant the grow-bed and add friends! You’ll first want to set up the grow-bed light, tank light, tank heater, and optionally a bubbler (for extra oxygen until the plants have grown in).

Fig 11: A nerite snail and cherry shrimp on our driftwood. Spot the clear fishing line helping our anubias attach to the wood.

After our recent move, we traded some of our excess plants for about 20-30 cherry shrimp. These have been thriving and have laid multiple rounds of eggs. A tank of our size can easily hold hundreds of small shrimp, so we are excited to see the population grow.

We also have loads of ramshorn snails (which came in from some plants and reproduce quickly), a nerite snail, and a small feeder guppy who snuck into the shrimp bag as a tiny baby and has since grown up to be the king of the tank.

Fig 12: Organic basil seedlings in the grow-bed.

Once you have animals providing waste to the system, you can begin growing crops in the grow-bed! An easy way to quickly add plants is to purchase organic herb seedlings (we got basil from Trader Joe’s), split them into the individual plants, and wash the dirt from their roots before carefully planting in the clay.

Fig 13: Giant harvested basil leaves.

The seedlings may look a little sad and limp at first, but should quickly grow into healthy vibrant plants that we harvest nearly every week (always trimming close to where leaves split at the base to create more stems).

Fig 14: Tomato seedlings in rockwool on a sunny windowsill.

If you want to grow plants but can’t find local seedlings (cough NYC in the winter months cough), another great option is to order seeds online and grow them into seedlings using rockwool cubes. The photo above shows seedlings of a micro-tomato variety called Tiny Tim that we are currently attempting to grow. We’ve previously successfully grown lettuce from seed in our grow-bed.

For these, I soak the rockwool in slightly acidic water, make a tiny hole in each for a seed, and set the cubes in some water with plastic wrap covering the tupperware to keep them humid. After a few weeks, once the seedlings have grown longer roots, I carefully remove most of the wool cubes and gently plant them in the grow-bed.

V. Maintenance

Now that we’ve perfected our setup the system is very low-maintenance. The plants, shrimp, and snails keep the water quality pristine, the larger pipe keeps the grow-bed draining well, and the grow-light placement and timer are helping our plants grow quickly.

Our regular maintenance of the system includes the following:

Feeding the shrimp and fish roughly once every-other day
Replacing a few gallons of the water with fresh water (that’s been treated with Prime dechlorinator) each week
Eating the fresh basil
Removing any dead plant leaves or overgrowth and stirring up the sand slightly if waste accumulates (so it gets sucked up by the pump) as needed, maybe once every few weeks

Out of curiosity, we did the math against our Con Edison bill (NYC rates hover around $0.30/kWh) to estimate the system’s monthly energy costs:

Grow light (100W, 8hrs/day): ~18 kWh/month, roughly $7.2
Tank light (22W, 8hrs/day): ~5.3 kWh/month, roughly $1.60
Pump (9.5W, 24hrs/day): ~6.8 kWh/month, roughly $2.05
Heater (50W, 24hrs/day): up to ~36 kWh/month if it ran nonstop, though since it’s just cycling on a thermostat to keep a small tank warm in an already-heated apartment, the real number is probably closer to $3-4

Total: ~$14/month

VI. If you’ve made it this far…

While we are by no means aquaponics experts, we are always happy to share the lessons we’ve learned, and hope this guide is helpful. Please feel free to reach out if you are thinking of starting an apartment system of your own and have any questions!

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

28. Engineering management after the cost of code collapsed

Source: https://karimjedda.com/engineering-management-after-cost-of-code-collapse/
Site: Karim Jedda
Author: Karim Jedda
Published: 2026-07-20
HN activity: 81 points · 127 comments
Length: 2.7K words (~12 min read)
Language: en

I have been a director of engineering for a bit over three years now, and I still hear and read what I call the "old rules" repeated over and over: a director should not spend time coding, good work takes time, protect the team from the business, get consensus before you commit, etc.

For a while I thought the people repeating these lines were behind. Then we introduced LLMs in my org and the cost of producing code dropped, and I started checking each rule against the assumption underneath it. The surprising realization was that about half of the old rules were resting on assumptions that broke and the other half were resting on assumptions that did not, and a few of those matter more now than they did before.

What follows is a cleaned-up version of notes I accumulated over the past year. Gemini 4 helped with the editing.

What we actually know

The cost of producing plausible code has collapsed and it is not going back. Almost every claim beyond that is either unproven or wrong.

That AI tooling has made engineering orgs dramatically faster: unproven.
That code review, documentation, and onboarding are obsolete: wrong.
That you can run the same roadmap with half the people: a bet, not a fact.

If you rebuild your management practices on the narrow claim, you will be right. If you rebuild them on the broad claims you are gambling with other people's careers and calling it a conclusion.

Focus on auditing assumptions

Every management practice rests on a certain assumption. Velocity tracking rests on output being a usable proxy for effort. Six month onboarding rests on syntax being slow to learn. Consensus driven architecture rests on change being expensive. Headcount planning rests on output scaling with people, and so on.

The question for each practice is not how old it is but rather what the practice actually rests on.

If a practice rests on the cost of writing code, put it under review because that cost moved. If it rests on how humans coordinate, build trust, allocate attention, or verify correctness, then nothing about it changed, no matter how dated the ritual feels.

This sounds obvious but I think many are sorting by feel: whatever seems modern stays, whatever seems old goes. That produces teams that abandoned useful friction and kept useless process, because the age of a practice and the validity of a practice are unrelated variables.

The evidence is smaller than the noise

Be suspicious of anyone, including your own team, who reports large speedups and only that. The gains I'm familiar with show up clearly in greenfield work, boilerplate, and unfamiliar territory. They fade or invert in deep work on systems the engineer already understands. I'm very much looking forward to data and studies done after the Q4 2025, where a new breed of models were launched that completely eclipsed the capabilities of the ones older reports and research were based on.

However, the gap between felt speed and measured speed is itself a management problem. If your engineers feel faster and ship the same amount with more defects, you will staff wrong, plan wrong, and set expectations with the business that you cannot meet. The first job in an AI adopting org is instrumentation being honest enough to tell you whether you have accelerated at all.

Weak proxies for a cheap thing

Velocity, pull request counts, and tickets closed were always imperfect. They survived because the thing they approximated ie the effort of writing code was genuinely scarce, so the noise stayed within tolerable bounds.

Now the proxied thing is cheap. That does not leave the metrics merely imperfect but actually actively misleading, because the cheapest way to raise them is to generate volume, and volume is the one thing your organization no longer lacks.

AI-specific metrics solve the wrong problem. I think acceptance rates and prompt counts are the same mistake in a new form. The durable move is older and harder: measure outcomes for the business and the health of the system, and treat code volume as a cost to be justified rather than output to be praised. Good engineers said this before LLMs. It was true then. It is enforceable now in a way it was not, because nobody can argue that writing more code was the hard part.

"Right" still takes time (for now)

The rule that good work takes time splits cleanly in two.

Plumbing time collapsed. Scaffolding a service, generating tests, translating between frameworks, writing the first draft of a migration: all of this is fast now, and any timeline built on those costs deserves compression.

Correctness time splits in two

AI systems now check and correct code faster than any human reviewer, and pretending otherwise costs credibility. One one hand, mechanical verification is collapsing. Anything where correct can be expressed as a machine-checkable artifact: types, tests, contracts, lint rules, invariants, canary metrics. Agents run the test loop, read the failure, fix the diff, and run it again at a speed no reviewer matches. If your correctness lives in this layer, your checking time is genuinely falling, and it will keep falling.

But notice what makes this layer fast. It is fast because someone already wrote down what correct means, in a form a machine can evaluate. The specification did the work & the checker reads it.

Semantic verification is a different matter. Does the code implement the policy the business actually needs? Does this trade-off match your regulatory exposure? Here, correct lives in human heads and institutional history. AI checking AI has a structural problem: the checker shares training data, biases, and blind spots with the generator. Both layers fail in the same places for the same reasons. Self-review catches the typo. It does not catch the shared misunderstanding.

I believe three consequences follow, and the core of this post:

Unit cost falls, total workload rises. Cheap checking invites more generation, and more generation demands more checking. The verification workload grows with volume even as each individual check gets cheaper. Net calendar time is ambiguous, and the incident profile shifts: fewer dumb errors, more systemic ones, because high-volume plausible output now passes high-volume plausible review.
The boundary is a strategic variable. How much of your correctness is machine-checkable is not fixed. It is a function of your specifications, contracts, and invariants. Teams with strong specs get the full benefit of cheap checking. Teams with weak specs get generated code reviewed by the same machine that generated it. Investing in machine-checkable correctness is now among the highest-leverage infrastructure work an org can fund, because it sets how much of this wave you can actually use.
The slowest part of verification was never the checking but accountability. Someone signs & someone absorbs the consequence of being wrong: the incident review, the regulator, the customer. Sign-off time does not compress, because it is not information processing. It is risk acceptance, and legal and trust systems assign that to people.

So verification still sets throughput. What moved is the location of the constraint: from checking speed to specification quality, and to the willingness of a specific human to own the result.

The junior pipeline is an unsolved problem

Nobody knows how to train engineers for this environment.

The judgment you want in a senior engineer was historically built by doing the work that AI now absorbs: fixing small bugs, writing boilerplate, getting stuck and then unstuck: these were not just tasks but actually the practice that produced judgment. If the machine takes the practice, the pipeline that produces seniors breaks, and it breaks on a delay, so you will not notice for three to five years.

There are plausible responses. Structured review of generated code, deliberate unassisted exercises, rotations through testing and verification work, earlier exposure to real systems under close senior oversight. I am running versions of some of these. I cannot tell you they work, because the outcome variable is the quality of a senior engineer half a decade from now.

What I can tell you is that anyone who claims to have solved this, whether vendor, essayist, or conference speaker, is selling something. Treat the pipeline as an open problem you personally own. It has the longest delay between action and evidence, and the fewest chances to correct course.

My take on the old rules

"A director should not code." The director who dabbles, reviews pull requests to feel useful, and becomes a bottleneck is real. So is the director whose mental model of the work is five years stale, who cannot tell the difference between a team that is genuinely faster and a team that is generating confident, wrong output at volume (slop cannons). The resolution is calibration. You do not need to ship. You need enough direct contact with the tools and the output that you cannot be fooled in either direction, by the hype or by the dismissal.

"Shield the team from the business." The assumption underneath this one is that attention is finite and context switching is expensive. That assumption is intact. What changed is the cost of starving the team of context. Engineers prompting AI tools without business context just produce fluent, plausible, wrong work, at scale. The revision is not to flood everyone with everything but to stop filtering by default and start selecting deliberately: which context, to whom, at what level of detail.

"We need consensus before we commit." Consensus was always about commitment and coordination, and the cost of surviving cheap pivots. What cheap pivots change is which decisions need consensus at all. Reversible decisions, or two-way doors, should be made by the smallest group possible, quickly, because a wrong reversible call is now cheap to undo. Irreversible decisions still deserve the slow process. The actual skill is classification, and most organizations misclassify constantly, treating reversible technical choices as permanent and permanent organizational choices as casual.

"We need more headcount." The unit economics of output changed, so every request deserves a harder question than it got three years ago: what part of this work is judgment, and what part is production we keep hiring humans to do? But do not overcorrect. Adding people to a late project still makes it later. Coordination cost, onboarding drag, and communication overhead did not change with the price of syntax. Scrutinize headcount because output per person moved, not because people stopped being the expensive part.

Why the tropes persist

Three years in, here is what I believe about persistence. Practices survive for reasons, and the reasons are always mixed: some obsolete, some still valid, some political. When you hear an old rule repeated, you are usually hearing a person defend the valid part with the wrong argument or defend the obsolete part with the argument that used to work.

Treating persistence as stupidity is the failure mode of every management fashion, and the AI fashion is not exempt. The leaders who will look worst in five years are not the cautious ones but the ones who replaced thinking with a new set of slogans, even accurate sounding slogans, and ran their orgs on claims that were still unmeasured.

The job is sorting

The temptation, when a technology this large arrives, is to pick a posture: burn the old playbook or defend it. Both postures are laziness. The playbook was never a single object. It was a hundred pages, some about the cost of typing and some about the nature of people, bound together so tightly that we forgot they were separable.

Do not let anyone, including a confident essay, including this one, convince you those were ever the same page.

Will the machines do the sorting

I was told recently that AIs will soon do the management too, including the sorting. I thought about it over the weekend and I believe it is partly right.

Management has an information-routing function: aggregating status, tracking progress, translating updates into dashboards, forecasting schedules, collating performance data. A large share of what a management layer does daily is moving information between formats and people. LLMs are excellent at this, and the value of this is going to zero. If your management layer earns its keep by summarizing Jira, then yeah, that's over.

Then there is the judgment function: hiring, firing, promotion, deciding which rule applies in this situation with these people, owning a bad call. This has the same structure as verification. Someone checks the output against reality, and someone absorbs the consequence.

We're back to the generation argument mentionned above, but applied to management work: management output becomes abundant, therefore cheap. But the thesis of everything above is that when generation is abundant, verification is the constraint. Machine-generated management still needs a human to verify it against the org's actual behavior and to sign the result. So this is perhaps not the end of the manager but rather the manager's demotion to editor and owner. It is the exact same shift the individual contributor is going through.

There is one more problem with delegating the sorting. Sorting requires a model of how your org actually behaves: trust relationships, hallway knowledge, the consequences of past decisions. Almost none of this is written down. The written record of an org is a small, polished fraction of the org, and a model sorts on the record. Worse, what the model encodes from its training is the industry's average judgment. An LLM will sort your playbook roughly the way the median org would. If your strategy is to be the median org, that is fine. Differentiation lives exactly in the decisions you refuse to delegate.

Here is my honest concession, the sorting as an intellectual exercise is automatable. I used AI to pressure-test parts of this essay, and its first-pass audit was decent. What is not automatable is the political and moral work.

Where this goes: spans of control widen, layers compress, the information-routing tier of management is genuinely at risk, and titles will persist longer than functions. The management work that survives is the work that cannot be written down, cannot be averaged, and cannot be signed by anyone else.

What survives

The residual of engineering work is specification and ownership. The residual of management work is judgment and ownership. Same shape, two levels.

At every level of the org, the work that survives is the work someone has to sign.

Let's push the extrapolation to its limit to really drive it home. Imagine an org where agents write the code, run the checks, route the status, schedule the work, and draft the plans. Humans set direction, define what correct means, and sign. Everything between the signature and the shipped result is machinery. Now run the timeline backwards: imagine this org came first, and someone proposed the one you actually run. We will hire hundreds of expensive people to produce text by hand, at typing speed. We will arrange them in layers, where the job of each layer is to summarize the layer below for the layer above. We will synchronize their calendars in rooms so they can tell each other what already happened. We will measure their worth by how much they emit. Nobody would fund this proposal. It is slow, it loses information at every handoff, and it spends the scarcest resource in the building on work the machinery already does.

The org you run was never designed but it rather accumulated. Every role, ritual, and layer exists because something used to be expensive: typing, routing, checking, remembering. The prices moved. The org chart did not. In the agentic limit, the chart stops recording who produces and starts recording who signs. Headcount stops measuring capacity and starts measuring how much accountability you can afford. The orgs that get there will look small, quiet, and mostly empty: a short list of names attached to a long list of decisions, and nothing else left to manage.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

29. Charles Ross spent 50 yrs building Star Axis naked-eye observatory in New Mexico

Source: https://www.nytimes.com/2026/07/22/arts/design/charles-ross-star-axis-land-art.html
Site: nytimes.com
Submitter: ChrisArchitect (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-07-22 21:58 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 91 points · 20 comments

Scrape failed: http 403

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

30. Scanwheel is a drum style mechanical television you can build yourself

Source: https://github.com/AncientJames/Scanwheel/
Site: GitHub
Submitter: tobr (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-07-25 14:10 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 52 points · 12 comments
Length: 596 words (~3 min read)
Language: en

Scanwheel is a drum style mechanical television you can build yourself.

It features five windows side by side, each taking advantage of the same scanning drum, but with separate LEDs to allow separate images. The windows are a luxurious 9mm x 8mm each, with 20 scan lines.

The software uses the Pico's PIO hardware to drive the LEDs, allowing extremely high horizontal resolution, so the image quality is a lot better than the 20p line count would imply.

There's an accompanying video showing the build process, with footage of it in action.

Parts

You'll need the following components:

Symbol Technologies 21-02485 stepper motor Old but still widely available online. It has an unusual wiring setup, but it can be used as a bipolar stepper motor by cutting the white wire before it goes into the 4 pin connector as described here.

A4988 based StepStick Something like the Pololu 1182. There's a potentiometer to adjust the current limit. Turn it down as low as it will go before the motor stops turning - it will be almost at the bottom end of the pot's range.

100uF Capacitor Across motor power & ground.

Raspberry Pi Pico Doesn't matter which, but use a Pico W if you want to stream wirelessly to the device.

LEDs In the design presented here there's a single RGB LED and 4 white LEDs, which seemed like a good compromise between wiring complexity and image quality.

Resistors Each LED needs a current-limiting resistor. The R, G and B channels need to be matched in brightness to each other, and the overall RGB brightness needs to be matched to the white LEDs. All of them together must draw no more than 50mA from the Pico's GPIO pins.

This means you need to determine the resistor values for the specific LEDs you have sourced - measure the actual current drawn with your LED and resistor connected.

I found that the red channel of the RGB LED was the deciding factor, at 10.75mA with a 120R resistor. Matching that brightness required 260R for green (2.9mA), 220R for blue (2.8mA) and 82R for white (4.6mA)

Printing

The 3D models are in the parts directory. There are three printed parts; the base, the drum and a lid.

They will fit best if they are scaled to compensate for shrinkage during printing - on my printer, using PLA, I find that a scale of 100.33% in X and Y and 100% in Z achieves this.

The base and the lid don't need any special treatment, but the drum requires a bit of care in printing. Use the highest quality settings - small layer height and low speeds - because small flaws in the pinholes are very visible in the final display.

The sides of the drum are a single wall thick. In Orca Slicer this means you need to set 'Wall Generator' to 'Arachne'. The infill should be 100%.

The OpenSCAD model for the drum is included, allowing you modify the design. One of the parameters is nozzle diameter, and if your printer supports a 0.2mm nozzle I recommend using that variant. You might find you need to fit a washer over the drum's spindle to increase its moment of inertia.

Wiring

Software

The software runs on Micropython 1.28. The device code is in the pico directory - scanwheel.py is the driver, along side some example apps.

The code in host runs on the PC - videostream.py streams videos over a network connection to streaming.py on the device. pngdirect.py converts image files to the raw framebuffer format used by scanwheel.

