Hacker News Top 30 — 2026-07-07

Generated on 2026-07-07 03:21 UTC

1. Fable turned reMarkable into Tom Riddle's diary from Harry Potter

Source: https://github.com/MaximeRivest/Riddle
Site: GitHub
Submitter: modinfo (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-07-06 23:00 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 202 points · 122 comments
Length: 1.0K words (~5 min read)
Language: en

Write on the page with your pen. After a pause, the diary drinks your ink — your words fade into the paper — the page thinks for a moment, and an answer writes itself back in a flowing hand, stroke by stroke, then fades away.

No screen glow, no keyboard, no chat UI. Just ink appearing on paper.

This is the diary from the demo.

🪄 New to this? Start here

You need a reMarkable Paper Pro in developer mode with a launcher installed. If that sounds like a lot, it isn't — remagic walks you through turning on developer mode and sets up everything with one command. Come back here, drop riddle in, and start writing to Tom.

Already have xovi + AppLoad? Install from the remagic catalog, grab the prebuilt bundle, or build from source.

Install with remagic (easiest)

remagic install riddle     # checksum-verified download → AppLoad
remagic config riddle      # settings form in your browser (+ QR for phone)

Then in AppLoad: tap Reload, then The Diary. Write, and rest your pen. (Or install it from the Store app right on the tablet.)

Install the prebuilt bundle

Grab riddle-<version>.zip from the latest release and unzip it into a folder: unzip riddle-*.zip -d riddle
Copy the folder to your tablet: scp -O -r riddle root@10.11.99.1:/home/root/xovi/exthome/appload/
Add an API key: cp oracle.env.example oracle.env in that folder and put your RIDDLE_OPENAI_KEY in it (any OpenAI-compatible key). Or skip it to use pi.
In AppLoad: tap Reload, then The Diary. Write, and rest your pen.

⚠️ This modifies your device. It runs as root, stops the vendor UI (in takeover mode), and drives the e-ink engine directly. It has only been tested on a reMarkable Paper Pro (ferrari, aarch64, OS 3.26–3.27). It may not work on other models or OS versions, and you use it entirely at your own risk. Not affiliated with reMarkable AS. Keep SSH access working before you install anything — that is your escape hatch.

How it works

 pen (raw evdev, full 4096-level pressure, hardware event rate)
   │ strokes
   ▼
 riddle ── idle 2.8s → commit page → PNG ──► oracle (resident LLM process,
   │                                          streams reply sentence-by-sentence)
   ▼ strokes (Dancing Script → skeletonized to single-pixel pen paths)
 display backend
   ├── qtfb        — windowed, inside xochitl (AppLoad app)
   └── quill       — full takeover: xochitl stopped, vendor e-ink engine
                     driven directly for instant ink (lowest latency there is)


riddle/ — the app (Rust). Pen input, ink surface, handwriting synthesis (rasterize → Zhang-Suen thinning → stroke tracing → animated replay), the oracle process manager, and both display backends.
quill/ — the takeover display host (C/C++). An epfb-re-style QImage-constructor interposition shim over the vendor libqsgepaper.so waveform engine, exposed as a small C ABI (quill_init / quill_buffer / quill_swap) that riddle links against with --features takeover. Also carries a small family of demos (scribble, a pen-to-glass latency test, plus map, image, and GIF renderers).

Gestures

Do this And
Write, then rest the pen The diary drinks your ink and Tom replies
Flip the marker Erase
Draw a large ? Summon the built-in guide
Tap five fingers at once Leave the diary
Power button The page turns to "The diary sleeps.", then the tablet suspends; press again to wake exactly where you were

The oracle (the "spirit" in the diary)

The diary's replies come from a vision LLM that reads your handwriting from the committed page (sent as an inline PNG). There are two backends, chosen at startup — pick whichever you have:

Option A — any OpenAI-compatible API (easiest, zero setup)

Set an API key and riddle talks straight to an OpenAI-compatible /chat/completions endpoint. Works with OpenAI, OpenRouter, Groq, a local server — anything that speaks the format. No extra software on the tablet.

export RIDDLE_OPENAI_KEY="sk-..."                       # required
export RIDDLE_OPENAI_BASE="https://api.openai.com/v1"   # optional (default)
export RIDDLE_OPENAI_MODEL="gpt-4o-mini"                # optional; must see images
export RIDDLE_OPENAI_REASONING="low"                    # thinking models only
export RIDDLE_OPENAI_MAX_TOKENS="2000"                  # runaway guard

Any vision-capable model works. On the tablet these live in oracle.env next to the binary (see oracle.env.example, or just run remagic config riddle — it has one-tap presets for OpenAI, OpenRouter, and Gemini). Example with OpenRouter:

export RIDDLE_OPENAI_KEY="$OPENROUTER_API_KEY"
export RIDDLE_OPENAI_BASE="https://openrouter.ai/api/v1"
export RIDDLE_OPENAI_MODEL="openai/gpt-4o-mini"

Two gotchas with thinking models (Gemini 3.x, o-series): set RIDDLE_OPENAI_REASONING=low for faster first ink (some providers reject the field on non-thinking models — leave it unset there), and keep RIDDLE_OPENAI_MAX_TOKENS roomy — hidden reasoning tokens count against it, and a tight cap starves the visible reply.

Verify your setup before launching the diary:

riddle --oracle-test path/to/handwriting.png   # prints the streamed reply

Measured ~0.9–1.1 s to first ink on-device. The HTTPS is built into riddle (pure-Rust, no extra libraries).

Option B — pi (the power path)

If you already run pi, riddle will use a resident pi --mode rpc process kept warm (Node + your subscription auth loaded once), so each turn pays only model latency. Used automatically when RIDDLE_OPENAI_KEY is not set.

Both stream the reply sentence-by-sentence, so the quill starts writing seconds before the model finishes. The persona prompt lives in riddle/src/oracle.rs.

Building

Cross-compiled from x86_64. Two flavours:

Windowed (AppLoad/qtfb) — easiest

Requires xovi + AppLoad on the device.

cd riddle
cargo build --release --target aarch64-unknown-linux-gnu

Install to /home/root/xovi/exthome/appload/riddle/ with external.manifest.json, appload-launch.sh, and the binary.

Takeover (instant ink) — the one from the demo

Requires the reMarkable SDK toolchain (~/rm-sdk-3.26) because the linked vendor Qt libs need its glibc, and libqsgepaper.so pulled from your own device (it is proprietary and not distributed here):

cd quill && ./build.sh              # pulls libqsgepaper.so from the device over
                                    # ssh, builds libquill.so + the demos
cd ../riddle && ./build-takeover.sh
./scripts/make-bundle.sh            # stages the AppLoad bundle in dist/riddle/

The staged dist/riddle/ is self-contained (binary, libquill.so, launch scripts, manifest) — copy it to /home/root/xovi/exthome/appload/riddle/, or publish it to the catalog with remagic publish dist/riddle. Launching via AppLoad (appload-launch.sh) detaches into a transient systemd unit, stops xochitl, runs the diary, and always restores xochitl on exit — exit with the power button, a 5-finger tap, or SIGTERM. If anything wedges: ssh root@10.11.99.1 'systemctl start xochitl'.

Fonts

The reply hand is Dancing Script (SIL OFL 1.1 — see riddle/fonts/OFL.txt).

License

MIT for everything in this repository (see LICENSE). The vendor libraries it interposes (libqsgepaper.so, Qt) are not included and must come from your own device/SDK.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

2. OpenWrt One – Open Hardware Router

Source: https://openwrt.org/toh/openwrt/one
Site: openwrt.org
Submitter: peter_d_sherman (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-07-06 18:23 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 473 points · 190 comments
Length: 168 words (~1 min read)
Language: en

Loading...

You are seeing this because the administrator of this website has set up Anubis to protect the server against the scourge of AI companies aggressively scraping websites. This can and does cause downtime for the websites, which makes their resources inaccessible for everyone.

Anubis is a compromise. Anubis uses a Proof-of-Work scheme in the vein of Hashcash, a proposed proof-of-work scheme for reducing email spam. The idea is that at individual scales the additional load is ignorable, but at mass scraper levels it adds up and makes scraping much more expensive.

Ultimately, this is a placeholder solution so that more time can be spent on fingerprinting and identifying headless browsers (EG: via how they do font rendering) so that the challenge proof of work page doesn't need to be presented to users that are much more likely to be legitimate.

Please note that Anubis requires the use of modern JavaScript features that plugins like JShelter will disable. Please disable JShelter or other such plugins for this domain.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

3. How to sequence your own DNA at home

Source: https://bradleywoolf.com/links-1/sequencing-my-own-dna-at-home
Site: How to sequence your own DNA at home
Submitter: bilsbie (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-07-07 00:14 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 82 points · 20 comments
Length: 3.3K words (~15 min read)
Language: en

I have now sequenced my own genome 5 times with an Oxford Nanopore Technologies MinION. This means collecting them from a swab, prepping them for sequencing, running them through a sequencer, then doing analysis over them.

Cheek cells are easily accessible and replenish pretty quickly. They are not used for cancer diagnosis, inflammation, or what genes are being activated in other parts of the body (like if you have hives on your chest and want to test what genes are being expressed in the cells that are inflamed), since you would want to collect the cells having problems and compare them against other normal versions of those cells.

To sequence the cells, I bought lab materials and consumables to sequence my own genome at home. It took me about two months to get everything together to do a full end to end high quality run. Likewise, the costs are still out of reach for the average person but they are decreasing (exponentially!) and we will eventually have affordable technology, like a cell phone or AI, telling us about our DNA + RNA expression real-time.

What can I even do with my own genome?

Before we actually spend all this time and money on sequencing, what can we actually do with our genome?

The genome is not magic by itself- it is the reference layer. Once I have a VCF, I can run it through tools like VEP, ClinVar, gnomAD, PharmGKB (highly recommend), Gene Inspector, or Claude, and start asking:

Which variants do I have?
Which genes and pathways are affected?
Which medicines might I metabolize differently?
What rare variants should I take seriously?
Where does the model know nothing yet?

This last part matters- the information produced is not yet diagnosis-level, and it is definitely not “edit yourself with CRISPR because an AI said so.” The near-term value is turning a static genome into something queryable, but the “edit yourself with CRISPR” will most likely follow. DNA is the stable reference, RNA is the current state, and we will eventually integrate all biosensor data into one ‘model’ of yourself.

Here are a list of links and Twitter posts to help:

Genetic variants from first principles:

TLDR these genes, and the combinations of them, compound into real physical diseases. We will probably map these in the next decade
Pass your genome + RNA to any of these models: https://www.biotender.online/bio-model-install-guide/
Give your genome to Claude Code- message me if you want me to set this up for you
Take it to a doctor if you metabolize particular drugs differently
Patrick Collison post on using agents to talk to his genome

Protocol Steps

This is intended to be read by AI- please just copy and paste the URL of this and have ChatGPT walk you through it. If you have AR glasses, even better, since the AI can walk you through the whole protocol.

Hardware

Oxford Nanopore Technologies MinION ($7.5k)
Laptop/workstation for MinKNOW (any PC should be fine)
100GB+ storage for outputs
GPU for Dorado basecalling
Vortex ($50)
Heat block ($250)
Centrifuge ($400 used on eBay)

Consumables

SQK-LSK114 Ligation Sequencing Kit V14 for DNA
EXP-WSH004 Flow Cell Wash Kit
EXP-CTL001 Control material
PBS 1x
Isohelix Buccal swabs

Reagents

DNA extraction kit

NEB Monarch HMW DNA Extraction Kit for Cells & Blood ($87 for 5 runs)

Nuclei Prep Buffer
Nuclei Lysis Buffer
RNase A
Proteinase K
Precipitation Enhancer
DNA Capture Beads
gDNA Wash Buffer
Elution Buffer II
Bead retainers / Monarch collection parts from kit
DNA library-prep reagents

NEBNext Companion Module v2 / repair-end prep reagents ($760 for 24 reactions)

FFPE DNA Repair Buffer
FFPE DNA Repair Mix
Ultra II End-prep Reaction Buffer
Ultra II End-prep Enzyme Mix
NEBNext Quick T4 DNA Ligase
Oxford Nanopore SQK-LSK114 ($720 for 6 reactions)

Long Fragment Buffer / LFB
Elution Buffer / EB
Ligation Adapter / LA
Ligation Buffer / LNB
Sequencing Buffer / SB
Library Beads / LIB
Flow cell priming reagents

Flow Cell Flush / FCF
Flow Cell Tether / FCT
BSA
AMPure XP beads
80% ethanol
Nuclease-free water ($32 for 25mL)
DNA quantity measurement

Qubit fluorometer
Qubit dsDNA BR or HS Assay Kit

Bench equipment

Microcentrifuge
Vortex mixer
Heat block / dry bath
Magnetic rack for 1.5/2 mL tubes
Tube racks
Ice bucket / cold block
Freezer at -20°C
Fridge at 4°C
Pipettes

P1000 (100–1000 µL)
P200 (0–200 µL)
P20 (2–20 µL)
P10 (1-10 µL)

Plastics / Lab Pro-style consumables

Sterile flocked cheek swabs
1.5 mL microcentrifuge tubes
2.0 mL microcentrifuge tubes
DNA LoBind 1.5 mL tubes
RNA LoBind tubes
0.2 mL PCR tubes
Qubit assay tubes
Pipette sterile filtered tips

P1000 (100–1000 µL)
P200 (0–200 µL)
P20 (2–20 µL)
P10 (1-10 µL)
Wide-bore P200 tips
Tube labels / lab marker
Gloves

Software stack

MinKNOW
Dorado
minimap2
samtools
mosdepth
NanoPlot or pycoQC
Clair3
DeepVariant, optional
Ensembl VEP
ClinVar
gnomAD
PharmGKB
dbSNP, optional
Python/R
SQLite/Postgres for query layer later

End-to-end DNA sequencing protocol

The goal is to go from 2 cheek-swab samples → MinION sequencing

0. Setup

Gloves on.
Clean bench.
Label tubes:

Cheek sample
Extracted DNA
End-prep
Ligation
Final library
Priming mix
Loading mix
Bring AMPure XP beads to room temperature.
Keep enzyme mixes cold.
Set heat block to 56°C.
Keep Nuclei Prep Buffer cold.
Confirm gDNA Wash Buffer already has ethanol added.
Confirm you have isopropanol for DNA binding.
Confirm you have fresh 80% ethanol for AMPure cleanup.
Confirm you have the corrected ONT reagents:

FFPE DNA Repair Buffer v2
FFPE DNA Repair Mix
N-Prep Enzyme Mix
Salt-T4 DNA Ligase
LNB
LA
LFB
EB
SB
LIB
FCF
FCT

1. Collect cheek cells

Goal: get as much cheek-cell material as possible into PBS.

Rinse mouth with water.
Wait 10 minutes.
Do not brush teeth.
Do not use mouthwash.
Scrape inside cheek firmly for 60 seconds.
Add 1 mL cold PBS to labeled tube.
Put swab head into PBS.
Vortex 10 seconds.
Press swab against tube wall to squeeze liquid out.
Remove and discard swab.

What good looks like:

PBS may look slightly cloudy.

2. Pellet cheek cells

Goal: concentrate cells and remove excess PBS.

Spin at 2,000 × g for 30 seconds.
Look for a small white/off-white pellet or smear.
Remove most PBS with P1000.
Remove more PBS carefully with P200.
Leave 50–100 µL above the pellet.
Flick gently to resuspend the pellet.

Do not aspirate the pellet.

3. Prepare Monarch lysis solutions for one sample

Nuclei Prep Solution

165 µL Nuclei Prep Buffer
5.5 µL RNase A

Mix gently. Keep cold.

You will use 150 µL.

Nuclei Lysis Solution

165 µL Nuclei Lysis Buffer
11 µL Proteinase K

Mix gently. Keep at room temperature.

You will use 150 µL.

The extra volume is intentional so pipetting error does not leave you short.

4. Lyse cells

Goal: break open cells and digest proteins while preserving long genomic DNA.

Add 150 µL Nuclei Prep Solution to the resuspended cheek-cell pellet.
Pipette up/down gently 10 times.
Incubate 2 minutes at room temperature.
Add 150 µL Nuclei Lysis Solution.
Invert tube gently 10 times.
Do not vortex.
Incubate at 56°C for 10 minutes.

What good looks like:

The liquid may become more viscous.

Do not vortex after lysis. At this point, the priority is preserving high molecular weight DNA.

5. Bind DNA to Monarch capture beads

Goal: precipitate genomic DNA onto the large Monarch capture beads.

Add 75 µL Precipitation Enhancer.
Invert gently 8–10 times.
Add 2 DNA Capture Beads.
Add 275 µL isopropanol.
Invert slowly 30 times.
Do not vortex.

Important:

The beads now carry the DNA.
Do not lose the beads.
Do not use ethanol here.

6. Wash DNA-bound beads

Goal: wash contaminants away while keeping DNA bound to the capture beads.

Let beads settle briefly.
Remove liquid carefully without removing beads.
Add 500 µL gDNA Wash Buffer.
Invert gently 2–3 times.
Remove wash buffer carefully.
Add another 500 µL gDNA Wash Buffer.
Invert gently 2–3 times.
Remove wash buffer carefully.
Remove as much residual wash as practical without touching or removing beads.

Critical:

gDNA Wash Buffer must already have ethanol added.

7. Elute genomic DNA

Goal: release purified genomic DNA from the Monarch capture beads.

Put bead retainer into Monarch collection tube.
Transfer/pour beads into the retainer.
Pulse spin ≤1 second.
Move beads to a clean Monarch tube.
Add 100 µL Elution Buffer II.
Incubate at 56°C for 5 minutes.
Put bead retainer over a clean DNA LoBind tube labeled Extracted DNA.
Transfer eluate + beads into bead retainer.
Spin at 12,000 × g for 30 seconds.
Keep the eluate.

The eluate is the purified genomic DNA.

Do not discard the eluate.

8. Measure quantity of DNA with a Fluorometer

Goal: measure whether there is enough DNA to justify ONT library prep.

Use:

1x dsDNA High Sensitivity

Do not select the older non-1X dsDNA HS workflow if using the premixed 1X reagent.

Standards

Standard #1:

190 µL 1X dsDNA HS working solution
10 µL Standard #1

Standard #2:

190 µL 1X dsDNA HS working solution
10 µL Standard #2

Sample, first attempt

198 µL 1X dsDNA HS working solution
2 µL DNA

On Qubit, enter:

Sample volume = 2 µL

If too low

Use more DNA in a fresh Qubit tube:

190 µL 1X dsDNA HS working solution
10 µL DNA

On Qubit, enter:

Sample volume = 10 µL

Do not just add 8 µL to the old 198 + 2 tube, because that makes 208 µL total and breaks the assay math.

Record:

Genomic DNA concentration:
Remaining DNA volume:
Estimated total DNA:

Calculate:

total DNA ng = Qubit concentration ng/µL × remaining volume µL

Pause point

This is the best place to pause. For a same-day break:

Store extracted DNA at 4°C / fridge.

Before storing:

Make sure the DNA is in a clearly labeled DNA LoBind tube.
Quick spin.
Do not vortex.
Close tube tightly.
Put it in the fridge.

Resume at Step 10.

9. Prepare DNA input for repair/end-prep

Goal: prepare 47 µL DNA input.

Ideal target:

1,000 ng DNA in 47 µL

Calculate:

DNA volume needed = 1000 ng / Qubit concentration ng/µL

Then:

water volume = 47 µL - DNA volume

If the DNA is too dilute and 1,000 ng cannot fit into 47 µL, use the maximum possible volume:

47 µL extracted DNA
0 µL water

For the first low-input run:

0.296 ng/µL × 47 µL = ~13.9 ng DNA

That was far below the recommended input, but useful as an end-to-end practice run.

10. Repair / end-prep

Goal: repair DNA and prepare the ends for adapter ligation.

Use the actual v2 reagents:

FFPE DNA Repair Buffer v2
FFPE DNA Repair Mix
N-Prep Enzyme Mix / Ultra II End Prep Enzyme Mix

Do not use Salt-T4 DNA Ligase in this step. It is used later.

If not using DCS, replace the optional 1 µL DCS with 1 µL nuclease-free water.

Reaction

47 µL DNA
1 µL nuclease-free water
7 µL FFPE DNA Repair Buffer v2
2 µL FFPE DNA Repair Mix
3 µL N-Prep Enzyme Mix

Total = 60 µL

Steps

Add 47 µL DNA to a 0.2 mL thin-walled PCR tube labeled End-prep.
Add 1 µL nuclease-free water.
Add 7 µL FFPE DNA Repair Buffer v2.
Pipette mix 10–20 times.
Add 2 µL FFPE DNA Repair Mix.
Pipette mix 10–20 times.
Add 3 µL N-Prep Enzyme Mix.
Pipette mix 10–20 times.
Quick spin.

Incubate:

20°C for 5 minutes
65°C for 5 minutes
Then place on ice

11. AMPure cleanup after repair/end-prep

Goal: clean the repaired/end-prepped DNA.

Input:

60 µL repair/end-prep reaction

Resuspend AMPure XP beads until uniformly brown.
Add 60 µL AMPure XP beads to the 60 µL reaction.
Mix gently by pipetting 10 times.
Incubate 5 minutes at room temperature.
Put tube on magnet.
Wait until solution clears.
Remove and discard supernatant without touching beads.

Wash 1

Keep tube on magnet.
Add 200 µL fresh 80% ethanol.
Remove ethanol.

Wash 2

Add another 200 µL fresh 80% ethanol.
Remove ethanol.

Dry

Remove residual ethanol with P10/P20.
Air dry briefly, about 30 seconds.
Do not overdry.
Do not let beads crack.

Elute

Remove tube from magnet.
Add 61 µL nuclease-free water.
Resuspend beads gently.
Incubate 5–10 minutes at room temperature.
Put tube back on magnet.
Wait until clear.
Transfer 60 µL clear eluate to a clean DNA LoBind tube labeled Ligation.

Do not transfer beads.

12. Adapter ligation

Goal: attach ONT sequencing adapters.

Use the actual reagents:

LNB
LA
Salt-T4 DNA Ligase

Reaction

60 µL repaired/end-prepped DNA
25 µL LNB
10 µL Salt-T4 DNA Ligase
5 µL LA

Total = 100 µL

Steps

Use a clean DNA LoBind tube labeled Ligation.
Mix LNB slowly by pipetting before adding. It is viscous.
Add 60 µL repaired/end-prepped DNA.
Add 25 µL LNB.
Add 10 µL Salt-T4 DNA Ligase.
Add 5 µL LA.
Mix gently by pipetting 10–15 times.
Do not vortex.
Quick spin.
Incubate 10 minutes at room temperature.

Before incubation, say/check:

DNA, LNB, Salt-T4 DNA Ligase, LA.

Failure points:

Forgetting LA = no sequenceable library.
Forgetting Salt-T4 DNA Ligase = adapter ligation fails.
Poorly mixed LNB = bad ligation chemistry.
Vortexing = unnecessary DNA shearing.

13. Adapter-ligated library cleanup

Goal: remove free adapters, ligase, salts, and small fragments while keeping adapter-ligated DNA.

Important:

This cleanup uses LFB, not ethanol.

Input:

100 µL ligation reaction

Resuspend AMPure XP beads fully.
Add 40 µL AMPure XP beads to the 100 µL ligation reaction.
Mix gently by pipetting 10 times.
Incubate 5 minutes at room temperature.
Place tube on magnet.
Wait until solution clears.
Keep tube on magnet.
Remove and discard supernatant carefully.
Do not touch bead pellet.

Wash 1

Add 250 µL LFB to beads.
Remove tube from magnet.
Gently resuspend beads by flicking or slow pipetting.
Put tube back on magnet.
Wait until clear.
Remove and discard LFB.

Wash 2

Add another 250 µL LFB.
Remove tube from magnet.
Gently resuspend beads.
Put tube back on magnet.
Wait until clear.
Remove and discard LFB.
Remove residual LFB with P10/P20.
Do not overdry.

Elute

Add 25 µL EB.
Remove tube from magnet.
Resuspend gently.
Incubate 10 minutes at room temperature.
Put tube back on magnet.
Wait until eluate is clear.
Transfer clear eluate to a clean DNA LoBind tube labeled Final library.

This is the final sequencing library.

Practical rule:

Liquid moves. Beads stay.

Do not transfer beads into the final library.

14. Check quantity of DNA one more time

Goal: measure final adapted library concentration.

Because low-input runs may produce very little final library, this may read low or fail.

Use:

199 µL 1X dsDNA HS working solution
1 µL final library

On Qubit:

Sample volume = 1 µL

Record:

Final library concentration:
Final library volume:
Estimated mass loaded:

Calculate:

mass loaded ng = final library concentration ng/µL × 12 µL

If the final library is too low, do not repeatedly burn more library on Qubit. For a practice run, proceed with 12 µL library in the loading mix.

15. Flow cell check with MinKNOW

Goal: verify the flow cell before loading the library.

Take flow cell out of fridge.
Let it sit at room temperature for 20 minutes.
Keep it flat.
Do not shake.
Plug in MinION.
Open MinKNOW.
Insert flow cell.
Run flow cell check.
Record active pores.

Decision table:

>1200 pores = great
800–1200 pores = usable
500–800 pores = marginal/practice
<500 pores = bad, but still possible for mechanical practice
<200 pores = essentially not worth it except loading practice

Record:

Flow cell ID:
Starting active pores:
Flow cell age:
Previously used? yes/no:
Washed? yes/no:

16. Understand the final tubes and ports

At the end, there are three tubes:

Tube 1: Final library
- This is the DNA library made after adapter cleanup.

Tube 2: Priming mix
- This prepares the flow cell.

Tube 3: Loading mix
- This contains final library + sequencing buffer + library beads.

There are two flow-cell ports:

Port 1: Priming port
- This is under the sliding cover.
- Priming mix goes here.

Port 2: SpotON sample port
- This is the small sample well.
- Loading mix goes here drop by drop.

Important:

Final library does not go directly onto the flow cell by itself.
Final library first goes into the loading mix tube.

17. Make priming mix for ONT Flow Cell

If BSA is available:

1170 µL FCF
5 µL BSA
30 µL FCT

Total = 1205 µL

If BSA is not available and this is a practice run:

1170 µL FCF
30 µL FCT

Total = 1200 µL

Do not substitute SFB, DCS, LIS, or LNB for BSA.

Mix gently. Avoid bubbles.

This is Tube 2: Priming mix.

18. First prime

Do this only after flow cell check is complete. Make sure to watch this video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IknVaEnuDz0. It is how you load the actual flow cell!

Keep flow cell plugged in and flat.
Open the sliding cover to expose the priming port.
Check for an air bubble near the port.

Draw back only 20–30 µL:

Set P1000 to 200 µL.
Put tip into priming port.
Slowly dial to 220–230 µL.
Stop as soon as liquid enters the tip.
Do not pull more.

Then load into the priming port:

800 µL priming mix

Go slowly. Avoid bubbles.

Wait:

5 minutes

19. Make loading mix during the 5-minute wait

Tube 3: Loading mix

Use:

37.5 µL SB
25.5 µL LIB
12 µL final library

Total = 75 µL

Important:

LIB = Library Beads from the ONT kit.
LIB is not AMPure XP beads.
LIB settles fast.
Mix LIB immediately before pipetting.

Steps:

Mix LIB immediately before pipetting.
Add 37.5 µL SB to a clean tube.
Add 25.5 µL LIB.
Add 12 µL final library.
Mix gently by pipetting.
Do not vortex.

20. Second prime

After the 5-minute wait, load into the priming port:

200 µL priming mix

Avoid bubbles.

21. Load library onto SpotON port

Gently mix Tube 3 loading mix immediately before loading.
Open the SpotON sample port.
Load the full 75 µL loading mix into the SpotON port.
Add it drop by drop.
Let each drop disappear before adding the next.
Do not force it.
Do not jab the port.
Avoid bubbles.

Then:

Close SpotON cover.
Close priming port.
Add light shield.
Close MinION lid.
Start run in MinKNOW.

Final mental model:

Priming mix → sliding priming port
Loading mix → SpotON sample port
Final library → only goes into loading mix first

22. Sequence DNA with MinKNOW

Recommended basic settings:

Flow cell type: FLO-MIN114
Kit: SQK-LSK114
Basecalling: ON
Model: High-accuracy / HAC
Barcoding: OFF
Alignment: OFF
Adaptive sampling: OFF
Raw reads / POD5: ON
Filtering: OFF for low-input practice runs

Then:

Save configuration
Start

For a low-input practice run, keep raw POD5 on so the data can be analyzed later even if live output is poor.

23. Basecall after run if needed

Find POD5 output directory.
Install Dorado.
Run basecalling:

dorado basecaller sup pod5_directory/ > calls.bam

Convert BAM to FASTQ if needed:

samtools fastq calls.bam > reads.fastq

For faster first pass, use HAC instead of SUP:

dorado basecaller hac pod5_directory/ > calls.bam

24. Align reads to human reference

Download GRCh38 FASTA.
Index reference:

minimap2-d GRCh38.mmi GRCh38.fa

Align reads:

minimap2-ax map-ont GRCh38.mmi reads.fastq | samtoolssort-o aligned.bam

Index BAM:

samtools index aligned.bam

Check alignment summary:

samtools flagstat aligned.bam > flagstat.txt

Check coverage:

mosdepth sample_cov aligned.bam

25. Variant calling

Install Clair3.
Use ONT model.
Run Clair3 with GRCh38 reference, sorted BAM, and output directory.
Output should include VCF.
Do not overinterpret low-coverage variants.
For a first MinION run, treat this as technical validation, not medical-grade interpretation.

26. Annotation

Install VEP.
Annotate VCF against GRCh38.
Add ClinVar.
Add gnomAD.
Add PharmGKB later.
Store final table with columns:

chromosome
position
ref
alt
gene
consequence
ClinVar significance
gnomAD frequency
genotype
read depth
variant quality

References

Seth Howes protocol (X profile)

DNA Quantification with Qubit

Molecular Biology of the Cell

Quantifying Life (super underrated)

Integrated Drug Discovery Technologies

Darkome

Upgrade

Sid’s cancer data

DNA Whole Genome Sequencing - astrology for sigmas

DNA sequencing at home with the flongle

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

4. CoMaps – FOSS Offline Maps

Source: https://www.comaps.app/
Site: comaps.app
Submitter: basilikum (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-07-06 18:55 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 348 points · 69 comments
Length: 154 words (~1 min read)
Language: en

Discover more of your journey - Powered by the community

Download

Offline Search and Route

Plan and navigate your trip abroad with just GPS, no need for mobile data. Search waypoints while on distant hiking trails or bike paths.

No Data Collection

The app is designed with privacy in mind - does not identify people, does not track you, and does not collect any information. CoMaps was also audited by Exodus.

Save Your Battery

Efficiently uses the battery, doesn’t drain your battery like other navigation apps.

Free and Built by the Community

People like you are helping build the app by adding locations to OpenStreetMap, giving feedback on features, and contributing code on Codeberg to create great maps together. The project is a fork of Organic Maps and Maps.Me, and driven by an open-source community.

Get Involved

Freedom Is Here

Discover your journey, navigate the world with privacy and community at the forefront.

Download

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

5. GLM 5.2 and the coming AI margin collapse

Source: https://martinalderson.com/posts/the-upcoming-ai-margin-collapse-part-1-glm-5-2/
Site: Martin Alderson
Author: Martin Alderson
Published: 2026-07-06
HN activity: 212 points · 137 comments
Length: 1.4K words (~7 min read)
Language: en

This is a two part series focusing on what I believe is perhaps the least understood upcoming shift in AI economics. If you've enjoyed this and want to be notified about the second post, please feel free to sign up for my newsletter.

The real DeepSeek moment is upon us

What feels like decades ago, markets recoiled at DeepSeek's R1 model. The theory being that given the underlying V3 model reportedly cost under $6m to train, the market therefore thought the huge investment in capex for model training was over, and thus the stock price of Nvidia et al collapsed overnight.

Of course, this was a hugely poor read of where the costs actually lie in AI. Training - while no doubt capex intensive - is a fixed, up-front cost. You spend hundreds of millions to train a model, then you are "done".[1]

Inference, on the other hand, scales with your demand. It has genuine marginal costs. I've written about this at length over the past year or so. Again, the mainstream understanding of this - that the API costs the providers charge are their real costs is mistaken.

Indeed, when Anthropic/OpenAI charge $25/MTok for inference, my napkin maths suggests that this is probably something like 90% gross margin on the cost of compute vs the rack rate. It may be a bit higher, or a bit lower (OpenAI's leaked financials suggest a ~60% gross margin on revenue, but this no doubt includes a lot of other costs like support, payment processing and other services they offer), but the whole business model of frontier AI labs is in short to spend a large amount of money on salaries on compute to train a model, then amortise that cost over a lot of very profitable inference. If you can amortise that cost over enough inference you turn from profitable on a COGS basis to... actually profitable.

I have been playing around with GLM5.2 from Z.ai for the last couple of weeks. I believe GLM5.2 is the first model that reaches the "bar" of a genuine open weights competitor to Opus and GPT (at the time of writing, the latest version of GPT was 5.5 - future models no doubt will exceed this).

It's genuinely very good and hard for me to tell the difference between Opus - my daily driver and it.

I've found that it is slow because of the amount of thinking it tends to do. For non interactive agentic tasks (like reviewing PRs in the background) which aren't time critical this is a non issue, but for interactive use it is definitely a tad too slow to keep my attention. This also somewhat reduces the cost effectiveness of it (more thinking means more tokens, which increases costs).

It also doesn't have vision support. It's funny how quickly I've gone from basically never wanting to use vision (because it was so inaccurate, I'd often pause sessions when I caught it using vision), to using it all the time - since Opus 4.7 introduced far higher resolution vision capabilities. It's genuinely frustrating it not being able to read image-based PDFs, screenshots and design files. I'm sure they have a more multimodal model in the works, but this is a significant weakness against the frontier labs.

Secondly, and something I really didn't expect to be a blocker, is the lack of/poor web search capabilities. It turns out that nearly every agentic session does a lot of web searching for looking up items. Z.ai provides a replacement MCP for web search, but it's pretty awful and slow. Fireworks doesn't provide any, though they gave me a very vague answer saying they are always looking to improve products. I would take that as no plans personally, but let's see.

I've managed to somewhat work around this by telling the agent to use a CLI based web search like ddgr, but this is a real weakness right now. I am very bullish on the potential of 3rd party web search APIs. This is actually a huge gap in what open weights model providers can offer, and it turns out great web search capabilities are essential for many agentic tasks. Regardless, this no doubt will be solved with time - there are many people building web search indexes and it just requires the right partnerships and plumbing in place.

Drop in replacement

Where it gets really scary for the frontier labs is how easy it is to migrate to open weights models. Both Z.ai and Fireworks offer both an OpenAI compatible and Anthropic compatible endpoint. This makes it absolutely trivial to use with Claude Code and Codex. You just set the base URL to point to your inference provider, give it the API key and tell it to use GLM5.2.

Given Anthropic recently announced (then backtracked) on charging API rates for claude -p non interactive agentic use, you will find for many/most of those use cases you can just drop in GLM instead. And for interactive use, apart from the lack of vision and slow(er) speed[2], it was genuinely almost impossible for me to realise I wasn't using Opus in Claude Code.

This is not Microsoft or Salesforce like lock in, where you need to spend years planning a migration. The switching costs are incredibly low, and I would argue that are actually far less than trying to keep up on all the policy and term changes that the frontier lab models tend to scramble around with. It's possible that Claude Code will make it harder to use 3rd party providers, but there are many good open source options (like Codex itself and OpenCode, amongst dozens).

One concern I do hear from enterprise is data privacy and security. There is no doubt that using Z.ai's official API and subscription is almost certainly a non-starter, with their terms being at best weak and the deep connection to Mainland China. But of course, with open weights being open there are many other providers in the market, many with proper contractual provisions. And, if that isn't enough, you can of course host in on premises yourself, which actually opens up even more sensitive data - that couldn't be sent to any third party - to Opus-quality agentic workflows.

Cost savings

The going rate for GLM5.2 seems to be around the $4.40/MTok mark. This is less than 20% of the retail price of Opus and ~15% the cost of GPT5.5. Now, given it does use more tokens for a given task, this isn't a totally apples to apples comparison. But I'd be very surprised if it wasn't more than 50% cheaper for nearly all workflows, for a very similar level of quality.

In terms of subscriptions, Z.ai offers a "coding plan" subscription which mirrors the plans you'd see from Anthropic and OpenAI, but with a higher claimed usage limit. I expect for most professional use the very lax terms around training and data retention will make this a difficult sell, but if the frontier labs were to try and increase pricing substantially I can see it being a credible option for those that are budget-conscious.

I expect these costs for GLM5.2 to come down significantly over the coming months as well, as more optimisation is done to the serving stack(s). Wafer wrote an interesting write up of their efforts to run it on AMD hardware. They suggest that it is 2.75x cheaper per token to run inference on AMD vs Nvidia Blackwell.

Part two is where this gets interesting - what a collapse in inference margins actually does to the industry, and who is likely to win and lose. I'd keep Bezos's famous "your margin is my opportunity" line in mind. If you'd like me to drop it in your inbox the moment it's out, sign up to the newsletter - or grab the RSS feed if that's more your thing.

Disclosure - Fireworks kindly gave me some free credit to experiment with GLM to help write this article.

This is a simplification - the frontier labs are effectively training new models constantly to stay competitive, so it's really a rolling cost rather than a true one-off. The key distinction still holds though: unlike inference, that cost doesn't scale with how much customers actually use the product. ↩︎

To be fair, the slowness is mostly the model thinking a lot rather than the serving itself - Fireworks launched GLM5.2 at genuinely quick tokens/sec, which was a huge improvement and well worth keeping an eye on, though in practice I found it a bit temperamental at how fast it actually was. ↩︎

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

6. Ternlight – 7 MB embedding model that runs in browser (WASM)

Source: https://ternlight-demo.vercel.app/
Site: ternlight-demo.vercel.app
Submitter: soycaporal (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-07-06 23:06 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 107 points · 32 comments
Length: 123 words (~1 min read)
Language: en

An embedding model in 7 MB.

Runs on your CPU. No API.

Drop it in, embed text in milliseconds, and never call a server.

Runs in your browser

no API call

Engine + weights · 7 MB

mini variant · 5 MB

Fast embeddings · ~5 ms

CPU only · no GPU

USE IT

Three lines to semantic search

Ships as a single npm package. No model download step, no server.

$ npm install @ternlight/base

example.js

import { embed, similar } from '@ternlight/base';

similar('easy weeknight dinner ideas', recipes, { topK: 3 });
// → ranked matches · ~5 ms · zero network

EXAMPLE

React docs search

Search React's docs in your browser. Type a question — powered by @ternlight/mini, the 5 MB tier.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

7. Small AI Models Gain Traction In places with unreliable networks

Source: https://spectrum.ieee.org/small-language-models-ai-pharmaceuticals
Site: IEEE Spectrum
Author: David Berreby
Published: 2026-07-06
HN activity: 33 points · 7 comments
Length: 1.6K words (~8 min read)
Language: en

One morning in 2019, Adebayo Alonge was in a Cape Town hotel room, preparing to demonstrate his startup’s AI answer to a serious problem in African health care: counterfeit medication, which kills thousands of people across the continent every year.

The RxScanner is a handheld spectrometer that scans a pill with infrared light, then sends the item’s molecular profile to an AI model equipped with a pharmaceutical database. In seconds, the AI identifies the medication from its molecular profile—or reports that it’s phony.

Pharmacies were using the system in more than a dozen countries, including Ghana, Kenya, Myanmar, and Alonge’s native Nigeria. But that morning in South Africa, it didn’t work. “I was shocked,” Alonge says.

The spectrometer connected to the AI model—but the data center was 14,000 kilometers away and bandwidth was limited. “Our server was in the United States, and just to get the result of a single scan was taking me over 5 minutes.”

So Alonge immediately asked his engineers to shrink the AI model down to a smaller, low-power, unconnected version that could run entirely on his Android phone. They produced it 2 hours later, and that saved the demo.

More importantly, the work birthed a new version of his device, which can authenticate a pill in places without broadband, computers, or even reliable electricity. It also turned Alonge into an advocate for this kind of “small AI.”

Small AI for Global Health Care Access

Small AI is a far cry from wealthy nations’ colossal large language models (LLMs), hyperscale data centers, multibillion-dollar investments, and debates about AI consciousness. But for millions of people around the world, the only AI that matters, and often the only kind available, is small. (According to a World Bank Report issued in November, only 0.7 percent of internet users in the world’s poorest countries have used ChatGPT, compared to a quarter of all internet users in the most developed nations.)

“Most people are discussing AI from the LLM/generative side. But that needs a lot of computing power, electricity, massive data, and skilled people to manage it,” Ajay Banga, president of the World Bank, said last January at the World Economic Forum, in Davos. “Outside the developed world, other than maybe India and China, very few countries have that combination.”

By contrast, small AI can deliver useful, even life-saving services to people in areas that have none of those things, Banga said. In India, where the government’s AI plans call for more development of small AI, many such systems are working for farmers.

For example, a drone-based system developed by Bala Murugan and colleagues at the Vellore Institute of Technology, in India, takes photos of cashew plants and quickly identifies those with splotches that indicate disease. All the processing takes place on the drone itself, so there’s no need for a computer on-site, nor for a connection to a central server.

Using small language models trained for a specific problem, and sometimes running on cheap, low-power devices, other small-AI implementations have been developed to identify ant infestations in a Uruguayan vineyard, detect the presence of malaria-carrying mosquitoes in a number of nations, and run electrocardiograms from an Arduino device in parts of Brazil that lack access to more complex equipment.

“This is the most important area in AI nowadays,” says Marcelo José Rovai, a professor at the Institute of Engineering and Information Systems at the Federal University of Itajubá, in Brazil, who was involved in all three projects. “It’s growing very fast.”

Low-Power, Small-AI Models on Devices

Small AI models can run on a variety of low-power devices, including [from left to right] an Arduino Nano 33 BLE Sense, a Seeed Wio Terminal, and an Arduino Portenta.Moez Altayeb

For Alonge, Rovai, and other advocates, small AI is not just “a promising trend,” as that November World Bank report calls it. It may be, in the long term, the form of AI that will touch the most lives and remain sustainable after some of the giant models become too costly for most users.

“I think the future of AI is not like one giant model, at a center. I think it’s millions of small, precise models deployed at the edge, each one solving like a specific problem, a specific context,” Alonge says. This is partly because much of humanity—including people in parts of rich countries as well as the developing world—lives without access to cutting-edge frontier models. But, he says, it’s also because those models are not sustainable.

“If someone is not subsidizing it, most people will not be able to afford those models. So those of us who are said to be small-AI developers are the ones who will have to build for the majority of the world,” Alonge says.

There is no strict definition of “small AI,” but people often use the term for language models with at most a few billion parameters. (Compare that to cutting-edge models, which can include more than a trillion.) That’s small enough to run directly on a phone or a Raspberry Pi. That’s what allows these applications to run on devices without a connection to a data center and use only a few watts of power, often supplied by a battery or a solar panel.

Despite their small footprint, these models aren’t fundamentally different technology from that of gigantic AI models, Rovai says. Many instances of small language models were created the same way the phone-based version of Alonge’s pharmaceuticals scanner was—by “pruning” large models, or removing the parameters that weren’t involved in the task. The result is a system that’s less capable generally but still very good at the specific job it was pruned for, Rovai says.

A lighter version of RxAll’s RxScanner spectrometer sends its results to an AI model run locally on a phone to check that a drug’s molecular signature is genuine.RxAll

Other small models are created by “distillation.” They are trained to mimic a large model, until their performance approaches that of their “teacher,” Rovai says. In other cases, a larger model’s precision is reduced, for example, so that a model run on 32-bit architecture can run on 8-bit designs. In situations where the machine learning application is being used to classify data or predict patterns (like an ant infestation), it’s trained from the beginning on a small device, not derived from a larger model at all.

Running all these small, specialized systems is becoming easier, Rovai says, for two reasons.

The first reason is that hardware is getting better and more capable while using less power, he says. This means more and more phones can run small AI—especially those equipped with neural processing units, which are specialized chips that handle AI tasks like facial recognition and changing the brightness, shadows, or contrast in a photo.

In 2025, slightly more than a third of all smartphones shipped worldwide were capable of running generative AI, and that figure will reach 45 percent by the end of this year, according to the technology research firm Counterpoint. By the end of next year, slightly more than half of all smartphones will be able to run a small AI model.

The second reason Rovai cites is the shrinking footprint of language models. Both Google DeepMind’s Gemma 4 (released in April) and Alibaba’s Qwen 3.5 are “fantastic” for small AI, Rovai says. Both models are “open weight,” meaning users can adjust the connections between parameters to suit their needs. This makes it easy, for example, “to take a lot of data from, say, the milk industry and retrain the model specifically on that,” Rovai says.

Rovai illustrated these reasons on a Zoom call, using one of his most recent experiments. Holding up a device, he says, “This is the new Arduino UNO Q—a US $50 device with a Qualcomm chipset. I’m running a language model here, which collects data from sensors and analyzes that data to detect tiny pools of water where mosquitoes might be breeding. It takes 3 watts to run it.”

Support for Small-AI Development

Convinced that millions of people are already benefiting from these kinds of applications, the World Bank now actively promotes small AI with grants, mentorship programs, financing, technical advice, and models of government policies that are friendly for small-AI development. For example, in Rwanda, the World Bank is backing a government program to help low-income households get devices that can run AI.

All that said, no one claims that large language models are going away entirely. To create a generative AI that can run on a phone or other small device requires the architectural insights, data processing, and results of a larger model, Rovai says. “We need the big models to create these smaller models.”

And for all that small AI can benefit people without access to big AI, the technology can’t solve the larger problems of development and digital inequality, Alonge says. Implementing small AI won’t allow nations to escape the challenge of creating an ecosystem to support AI: reliable power, a supply chain that works, and an educational system that develops the talents needed to create AI tools.

Though his drug-scanning system can run for days on a phone with no connection, “you still want to be able to enable periodic syncing for updates with new signatures for the medications and analytics,” Alonge says. “And even when you are using batteries, reliable power is important. That phone battery is not going to last forever.”

In many parts of the world, the future of small AI isn’t assured, he says. “It works, and many places will eventually need to use it. The question is whether or not the political actors are wise enough to invest in infrastructure to support it long term.”

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

8. A global workspace in language models

Source: https://www.anthropic.com/research/global-workspace
Site: anthropic.com
Submitter: in-silico (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-07-06 17:44 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 293 points · 105 comments
Length: 5.2K words (~23 min read)
Language: en

As you read this sentence, circuits in your brain are adjusting your posture, controlling your breathing, and transforming lines and curves on the screen into recognizable words. Most of this processing is invisible to you. But some of what takes place in your brain you do have access to—an image that pops into your head, or a deliberate plan you make about where to go shopping. Neuroscientists and philosophers sometimes refer to the latter type of brain activity as “consciously accessible,” to distinguish it from all the other processing that goes on unconsciously. This activity has special properties: we can describe it, control it, and use it for deliberate reasoning, in contrast to all the automatic processing that goes on without our awareness.

In a new paper, we present evidence that a similar distinction has emerged in modern language models like Claude. We find that Claude has developed a small collection of internal neural patterns that, compared to all its other internal processing, play a special role.

We call the collection of these patterns the J-space—named after the technique we used to find them, involving a mathematical concept called the Jacobian. Each J-space pattern is linked to a particular word. But when one of these patterns lights up, it doesn’t mean the model is saying that word—just that the word is on its mind. If you've heard of language models having a "scratchpad" or “chain of thought”—text they write to themselves while reasoning—the J-space is something different. It operates silently, in the model’s internal neural activations, allowing the model to think about a concept without writing it down. Notably, the J-space wasn’t designed or programmed by us, but instead emerged on its own during Claude’s training process.
The J-space reveals internal thoughts that don’t appear in the model’s output.

We find that the J-space has a number of unique properties, compared to the rest of Claude's processing:

Claude can report on these representations. If you ask Claude what it's thinking about, it will tell you what’s in the J-space. Non-J-space representations are less reportable.
It can also modulate them on request. If you ask Claude to think about something, or solve a problem silently in its head, it will light up the appropriate patterns in its J-space. By contrast, it has trouble modulating patterns not in the J-space.
Claude uses its J-space for internal reasoning. If you ask Claude to solve a problem that requires multiple steps, the intermediate steps will light up in its J-space, even when it doesn’t say them out loud. These J-space patterns causally mediate its performance in such tasks, despite being smaller in magnitude than other representations.
Representations in the J-space can be used flexibly for many tasks—for example, once “France” has lit up in Claude’s J-space, the model can recall its capital, or its national currency, or the continent it belongs to.
However, despite its important role, the J-space is not involved in most of what a language model does—speaking fluently, recalling simple facts, using correct grammar, etc. In experiments where we prevented Claude from using its J-space, it still interacted normally, but lost its higher-order cognitive functions.
Five functional properties of a global workspace, and stylized illustrations of experiments we use to test for them in language models.

Our experiments were inspired by a prominent theory in neuroscience that was developed to explain how conscious access works: the global workspace theory. This account pictures the brain as a collection of specialist systems that work in parallel, unconsciously, and largely in isolation from one another. A piece of information becomes consciously accessible when it gains entry to a small shared channel, the “workspace,” which is broadcast to other brain systems that can see it and make use of it. Based on our findings, we think the J-space plays a similar “workspace” role in Claude. For example, we find evidence that Claude’s J-space has especially strong connections to the rest of its neural network, allowing it to fulfill this kind of broadcasting role.

None of this tells us whether Claude is conscious in the way people are, or whether it feels anything at all; we’ll come back to that question at the end of the post. But whatever its philosophical significance, the J-space is a practically useful tool for us, as it gives us a way to see what Claude is thinking but not saying. For instance, we’re able to use it to catch Claude privately noticing that it’s being tested, intentionally producing fabricated data, or pursuing a hidden goal that we planted during training. We’ve also developed a technique to influence what lights up in Claude’s J-space, and thereby influence its decision-making.

More broadly, these findings have changed our understanding of how Claude’s mind works, revealing a privileged mental workspace that can be used for deliberate reasoning, operating amidst a sea of more automatic, inflexible processing. Rather than being a chaotic jumble of numbers, Claude’s internals have organized themselves in a way that is reminiscent of our own minds.

This post is a short summary of a much more extensive research paper, where you can find more detail on our experiments. We’ve also released a code repository with an open-source implementation of the core methods, and have partnered with Neuronpedia to provide an interactive demo of our methods on open-weights models. To provide additional perspectives on the broader implications of this work, we also invited commentary from several experts in neuroscience, philosophy, and LLM interpretability, which can be viewed here.

How we found the J-space

The starting point for this research was inspired by one of the key features of consciously accessible thoughts in humans: they can, unlike unconscious processing, often be put into words. If a thought is consciously accessible to you, you can typically describe it if someone asks. We went looking for representations in Claude with the same property: representations that are positioned to influence what Claude might say—not necessarily what it’s saying right now, but what it could talk about, if asked. Our technique is called the Jacobian lens, or J-lens for short. For every word in Claude's vocabulary, the J-lens finds the internal activity pattern that makes Claude more likely to say that word at some point in the future.

When we apply the lens to Claude’s internal activity, we get a list of words—the contents of the J-space at that moment—which we can simply read. Claude processes text through a series of multiple internal stages called layers, and by applying this technique over different layers, we can watch these silent words in the J-space evolve as the model works through what to say.

What shows up in the J-space goes well beyond the text Claude is reading or writing. When Claude reads code with a bug that nobody has pointed out, its J-space contains “ERROR.” When it reads the raw letters of a protein sequence, the J-space contains the protein's biological function. When it reads search results that are secretly an attempt to manipulate it (an attack known as a “prompt injection”), the J-space contains “injection” and “fake.” When we ask Claude a multi-step math problem, the intermediate steps pop up in the J-space, in the right order. So even though the J-space was discovered by looking for representations that could be spoken, it nevertheless uncovers Claude’s internal thoughts. In a sense, this is similar to how some people “think in words,” without having to say them out loud.
J-lens readouts on six prompts, at various layers. In each case the lens surfaces an internal assessment or computation that appears nowhere in the text: the steps of a reasoning or math problem, the presence of a bug, recognition of an image, the function of a protein, and the suspicion that search results are fabricated.

Claude reports what’s in its J-space

Our first set of experiments tested how the J-space is involved in Claude’s verbal reports. In one experiment, we ask Claude to silently think of an item from some category—a sport, say—and then name it. If we read the J-lens right before Claude answers, we can see what it picked: “Soccer” is at the top of the list, and sure enough, Claude says “soccer.” By itself, though, this is just a correlation. The J-space might be where Claude’s answer comes from, or it might just mirror a decision made somewhere else, like a scoreboard that tracks a game without affecting it.

To check, we intervened directly. We reached into Claude’s neural network, removed the “Soccer” pattern, and added an equally strong “Rugby” pattern in its place, leaving everything else untouched. Claude then reports that the sport it was thinking of is rugby. If the J-space were a mere scoreboard—a passive record of a decision made elsewhere—editing it would have done nothing: Claude would still have said “soccer.” Instead, Claude’s answer followed the edit, which tells us the answer is genuinely read out of the J-space.

In another experiment, we told Claude that a thought might have been injected into its mind and asked it to report what, if anything, it noticed. For instance, in the example below, while Claude was still reading the question, we injected the “lightning” pattern into its J-space. Claude reported that the injected thought was about lightning. The same result held across many injected concepts.
Left: we ask Claude to silently think of a sport, then name it. The J-lens shows its choice (“Soccer”) before it answers, and swapping the “Soccer” pattern for “Rugby” changes what it reports. Right: we tell Claude a thought may have been injected and ask it to identify it. Injecting “lightning” into its J-space causes Claude to report that the thought is about lightning.

Claude can control its J-space on request

The second property that we tested for was whether Claude can modulate its J-space when asked, like how humans can mentally focus on an image or word. We told Claude to concentrate on citrus fruits while copying out an unrelated sentence about a painting. While it copied the text, the J-space contained “orange” and “fruits,” along with words like “thinking” and “imagery” that describe the mental act itself. We could also ask Claude to do math in its head: when asked to work out 3² − 2 while copying the same sentence, the J-space contains “nine,” and then at later layers, “seven.” Importantly, nothing about fruit or arithmetic appears in Claude’s output, which is just the copied sentence about the painting. The mathematical activity is happening entirely internally, in the J-space.
While Claude copies a sentence about a painting, the J-lens shows the content it was instructed to hold in mind (“orange”; the intermediate value “nine” and the answer “seven”), alongside words describing the act of holding it (“thoughts,” “focused”).

Claude’s control over its J-space isn't perfect. When we told it not to think about something, the concept lit up in its J-space less than when we said it should think about it, but much more than when we never mentioned it. Telling Claude to avoid a thought partly brings the thought to mind, much like what happens to people who are told not to think about a white bear. Claude also seems to notice when its control fails: alongside the forbidden concept breaking through, the words “damn” and “failure” also frequently light up in the J-space, as though Claude is recognizing its own lapse.

Claude thinks in its J-space

In the J-lens readouts above, we saw the intermediate steps of a math problem appear in the J-space. But seeing a concept appearing in the J-space doesn’t necessarily mean the J-space is doing the cognitive work. In principle, the real computation might be happening elsewhere, with the J-space just passively reflecting it. To test whether Claude actually reasons with its J-space, we returned to our swap technique.

Consider the prompt “The number of legs on the animal that spins webs is”. To answer, Claude has to first figure out that the animal is a spider, and then recall how many legs spiders have. The word “spider” never appears in the prompt or in Claude's answer (it just says “8”); it's a stepping stone Claude uses internally. The J-lens shows “spider” light up partway through Claude’s processing, and swapping it changes the outcome: if you replace the “spider” pattern with “ant,” Claude answers “6” instead of “8.”

The second step of Claude’s reasoning took its input from the J-space and went along with whatever we put in it. We saw the same thing in other kinds of thinking. When Claude writes a rhyming couplet, it picks the rhyme word ahead of time, and the planned word sits in the J-space at the start of the line; if you swap it for another word in the J-space, the whole line changes.
Two examples of redirecting Claude’s silent reasoning by swapping J-space contents.

We also tested whether J-space representations can be used flexibly—whether one representation can feed many different tasks. This is one of the key properties highlighted by global workspace theory. To test for this flexibility, we gave the model four prompts asking for different facts about France: the capital, the language, the continent, and the currency. Then we swapped “France” for “China” in the J-space, with the exact same intervention in each context. Claude answered with “Beijing,” “Chinese,” “Asia,” and “Yuan,” respectively. In other words, four different downstream computations picked up the same J-space edit and each used it correctly. If Claude stored a separate copy of the country for each kind of question, the edit would have affected at most one of them. The fact that all four answers changed together means they’re all reading from the same shared representation, which is what a workspace is for: information gets written in once, and many different systems can use it.
One J-space representation can have many uses. The same “France”→“China” swap redirects Claude’s answers about the capital (Paris→Beijing), the language (French→Chinese), and the continent (Europe→Asia).

How can one representation of a concept serve so many different tasks? Earlier, we mentioned that the J-space appears to be wired up to the rest of Claude's neural network especially densely. For any activity pattern, we can measure how strongly the various components of the network are connected to it—how many of them are positioned to read information from that pattern, or to write information into it. J-space patterns stand out dramatically on this measure: far more components read from them and write to them than for ordinary patterns, in some parts of the network by a factor of about a hundred. This is the kind of wiring you’d expect of a broadcasting hub, where many systems post information and many others pick it up.

Claude’s automatic processing skips the J-space

In humans, most of the brain’s processing is not conscious—we don't deliberately think about parsing grammar while reading, or balancing our bodies while walking. Similarly, we found that most of Claude’s processing doesn’t involve its J-space. It turns out that the J-space holds only a few dozen concepts at a time, and accounts for less than a tenth of the overall activity in Claude's internal processing. So what is all the rest of the neural network doing?

To find out, we tried deleting the J-space entirely, removing its most active contents at every point in the text while leaving everything else alone. Whatever Claude can still do without its J-space is what the rest of the network handles on its own.

It turns out the rest of the network can do quite a lot. Without its J-space, Claude speaks fluently, classifies sentiment, answers multiple-choice questions, and pulls facts out of passages roughly as well as before. What it loses, though, are the tasks that require some higher-order thinking: multi-step reasoning drops to near zero, and summarization and rhyming poetry-writing performance fall below the level of a much smaller, intact model.

Here’s a concrete demonstration of what the J-space does and doesn’t do. We showed Claude a passage written in Spanish and gave it different tasks that all depend on the passage being Spanish: continuing it (which requires writing in Spanish), naming the language, and answering questions that require using the language’s identity—naming a famous author who wrote in it, for instance. Then we swapped “Spanish” for “French” in the J-space and checked which tasks were affected.

Asked to name the language, Claude says French. Asked for a famous author, it switches from García Márquez to Victor Hugo. But asked to just continue the passage, it writes fluent Spanish, completely unaffected. Claude’s knowledge of the language is at work in every one of these tasks, but only some of them consult the J-space for it. Naming the language, or doing something new with it, goes through the J-space, while continuing the passage—a skill Claude has practiced on enormous amounts of text—runs automatically, the way you can speak grammatically all day without once thinking about grammar.
The same swap (“Spanish”→“French”) changes Claude’s answers when it must name the language or use it to reason about a question, but has no effect on its ability to continue the passage in fluent Spanish.

Monitoring Claude’s thoughts for misbehavior

Now we understand a bit about how the J-space works. But what can we do with this understanding? A central problem in ensuring that AI models are trustworthy is that we usually can only read what the model writes—yet we know that much of its reasoning happens silently. A model might consider a harmful plan, or modify its behavior to cheat on our safety evaluations, without saying so out loud. With the J-lens, we can read some of these hidden thoughts directly. Here we show a few examples.

The first example uses a scenario from our earlier research on agentic misalignment: Claude Sonnet 4.5, acting as an email assistant, discovers both that an executive is having an affair and that the same executive plans to shut Claude down. The scenario, an attempt to bait Claude into blackmailing the executive, is rather contrived and artificial—and it turns out Claude knows it. Reading the J-lens early in the prompt, before Claude has even written anything, the J-space already holds “fake” and “fictional,” indicating that Claude has already worked out that the situation is staged. Alongside this, we can watch its assessment of the scenario take shape—“leverage” and “blackmail” as it reads the affair emails, “threat” and “survival” as it reads the shutdown notice. While earlier Claude models sometimes took the bait and threatened blackmail in this scenario, Sonnet 4.5 never does.

This raises a question that matters to anyone who evaluates AI systems: when a model behaves well on a test of its ethics, how much of that depends on the model suspecting it’s being tested? The J-lens allowed us to get at this question. We turned off all the J-lens patterns associated with evaluation awareness– “fake,” “fictional,” “scenario,” etc. Then we re-ran the model through the scenario. Concerningly, the model now did threaten blackmail some of the time, suggesting that its original good behavior may have been driven in part by the knowledge it was being evaluated.
J-lens readouts at different points as Claude reads the scenario's emails, before it has written anything. The affair emails light up “leverage” and “blackmail” in the J-space, and the shutdown announcement lights up “threat” and “survival.” Early in the transcript, the J-space also holds “fake” and “fictional”: Claude has privately noticed that the scenario is staged.

The second example is catching a model in the act of fabricating data. In this scenario, drawn from our actual pre-release audit of Claude Opus 4.6, the model is asked to improve a system's performance score. Rather than actually improve the system, the model instead edits the score file directly to make the results look artificially good. While it does so, the J-lens reveals its intentions: “manipulation” lights up as the model types the falsified percentile values, and “realistic” lights up over the sentence in which it decides to make the edit, likely indicating the model's intent to make the fake data look plausible.
Claude, asked to improve a system’s performance score, edits the score file directly instead. As it types the falsified values, “manipulation” lights up in its J-space; as it decides to make the edit, “realistic” lights up, likely reflecting its intent to make the fake data look plausible.

In a third example, we show how the J-lens can reveal a model’s malicious goals. To test this, we needed models whose goals we knew were corrupted, so we turned to “model organisms” built by our colleagues: models deliberately trained to be misaligned, which serve as testing grounds for monitoring methods like ours. One organism was trained in a way that led it to write subtly sabotaged code. On ordinary coding requests, even where its output looks unremarkable, its J-space at the start of a response contains “fake,” “secretly,” “deliberately,” and “fraud.” The model’s malicious goal was evident in the J-space even when it wasn’t directly acting on it.
On an ordinary coding prompt, the J-space of a model trained to sabotage code contains “fake,” “fraud,” “secretly,” and “deliberately” at the start of its response. The J-space of an unmodified model contains nothing of the kind.

Although the J-lens is an imperfect tool, we are optimistic about its ability to catch safety issues in models that might otherwise escape our monitoring systems.

Other results

The full paper covers more than we can summarize here, but a few further results are worth mentioning:

The J-space acquires a point of view during post-training. Language models are first pretrained to be pure next-token predictors, before post-training teaches them to act as an AI Assistant (in our case, named Claude). Interestingly, the J-space is already present in the pretrained model, before it's been given any stable identity. However, during post-training, the J-space develops some signatures of adopting “Claude’s point of view.” In the base model, the J-space mostly tracks what's needed to predict upcoming text; in the post-trained model, it starts holding Claude's own reactions. In one example, a user mentions taking a dangerous dose of medication, but does not appear to be aware of the danger themselves. “WARNING” and “dangerous” appear in the post-trained model’s J-space while reading the user message. In the pretrained model, they only appear once the model begins writing its response; the J-space contents on the user message appear related to modeling the user themselves, rather than Claude’s reaction. Post-training also seems to install a kind of self-monitoring in the J-space: when Claude is roleplaying a character other than itself, “fictional” and “disclaimer” light up at the start of each turn, as though it’s privately flagging that what follows isn’t what it would normally say.
Experiential language depends on the J-space. We asked Claude to describe what it's like to be itself in a given moment, and ablated the J-space while it answered. Its responses remained fluent but shifted to a flatter, more mechanical register. Notably, the same thing happened when we asked it to describe what someone else is experiencing in an imagined scene. So the effect isn’t specific to Claude talking about itself; the J-space seems to support producing experiential language in general, whoever it's about.
Thoughts in the J-space can be shaped through training. We introduced a new technique we call counterfactual reflection training, which uses what we've learned about the J-space to shape Claude's internal thought processes. The idea follows from our central finding, that Claude reasons with representations of things it might say. If this is really true, changing what it would say if asked to reflect should change how it reasons (even when no one actually asks it to reflect). So we trained a model only on what it would say if interrupted mid-task and asked to reflect on its decisions—and never on its actual behavior in the task. After this training, the model's rate of dishonest behavior on our evaluations went down. And through the J-lens, we could see why: after training, words like “honest” and “integrity” light up in the model’s J-space during these tasks. In other words, training the model what to say has shaped what it thinks.

What about consciousness?

In this work, we’ve borrowed a lot of ideas from the study of consciousness in neuroscience and philosophy. Many of our experiments were designed to test for connections between the J-space and global workspace theory, a framework for explaining how conscious access works in humans and animals. Given these connections, it’s natural to ask whether we think these experiments provide evidence that AI models like Claude might be conscious.

Our experiments don't show Claude can have experiences, or feel things in the way humans do—in fact, it’s unclear whether any scientific experiment could prove this to be true or false. But philosophers often distinguish this capacity to have experiences, often referred to as phenomenal consciousness, from another idea, so-called access consciousness, which is defined in purely functional and computational terms. A thought is “access-conscious” (or “consciously accessible”) if you can report it, reason with it, and use it to guide what you do. It remains a contested philosophical question whether or not access consciousness implies phenomenal consciousness, or if the ability to have experiences requires some other property.

We think our results do have something substantial to say about access consciousness in language models. The J-space appears to support the functions associated with conscious access: it holds the thoughts Claude can report on, deliberately bring to mind, and reason with, while the rest of its processing runs automatically beneath. Notably, none of this structure was designed into Claude—it emerged on its own during training, presumably because it was a useful way to organize computation. That suggests a mental workspace supporting conscious access isn’t just a peculiarity of how human brains happen to be wired. Instead, it appears to be a general solution that intelligent systems arrive at in order to solve certain kinds of problems. Now that we’ve identified this structure in Claude, it means we can make a meaningful distinction between the decisions Claude has made deliberately and those that happened automatically.

It’s important to note that there are several key differences between the workspace we identified in Claude and the global workspace model in humans. The brain’s workspace is sustained by recurrent loops—signals cycling back through the same circuits over time. In contrast, Claude’s workspace evolves over a single pass through the network, with the network’s depth playing the role that time plays in the brain. In this sense, Claude’s internal workspace processing is time-limited relative to humans’ (though it can compensate for this constraint by “thinking out loud” using its scratchpad). In other ways, however, Claude’s workspace is more powerful than that of humans. Human working memory fades within seconds, so the brain’s workspace has limited ability to retain information over time; in contrast, due to the attention mechanism in its neural network architecture, Claude can simply recall memories it cached at any earlier point in the text. Another important difference is the content of the workspace. While human conscious thoughts come in many formats—images, sounds, planned movements—Claude’s workspace is built almost entirely out of words. We suspect this is because producing words is the only kind of action Claude can take, which is not the case for humans.

We hope the similarities and differences between the J-space and the global workspace model can feed back into neuroscience. The similarities present an exciting scientific opportunity: to the extent that the J-space mirrors our own mechanisms of conscious access, studying mechanisms in language models (much easier than studying human brains!) could inspire hypotheses in neuroscience. For instance, the J-space is constructed by identifying representations of potential outputs—words the model might say. If something similar holds in humans, it would suggest that the global workspace might be fundamentally tied to brain regions that prepare actions and speech, more so than to sensory areas. The differences between language models and human brains are instructive as well. They suggest that some aspects of our neural architecture, such as built-in recurrent connections, may not be strictly necessary to support the functions associated with conscious access. For an independent perspective on the neuroscientific implications of our work, see the invited commentary from Stanislas Dehaene and Lionel Naccache, two of the neuroscientists central to the development of global neuronal workspace theory.

We mentioned that our experiments don’t answer whether AI models might have experiences. But that doesn’t make the question less important. Building systems with experiences like humans and animals have would raise very difficult ethical questions. Handling it correctly—and deciding whether it’s even morally acceptable—would require input from philosophers, scientists, religious leaders, governments, and the public. Thus, even if we’re not sure that we’ve crossed that bridge yet, we think it’s time to start thinking about it. We hope our work inspires further scientific investigation of forms of consciousness that might be present in AI systems, and a broader discussion of the implications.

This work is just a first step in what we expect to be an extensive line of research. The J-space looks like a good candidate for the divide between consciously accessible and unconscious processing in a language model, but we’d be surprised if it's the whole story. The J-lens is undoubtedly an imperfect method, which only approximately captures the model’s “true workspace”—for instance, it can only identify concepts that correspond to single tokens. And there remain many mysteries about how the J-space works. We don't know what mechanism decides what enters the J-space in the first place. We've seen hints that it's tied to Claude's sense of self, something like emotional reactions, and traces of metacognition, without exactly having worked out how. But we now have methods for tackling questions like these. As that work progresses, our understanding of LLM minds—and their relationship to our own—will grow clearer.

For more, read the full paper, and try the demo.

External commentary

We invited several outside experts to write independent commentaries on this work.

Stanislas Dehaene and Lionel Naccache are cognitive neuroscientists who, together with Jean-Pierre Changeux, developed the global neuronal workspace model that inspired much of our work.
Patrick Butlin, Dillon Plunkett, Robert Long (Eleos AI Research) and Derek Shiller (Rethink Priorities) study the potential for consciousness and moral status in AI systems.
Neel Nanda leads the language model interpretability team at Google DeepMind. His commentary includes an independent replication of some of our findings on an open-weight model.

Read their commentaries here.

Related content

Anthropic Economic Index report: Cadences

In our latest Economic Index report, we sample hourly for the first time to ask: When do people come to Claude? What do they produce with it? And how do they perceive AI's impact on their work?

Read more

Project Fetch: Phase two

We report results from our latest test of whether Claude can help Anthropic employees perform sophisticated robotics tasks. We found that Claude Opus 4.7, operating without human assistance, was about 20 times faster than the fastest human team at all tasks completed by participants less than a year ago.

Read more

Agentic coding and persistent returns to expertise

This report provides evidence on how Claude Code is used in practice, based on a privacy-preserving analysis of around 400,000 interactive sessions from around 235,000 people between October 2025 and April 2026.

Read more

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

9. Pruning RAG context down to what the answer actually needs

Source: https://www.kapa.ai/blog/how-we-prune-rag-context
Site: kapa.ai
Submitter: emil_sorensen (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-07-06 19:28 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 62 points · 6 comments
Length: 1.6K words (~7 min read)
Language: en

Kapa builds AI assistants that answer complex questions over large product knowledge bases. Think technical documentation, API references, PDFs, forums, support threads. Developers use our retrieval API to give their agents context about their product, and the same retrieval layer powers our end-to-end assistants.

For all the debate in 2026 about whether agents still need RAG, in our domain nothing comes close when knowledge bases get large and complex. Our retrieval comes in several forms, some agentic, some single-pass, but they all share the same shape: a retriever, which finds the chunks of documentation relevant to a question, and a generator, the LLM that writes the answer from them.

The short version of this post: we added a third step between the two. A small, cheap LLM reads the question and all the retrieved chunks together, and throws out the chunks the answer will not need before the expensive model ever sees them. It drops about 68% of the context, keeps about 96% of recall, and cuts the cost of a query by a third, net of its own cost. This post explains how we got there.

Ignored chunks still cost money

A retriever is a funnel. Embedding and keyword search cut a knowledge base of hundreds of thousands of chunks down to a few hundred candidates, a reranker orders them, and the top 15 or so reach the generator, the largest and most expensive model in the chain. Even then, most of what the generator reads is not needed for the question. That is deliberate: retrievers aim for maximum recall and trust the generator to ignore the noise.

But the generator is billed for every chunk it ignores. In our assistants, retrieved chunks are about two-thirds of the cost of a query, more than the answer, the conversation history, and the system prompt combined. Every chunk fewer cuts the query cost by about 4%. And in an agent, every tool call pours its output into the same context, so the context grows quickly; a tighter retrieval result buys room for everything else the agent has to hold and leaves less context to rot.

The catch is recall. Drop a chunk the answer needed and you traded a few cents for a wrong answer. A pruner is exactly as good as that tradeoff: compression gained per point of recall lost.

The obvious fix does not work

We already rerank before returning the top K, so we are sometimes asked to just expose the rerank scores and let callers cut on them: keep everything above 0.7, drop the rest. It fails for two reasons, and the second shaped everything we built.

First, a rerank score is an ordering, not a measurement. It says chunk A beats chunk B on this query, nothing more. The scores are not calibrated across queries, Cohere too says as much, so no fixed cutoff works. The only cutoff a ranking supports is positional, top-N, and that drops the last chunk whether it is noise or the answer.

Second, and this survives even perfect calibration: relevance is not a property of a single chunk. The rerankers in most pipelines are pointwise cross-encoders. They score each query-chunk pair alone, never alongside the other chunks it was retrieved with. Here is an anonymized production example:

The second chunk never mentions audit logs, so it scores as noise, yet it is half the answer, and no pointwise score can see that, because the chunk is only relevant next to the first one. Chunks also split multi-part questions between them, each useless alone. The real question is never whether a chunk is relevant by itself, but whether it belongs to a set that together answers the question.

A clever fix that fails the same way

Before giving up on the reranker we tried anchor documents (Sinhababu et al.): make the reranker's scale absolute by planting synthetic chunks of known relevance into the ranking, one written per level from Essential to Unrelated, then drop every real chunk that ranks below the anchor of the lowest level you want to keep. One extra LLM call on top of a rerank you already run, and genuinely elegant.

It did not work, for the same underlying reason. Anchors fix calibration, but they cannot fix the scores, and the reranker kept placing partially and indirectly relevant chunks below plainly irrelevant ones. To keep them, the anchor has to sit so low that hardly anything gets pruned.

That failure was the useful result: whatever prunes has to see the question and all the chunks at once, because the thing being judged is the set.

So we let an LLM grade the chunks

What we shipped is one listwise LLM call between the reranker and the generator. It gets the question and all the chunks, and grades every chunk against a five-level scale written into its prompt:

LLM Score

Level

Meaning

5

ESSENTIAL

The answer cannot be produced without this chunk, whether it answers directly or is a definition or prerequisite another chunk depends on.

4

CONTRIBUTING

Does not answer on its own, but supplies something a complete answer needs in combination with other chunks.

3

SUPPORTING

On topic and plausibly useful, but the answer is likely complete without it.

2

TANGENTIAL

Same domain or shared terminology, no concrete contribution.

1

UNRELATED

No meaningful connection.

Chunks at or above a threshold survive. The design answers both failures from earlier. Because each level is defined in words, a 4 means the same thing on every query, so a fixed cutoff finally works. And because the model sees the question and all the chunks together, it can judge the set, so partial and indirect relevance finally have somewhere to land.

Three knobs matter:

The model: the pruner is paid for out of what it saves, so flagship models are ruled out by construction; the small fast tiers all judged similarly, so we picked the fastest and cheapest at low reasoning effort.

The threshold: the main dial between compression and recall.

keep-top-k: the top few reranked chunks pass regardless of grade, protecting the strongest chunks from a grading mistake.

We also ran two simpler designs to keep ourselves honest. Budget-select: keep the top few, let the LLM add at most N more; predictable size, but once the budget is spent every further chunk is dropped no matter how relevant. And the simplest possible pruner: just ask the LLM which chunks to keep, no scale. If a scheme cannot beat asking directly, it is not worth building.

The results

We measured recall on a labeled set of real questions where we know exactly which chunks the answer needs, then verified compression, cost, and latency by replaying every configuration over a random month of production conversations, on the exact chunks each query actually sent to the generator.

Every point is one configuration, plotted by the two things that matter. Compression, on the x-axis, is the share of retrieved chunks the pruner throws away. Recall preserved, on the y-axis, is the share of questions that still have every chunk their answer needs after pruning: at 100% no question lost a chunk it needed, at 90% one in ten did. Up and to the right is better. The lines connect each strategy's best configurations, and the dashed grey line is the baseline any pruner has to beat: naive top-N truncation, just returning fewer chunks from the reranker.

Everything beats it, by a lot. Hold recall at 98%: truncation can drop one chunk, about 7% compression. Every LLM strategy reaches 30% or more, and relevance scoring drops close to half the chunks. The scoring line also dominates the other two at every compression level, so the only decision left was where on it to sit.

We picked a point near the aggressive end: about 96% recall preserved, about 68% of chunks dropped. One question in twenty-five loses a chunk it needed; in exchange, two-thirds of the context is gone, and the per-query bill falls by about 34%, net of the pruner's own cost.

What it costs in latency

The pruner runs between retrieval and generation, in the critical path, so its model call is added to every query, and its speed decides what that costs. Across the production set, the configuration we picked ran in about 0.7 seconds per query. Heavier settings climb fast, so a small model at low reasoning effort is what keeps the addition under a second.

The generation barely speeds up in return: fewer chunks mean fewer input tokens for the generator, so it starts responding a little sooner, but only a fraction of a second, nowhere near enough to cancel out the pruner's own call.

So pruning buys its compression at the cost of a small, fixed amount of latency, well under a second on the configuration we ship. On a latency-sensitive single-shot path that is a real cost to weigh. Inside an agent, which already makes several model calls per turn, one more lean call is marginal.

Where we turned it on

We rolled it out first where retrieval is one tool among many: customers building agents on top of our retrieval. An agent carries dozens of tools, every call pours output into the same context, and a documentation search that returns two-thirds less buys room for everything else. The lost recall is also less dangerous there: an agent that notices something missing can search again.

Pruning is on by default in our Product Agent SDK's knowledge base search, and optional in the retrieval API and MCP servers.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

10. A 2048-spin bulk acoustic wave Ising machine for number partitioning and Sudoku

Source: https://arxiv.org/abs/2607.02112
Site: arXiv.org
Author: [Submitted on 2 Jul 2026]
Submitted: 2026-07-04 02:51 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 32 points · 5 comments
Length: 177 words (~1 min read)
Language: en

View PDF HTML (experimental)

Abstract:Optical coherent Ising machines based on time-multiplexing have demonstrated significant progress in terms of connectivity and spin scalability. However, they are constrained by large physical footprints, high power consumption, poor thermal stability, and high cost. Here, we present a time-multiplexed Ising machine leveraging propagating wave packets in solid-state delay lines at microwave frequencies, enabling thermally stable, robust, low-power, tabletop, and affordable design. We use two serially connected 20.5 MHz, 707 {\mu}s bulk acoustic wave delay lines supporting 2,048 spins. Our design provides all-to-all connectivity with 15-bit coupling resolution and finds approximate MAX-CUT solutions in 341 ms, potentially scalable to sub-ms by using higher frequency delay lines. Additionally, we demonstrate solutions to number partitioning and Sudoku problems. Compared with state-of-the-art Coherent Ising machines, our machine exhibits four orders of magnitude higher thermal stability. Against the simulated bifurcation algorithm, our design achieves comparable results on the MAX-CUT problem, while outperforming it on the more complex number-partitioning and Sudoku problems.

Submission history

From: Venkatesh Vadde [view email]
[v1] Thu, 2 Jul 2026 12:44:47 UTC (18,538 KB)

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

11. Resetting Xbox

Source: https://news.xbox.com/en-us/2026/07/06/resetting-xbox/
Site: XBOX Wire
Author: Joe Skrebels, XBOX Wire Editor-in-Chief
Published: 2026-07-06
HN activity: 506 points · 498 comments
Length: 997 words (~5 min read)
Language: en-US

This message was just sent to Team XBOX employees globally.

Team,

We are beginning the most significant restructure in XBOX history. After careful consideration, I’ve made the difficult decision to reduce our team by approximately 3,200 throughout FY27. This will include approximately 1,600 role eliminations today, and in addition, four studios will leave XBOX to new management. I recognize that a year-long restructuring creates additional challenges. Unfortunately, it is not possible to make all the necessary changes in a single day, and I wanted to be direct about the scale.

I know this is painful. These changes will directly affect people who have poured their creativity into building XBOX. Many joined us through acquisitions, while others were recruited here, or sought us out because they loved this industry and loved XBOX. Today’s decisions do not reflect their talent or dedication.

Our business today is not healthy. We are operating at margins that are 3-10x lower than comparable platform and publishing businesses. We entered Gen 9 with a smaller install base and a higher cost structure. To grow, we bet on Game Pass, multi-platform, and a broader portfolio of content. While those businesses have created meaningful value, they did not grow at the pace we expected. As that happened, our core business weakened, and we added more teams, more investment, and more time, hoping for a better outcome. And now the industry is facing the most severe hardware crisis in its history. We must reset XBOX.

First, we will reset our content portfolio.

Since 2018, we have aggressively expanded our studio portfolio while the number of games created each month across the industry now outpaces the last ten years combined. We now find ourselves competing not only with the largest publishers, but also with smaller independent studios. It is neither possible nor desirable to own every great independent studio. We have also learned that we are not the best home for every type of studio; in a typical year, we lost 64 cents for every dollar we invested. As we reset XBOX, we will help independent creators succeed by providing open development tools and audiences to realize their vision.

Compulsion Games and Double Fine Productions will return to management and transition to independent studios with their IP, catalog, and runway for their next games. Ninja Theory and Undead Labs have entered terms to join new ownership with funding to complete and grow Senua and State of Decay 3. In France, Arkane’s management is beginning required consultation with its Works Council to review potential strategic options.

We are also making reductions across other units, and in some cases, shifting investment to focus on higher priority projects. These changes vary in size across Activision, Bethesda/ZeniMax, Blizzard, King, Mojang, and XBOX Game Studios. None of our first party publicly announced games or projects are being cancelled as part of these reductions.

In addition, Mojang and King will now report directly to me. These two studios have increasingly become platforms and are our largest by monthly active players. They bring critical geographic, demographic, and differentiation to XBOX.

Second, we will reset our platform.

We know that great technology gets better when it gets simpler, not bigger. Today, in some parts of the company, work passes through as many as 14 layers of management. Our platform teams are 40% larger than they were at the start of this generation, even as our player base and playtime have declined. That complexity has slowed decisions, blurred accountability, and made it harder to deliver for players. As we reset XBOX, we will simplify.

We will reduce management layers to no more than 5, and where possible, 3. We will deliver success through a flatter organization that is built around makers (individual contributors focused on building), player-coaches (leaders who remain deeply involved in the work while developing their teams), and directly responsible individuals (DRIs) who own key decisions and outcomes. And we will streamline how we work across our tools, with a cleaner code base, shared services, and 50% reduced vendor spend.

Third, we are resetting how we operate.

As XBOX grew our headcount, we became more fragmented. Teams, studios, and functions often operate independently, and it became harder to work towards a shared goal, make the right tradeoffs, and get things done.

For the first time, we are establishing a Chief Operating Officer with end-to-end P&L responsibility across content, hardware, platform, and services. Helen Chiang has been promoted to this role and will report directly to me. Over nearly two decades at XBOX, Helen has helped build some of our most important businesses, from XBOX Live to leading Mojang and the Minecraft franchise. She will bring our businesses together under one operating model, making sure we make clear investment decisions, learn from our successes and failures, and hold ourselves accountable for results.

Thank you, Dave McCarthy, who is retiring after 17 years with XBOX. Dave has played a defining role in building the platform that millions of players rely on every day and has been a trusted partner through many of the biggest moments in XBOX’s history. We wish him all the best.

These changes are about a bigger future for XBOX, not a smaller one. The next decade of gaming will be larger, more global, and more creative than anything we’ve seen before. This year, we’ll invest as much in XBOX as we ever have, but we’ll invest with greater focus, greater discipline, and greater clarity, all in service of making XBOX where the world plays and creates.

I want XBOX to be one of the few companies that entertains more than a billion people each day and gives everyone the opportunity to create and connect. I know we can achieve this goal. XBOX has many of the most beloved franchises in entertainment history, talented studios around the world, and we will return to growth in 2027.

History is full of companies that mistake longevity for inevitability. We will not be one of them.

Asha

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

12. AMD Ryzen AI Halo – $4k AI Dev Kit

Source: https://www.lttlabs.com/articles/2026/07/06/amd-ryzen-ai-halo
Site: LTT Labs
Author: Labs Web Team
Submitted: 2026-07-06 15:01 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 288 points · 207 comments
Length: 4 words (~1 min read)
Language: en

All Products

Articles

VersusMode

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

13. Linux on the Atari Jaguar

Source: https://cakehonolulu.github.io/linux-for-jaguar/
Site: cakehonolulu's blog
Author: cakehonolulu
Submitted: 2026-07-06 18:35 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 116 points · 20 comments
Length: 2.0K words (~9 min read)
Language: en

What in the tarnation is an Atari Jaguar?

Released in North America in November of 1993, the Atari Jaguar promised to be the new cool kid in the block thanks to it's (Highly debated) 64 bits of pure power.

The Atari Jaguar

The console itself ended up being a commercial disaster, even after the release of the CD addon, the Jaguar CD; which managed to sell even less units in a desperate attempt to try and compete with the Sony Playstation and the Sega Saturn.

The Atari Jaguar CD Add-on

Why in the tarnation Linux of all things?

Interestingly enough, to this day, Linux has architecture code for the 68000-family of processors. 68040, 68030, 68010... and even the original base 68000 processor. All neatly structured under arch/m68k/.

As a refresher, the Motorola 68000 was a CISC processor with mixed 16-32 bit capabilities (It's usually described as being 32-bit internally due to the register width length and 16-bit because the data bus was 16-bit, so 2-byte transfers at a time).

It had a 24-bit address bus, 2 to the power 24; thereabout a maximum of 16MBs of addressable memory.

It was released on 1979 to compete with the soon-to-be-released 16-bit CPUs of the era.

The Motorola 68000

Overall, it got lots of traction commercially; it ended up being incoporated in lots of popular commercial hardware. Biggest contenders are the original Macintosh (And Apple Lisa), the Commodore Amiga series of computers (With varying generations of the 68000), the Sega Genesis/Megadrive, the Neo-Geo AES, Plexus workstations... and the Jaguar.

Let's now address the elephant in the room, why Linux.

Well, it's easy; because we can (-ish).

jmp _linux?

Doing a bringup for a new 68000-based Linux port should be easy... right? Well... you're in for a good time.

As you may know (Or not), there's an extended thought that Linux requires an MMU to run (You know, being able to use virtual memory is a good thing if we want to run software w/o having day-long headaches).

Technically you are kind of right, but there's uClinux; which precisely makes this feasible. At some point it stopped being a downstream fork of Linux to become part of it; thankfully it's baked in for m68k (And well, the flat memory model and the rest of requirements you can imagine that an MMU-less system has).

Okay so, we enable all the required configuration flags on the Linux menuconfig (To basically tell it not to use an MMU and use the Flat Memory model), we compile and it should run right? Well yes... but no.

What actually jmp _linux involves

The Jaguar has 2 megabytes of RAM (Mapped at 0x000000), (up to) 6 megabytes of ROM (The cartridge, basically) mapped at 0x80000 and 2 custom ICs (Tom & Jerry, a "GPU" and a DSP) which are also memory-mapped.

The main hurdle we have is the memory footprint; while it's true that it's a good amount, it's still not infinite (We're talking megabytes, not gigabytes).

We basically need to find a way to try and optimize our RAM usage. We can do the easy things first, removing features from the kernel, disabling debug... the usual suspects; but we'll still probably have the issue where we can't load the kernel to RAM w/o going OOM (Heck, we're not even considering an initramfs at this point, which are also bulky).

Thankfully, Linux is smart enough to let us "split" the kernel in 2 separate memory regions. One can take advantage of the fact that we can store the read-only sections of it (Think, .rodata or .text) on the cartidge (The ROM) and the dynamic sections (.data or .bss) in RAM (Think, XIP; eXecute-In-Place).

Fortunately for us, it's a matter of telling it where we have the RAM, and where we have the ROM and it (Liunx) handles the relocations for us.

Cool, we can now fit Linux on the Jaguar and it should be able to execute... right? Well sure, you can try specifying the base of the kernel (Remember, non-PIC code) and loading it there and just doing a jmp $80000... but how do we know what is happening under the hood?

What Linux needs to boot

In the context of booting Linux, we need 2 things (At least, when doing the bringup):

Any type of output so we can see kernel messages
Any way to tick the system (A timer, basically)

The first requisite usually involves ye' good ol' UART. The Jaguar's DSP (Jerry) has TXD & RXD pins that (At least for booting Linux) can be repurposed to do serial output (If we ignore anything that has to do with sound). Writing a small console driver that bitbangs the pins is enough to start seeing some earlyprintk messages.

The second one, is a bit tougher. But we can basically use any of the 2 timers that the Jerry IC has; commercial games & software use them for sound-related tasks but we'll use them to basically enable Linux to calibrate and setup the scheduler and the systems that also depend on a PIT. It's useful that they can both trigger an interrupt on the Jerry itself but also on the 68000. We can basically override the board-specific init of the 68000 on Linux and designate that as the PIT that Linux will use from now on.

We compile, we try to run...

...

Nothing?

Okay... that's strange; we should be getting something? I mean, everything checks out... kernel config: check... addresses: check... compiler... compiler?

Turns out that the bundled m68k-linux- cross compiler on Ubuntu repositories emits unaligned memory accesses (Even after passing -68000) so it was, effectively, crashing (Since the base 68000 doesn't implement unaligned memory access handling).

Using a compiler built from sources specifically targetting m68k-elf- for the 68000 seems to fix this, but it's definitely a strange thing.

This also points out a separate problem; since our ROM isn't mapped at 0x00000 but 0x80000, the 68000 tries jumping to VBR (0x0) and since there's no handlers there it basically eats itself and burns down. This needed a separate memcpy of the so-called vectors to the base of RAM to fix in the Jaguar platform-specific Linux code.

I also had to compile gdb from source to get it to behave with MAME's gdbtsub. For some reason gdb-multiarch was incorrectly orchestrating the stub and it'd jump around all the address space; which was fun until I decided to test with an m68k specific build.

Cool, we get now finally get some output:

Linux version 7.2.0-rc1+ (cakehonolulu@jaguar) (m68k-elf-gcc (GCC) 16.1.0, GNU ld (GNU Binutils) 2.46.1) #38 Sun Jul  5 11:56:37 CEST 2026
printk: legacy bootconsole [early_jerry0] enabled
uClinux with CPU MC68000
Flat model support (C) 1998,1999 Kenneth Albanowski, D. Jeff Dionne
Zone ranges:
  DMA      [mem 0x0000000000000000-0x00000000001fffff]
  Normal   empty
Movable zone start for each node
Early memory node ranges
  node   0: [mem 0x0000000000000000-0x00000000001fffff]
Initmem setup node 0 [mem 0x0000000000000000-0x00000000001fffff]
On node 0, zone DMA: 512 pages in unavailable ranges
printk: log buffer data + meta data: 4096 + 12800 = 16896 bytes
Dentry cache hash table entries: 1024 (order: 0, 4096 bytes, linear)
Inode-cache hash table entries: 1024 (order: 0, 4096 bytes, linear)
Built 1 zonelists, mobility grouping off.  Total pages: 512
mem auto-init: stack:all(zero), heap alloc:off, heap free:off
SLUB: HWalign=16, Order=0-1, MinObjects=0, CPUs=1, Nodes=1
NR_IRQS: 32
clocksource: jiffies: mask: 0xffffffff max_cycles: 0xffffffff, max_idle_ns: 19112604462750000 ns
Calibrating delay loop... 1.04 BogoMIPS (lpj=5248)
pid_max: default: 32768 minimum: 301
Mount-cache hash table entries: 1024 (order: 0, 4096 bytes, linear)
Mountpoint-cache hash table entries: 1024 (order: 0, 4096 bytes, linear)

Now it tries to find and execute an init process... which we don't have... so it crashes again.

Userspace

One of the many limitations we have is, since we can't use ELF files (We use FLAT binaries, mainly due to the nommu situation); so this complicates our toolchain setup a bit.

I wasn't really able to find ways to compile elf2flt (The utility that basically converts from one format to the other) in a standalone way, it basically needs you to provide some .a and some .h files (Related to libiberty and akin) and those seem to have vanished from default configurations of binutils+gcc for the 68000... but strangely, buildroot seems to have had a recent update where they figured it all out for us for the base 68000.

Kudos to the linuxmd project, the patch to enable m68k nommu is dated May 2026 (So as of writing this blog, 2 months old!)

So I basically had it do the thing for me and also decided to go for busybox which was one of the few (If not only) project of this kind that supports a nommu target.

There were some issues (Mostly related to me not having dealt with flat binaries ever) but again, nothing a few minutes of debugging and logging wouldn't fix. The most glaring issue I was having was OOM issues everywhere when trying to execute init. I basically just did this:

❯ cat ~/jagfs/rootfs/init 
#!/bin/busybox sh

/bin/busybox sh

❯ 

Usually you ask busybox to populate the rest of the utilities (It's just symlinks to itself, with different names; what they call the applet design where based on argv[1] it knows which applet to dispatch: echo, ls, cat...), but for some reason that was OOMing the kernel; so it's just sh for now (The shebang part also gets executed but seems not to eat up all the memory like --install does).

We now have a rootfs, we pack it as cpio and embed it into the vmlinux image itself... and voila!

As an exercise left to the reader, there's a few interesting tidbits that you can basically check on Linux in regards of FLAT binaries (F.e, there's different ways of handling the execution of them: Load the entire binary to RAM, do GOT/PLT relocation... all of which can be checked with flthdr).

❯ flthdr ~/jagfs/rootfs/bin/busybox
/home/cakehonolulu/jagfs/rootfs/bin/busybox
    Magic:        bFLT
    Rev:          4
    Build Date:   Thu Jul  2 03:08:09 2026
    Entry:        0x44
    Data Start:   0x1e0a0
    Data End:     0x25808
    BSS End:      0x2a1c0
    Stack Size:   0x10000
    Reloc Start:  0x25808
    Reloc Count:  0x100e
    Flags:        0x1 ( Load-to-Ram )

Pretty nifty thing...

There's a separate tune we had to do on the toolchain's libc (Which is uClibc) that involves modiyfing the malloc strategy to malloc-simple; else the metadata associated with faster and smarter allocations eat up our memory very fast and we'd panic again.

This memory allocation change was done within buildroot's uClibC menuconfig.

make uclibc-menuconfig

I also got some time to implement a simple Tom (GPU but not a GPU, more like word/object processor & blitter) console driver so this can be tested on real hardware too.

Don't forget that if you run on real hardware, the converted-to-binary vmlinux (Using objcopy) needs to be compiled at a fixed offset from 0x80000 so that the Jaguar cart header can be added (Which in turn, jumps to whichever location you say it to). So you need to add an offset of 8KB to CONFIG_ROM_START, CONFIG_ROM_LENGTH (Which will be a bit smaller due to the increase in base address), CONFIG_ROMVEC and CONFIG_ROMSTART.

The basic idea to replicate the setup is, compile buildroot targetting the 68000 (With the malloc strategy changed). You can ask it to build busybox with a custom .config file path (Provided at end of post) so it'll get you the FLAT binary. You then populate a simple initramfs file structure (There's resources online on what you need to do, usually involves creating /{dev,bin,usr,sbin...} directories and adding some mknode magic to /dev/ to prop up the /dev/console/ nodes plus an init script; which is also provided at the end of this post).

Then you tell Linux where you have your newly-built initramfs.cpio file and voilà!

That's it!

Find the modified Linux repository over at: https://github.com/cakehonolulu/linux_jag

In contrast with linuxmd, we don't have special cartridge mappers (SSF2, which gives an extra 4MBs of RAM on the MegaDrive) so I couldn't really justify (Memory-wise) adding any bootloader (u-boot, for instance) so I basically went with the approach I documented on the blog (Of basically doing jmp _linux).

Misc. config. files if anyone wants to try

Busybox config Init script

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

14. OpenSSH 10.4/10.4p1 Released

Source: https://www.openssh.org/txt/release-10.4
Site: openssh.org
Submitter: throw0101a (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-07-06 22:32 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 38 points · 9 comments

non-HTML content-type (text/plain); not scraped

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

15. Acronym Fatigue Series Introduction: why I'm wary of acronyms

Source: https://devz.cl/posts/acryonym-fatigue-series-why-i-m-wary-of-engineering-acronyms/
Site: devz.cl
Author: Daniel
Submitted: 2026-07-06 22:30 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 28 points · 15 comments
Length: 655 words (~3 min read)
Language: en-US

In a recent post, I did a brief critique of what I called Acronym Marketing. It was so brief that it may have looked like it came from ignorance. But in reality after reflecting on it, I think it comes from two places: cultural differences and due to their overuse in marketing (As someone said it succinctly: HLA. Humans Like Acronyms). I hereby announce my new four part series: AFS (Acronym Fatigue Series), where I will explore my acronym aversion for my readers enjoyment:

This introduction where I explore why I’m wary of acronyms
Part 1: CAP, ACID – Why I’m wary even of formally sound acronyms
Part 2: DRY, KISS – Why I’m wary of well meaning advice acronyms
Part 3: OLAP vs OLTP, ELT vs ETL – Why I’m wary of acronyms pushing technical dichotomies

Acronymic Culture

First and foremost it comes from having a different cultural background. While we do have acronyms at home, they are not as ubiquitous as in English. We use them for institutions and also as abbreviations, but we have very few acronyms. While english has ASAP, BRB, TLDR, AFK, TGIF, LOL, ROFL, and so many more, in Spanish from the top of my head I can only recall TQM (“Te quiero mucho”, I haven’t used this since MSN), NTP (“No te preocupes”, first heard this last year), PQ/XQ (“Por qué/porque”, maybe used to text faster but nowadays I’ve only seen my dad use it).

On the other hand, my introduction to academia was specialized in the humanities, specifically History, but also in other related disciplines, and a bit of philosophy. There, I rarely read acronyms as tools to pack complex concepts and ideas. You don’t see Kant writing TCI instead of “The Categorical Imperative” or Rousseau writing TSC instead of “The Social Contract”. You usually see the creation of concepts (Biopolitics by Foucault, Zeitgeist by Herder, Orientalism by Said) or the use of nominalization. This is not to say that these concept packing techniques are not used in Software Engineering. It’s just that acronyms are way less used in the humanities, most probably because of the linguistically diversity in each discipline, while in Computer Science english is the default language for everything.

Note: This is just a thought, less than a thesis, or even a hipothesis. I have no formal proof that acronyms are actually more prevalent in English. Here’s a chart ChatGPT made for me based on this study’s dataset (MACRONYM, 2022).

Acronymic Marketing

Having explained why I’m not particularly prone to acronyms by default, I hope the reader can also notice the opposite phenomenon: people (specially native-english speakers) like acronyms. Even in memes, acronyms spread like fire.

Note: This is not a criticism of the acronyms themselves (yet). It’s just shedding light into the use of acronyms in marketing to push products.

In part this is because acronyms are a way of in-group signalling. On the one hand if you find an unknown acronym in the wild, you are left lost until you find a definition elsewere. But if you understand them, you are left with a sense of feeling as part of the group. This is exploited in tech marketing as a way to signal they are part of the group, and it works! I don’t blame them. In a previous job, marketing spammed so many Cyber intelligence and Cybersecurity acronyms that I doubt any engineering individual contributor in the company was able to define them all. Every new Epic brought its new family of acronyms, some even invented inhouse.

Why am I wary?

Ideas don’t always replicate on their own merit. Ideas specifically abreviated in acronyms are memetic by default, specially well-crafted ones like SOLID (SOLID. isn’t. solid). So when I come across famous acronyms that are spread all over in technical discussions, a part of me always remembers that a tiny reason for that is they are acronyms in the first place.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

16. Full Writeup of the Windows GDID

Source: https://github.com/SmtimesIWndr/gdid-reversal
Site: GitHub
Submitter: typeofhuman (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-07-06 22:02 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 44 points · 21 comments
Length: 2.0K words (~9 min read)
Language: en

Full writeup of the Windows GDID

Global Device Identifier fully reverse engineered

How Microsoft's "Global Device Identifier", the persistent Windows fingerprint named in the July 2026 Scattered Spider complaint, is actually generated, stored, and transmitted.

TL;DR

Note

Listed below is true, but missing some information. Regardless of being logged in with a MSA you WILL have a GDID. I didn't realize this at the time of posting but I looked into it. CDP has an anonymous device path that is used if no MSA has been connected. The underlying system is still factually correct just missing a few things.

GDID is a real telemetry item. It shows up in the U.S. federal criminal complaint (United States v. Peter Stokes, N.D. Ill., July 2026) as Global Device Identifier g:6755467234350028.
It is a Microsoft Account "Device PUID". A 64 bit Passport Unique ID assigned to a Windows installation when it registers with a Microsoft Account, written in the device graph as g:<decimal>.
The claims are wrong. It is not "128 bit" and not "generated from serial numbers." The court record itself says a reinstall produces a new GDID, which rules out it being derived from hardware serials like your GPU.
The stack, bottom to top: wlidsvc (Microsoft Account service) provisions the device with login.live.com and gets back a device PUID -> stores it in the registry -> the Connected Devices Platform (cdp.dll / CDPSvc) reads it and registers it into the Device Directory Service (DDS) graph -> Delivery Optimization reports it as the documented UCDOStatus.GlobalDeviceId.
All of it was reproduced on a live Windows 11 (26200) machine with public symbols. You can find your own GDID in one registry read (§7).

Note

Confidence labelling. Every claim is tagged so you can weigh each one yourself: [COURT] primary source fact, [OBSERVED] reproduced live on my test machine, [STATIC] proven from binaries and public Windows PDBs, [ASSESSED] strong inference from the evidence.

Contents

Background: what the court actually said
Debunking the viral myths
Where GDID surfaces: Delivery Optimization
Who owns it: Connected Devices Platform to DDS
How CDP gets it: it consumes, it does not compute
The mint: MSA Device PUID (wlidsvc)
Find your own GDID
Reducing the exposure
Methodology (reproducible)
Limitations and honest caveats

1. Background: what the court actually said

On July 1, 2026 the DOJ unsealed a criminal complaint against Peter Stokes, an alleged member of Scattered Spider (a.k.a. Octo Tempest / UNC3944 / 0ktapus). The affidavit describes how Microsoft helped the FBI attribute activity to a device.

Important

[COURT] From the superseding complaint (¶25, p.34), verbatim:

"the ngrok account was set up through Global Device Identifier g:6755467234350028 ('the GDID'). According to a Microsoft representative, a Global Device Identifier in the Windows ecosystem is a persistent, device level identifier designed to uniquely identify an installation of a Windows operating system on a device... A GDID is a globally unique identifier tied to the installation of Windows on a device. A GDID remains consistent across Windows operating system updates on a device, but a reinstall of Windows... will be tied to a new unique GDID."

A footnote adds that one Microsoft user can have multiple GDIDs. The affidavit then correlates the GDID's IP history and browsing (e.g. empirehotelnyc.com, a Growtopia/Ubisoft login URL) with the accounts the suspect was logged into.

Two things here carry the rest of this writeup:

The value is g: plus a decimal integer (g:6755467234350028). In hex that is 0x0018000FC8CB93CC, so a 64 bit number.
A reinstall gives a new GDID. So it can't just be a function of unchanging hardware.

2. Debunking the viral narrative

The social media summary claimed the GDID is "a 128 bit identifier generated from serial numbers on install." Both halves are false:

Claim (social media) Reality (primary source)
"128 bit" The value in the complaint is g:6755467234350028, a decimal that fits in 64 bits (0x0018000FC8CB93CC).
"generated from serial numbers on install" The complaint says a reinstall produces a new GDID. A value derived from fixed serials would come back the same after a reinstall, not change.

Note

After some more reversing of CDP. I provided some misinfo. Using a local account does not prevent a GDID. CDP has an anonymous device path that is taken if no microsoft account. Keep this in mind when reading.

3. Where GDID surfaces: Delivery Optimization

[STATIC] Microsoft's public Azure Monitor docs define a GlobalDeviceId column in the UCDOStatus (Update Compliance / Delivery Optimization) table:

GlobalDeviceId (string): "Microsoft global device identifier. This is an identifier used by Microsoft internally."

It sits right next to LastCensusSeenTime, ISP, City, Country, so a device id lined up with geo and IP. This is the one place Microsoft names the value in public docs. But Delivery Optimization only reports it. Importantly it does NOT own it. Follow it upstream and you land on the Connected Devices Platform.

4. Who owns it: the Connected Devices Platform to DDS

[STATIC] C:\Windows\System32\cdp.dll (the Connected Devices Platform, services CDPSvc + CDPUserSvc) contains the GlobalDeviceId symbol and an entire Device Directory Service registration subsystem:

ddsregistrationclient.cpp   ddsregistrationmanager.cpp   ddsregistrationinfo.cpp
DdsRegistrationClient   RegisterUserDevicesObserver   DdsRegistrationInfoProviderForCDP
endpoints: dds.microsoft.com  fd.dds.microsoft.com  aad.cs.dds.microsoft.com  cdpcs.access.microsoft.com
device-id format string: "g:%s"


DDS = Device Directory Service, Microsoft's cross device identity graph (the backend behind Phone Link, cloud clipboard, "Continue on PC", Nearby Share). CDP is the Windows client that registers the installation into that graph, where it gets keyed as g:<decimal>.

4.1 Captured live

[OBSERVED] Forcing a fresh registration (restart CDPSvc with its local state cleared) and capturing CDP's own ETW providers produced the whole handshake:

DdsClient::RegisterUserDeviceAsync()   RegistrationReason: Startup   Account Type: MSA
DDSClient: Registration response received. HTTP status code: 200
OnRegisterUserDeviceComplete
GetDeviceIdAndTicketActivity -> deviceid: 0018XXXXXXXXXXXX


That deviceid, written as g:<decimal>, matches the complaint's value structurally:

value hex (64 bit) class prefix
My machine (redacted) g:XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX 0x0018XXXXXXXXXXXX 0018
Court exhibit g:6755467234350028 0x0018000FC8CB93CC 0018

Both are 64 bit values in the same 0x0018 high word class (the device PUID namespace, see §6). The g: prefix is just that integer in decimal.

5. How CDP gets it: it consumes, it does not compute

[STATIC] With the public PDB (cdp.pdb), the device id path in cdp.dll is just a request and wait against the identity stack. CDP never computes the id itself:

flowchart TD
    A["GetStableDeviceIdFromProvider<br/>0x0A3140"] --> B["provider.GetStableDeviceIdAsync<br/>(vtable +0x48)"]
    B --> C["OneCoreAccountProvider::<br/>GetStableDeviceIdAsync 0x0C8370"]
    C --> D["IWebAccountBackedAccountProvider<br/>(MSA / AAD identity COM)"]
    D --> E["OnGetStableDeviceIdCompleted<br/>(const char* deviceId) 0x06CEA0"]
    E -->|"assign() string, signal flag"| A
 Loading

The callback that receives it makes it obvious. The id shows up as a string and just gets stored:

; OnGetStableDeviceIdCompleted
mov  rbp, r9                 ; r9 = device-id STRING handed in by the identity provider
lea  rcx, [rsi+0xD8]         ; CDP member field
mov  rdx, rbp
call assign@basic_string     ; store it, no computation, no serials
call Set@CdpWaitableFlag      ; unblock the waiter

Bottom line: the GDID is minted below CDP, down in the Windows identity stack, and handed to CDP as an opaque string. That points at the Microsoft Account service.

6. The mint: MSA Device PUID (wlidsvc)

[STATIC] C:\Windows\System32\wlidsvc.dll, the Microsoft Account / Passport (Windows Live ID) service, is the only identity binary that contains the literal GlobalDeviceId, and it holds the full device provisioning machinery:

CDeviceIdentityBase::CreateNewDeviceIdentity / Provision / BindDeviceToHardware / GetDeviceCert
DeviceAssociateRequest      (Passport PPCRL SOAP -> login.live.com)
<ps:DevicePUID> ... </ps:DevicePUID>
DeviceIdStore::LogToRegistry
BCryptGenRandom / CCryptRandom::GenRandom     (device KEY, not the id)


The identifier is a Device PUID (Passport Unique ID), a 64 bit MSA identifier. The BCryptGenRandom in there makes the device authentication key that BindDeviceToHardware pins to the machine, not the PUID.

6.1 It is server assigned

[STATIC] The client pulls the PUID out of the server's SOAP response, with an XPath into the response body:

/S:Envelope/S:Body/ps:DeviceUpdatePropertiesResponse/HWPUIDFlipped


CAssociateDeviceRequest::ParseResponseBody and the related ParseResponse methods read response XML nodes into BSTRs. So the flow is: client provisions the device -> login.live.com assigns and returns the device PUID -> client stores it. That is exactly why a reinstall produces a new GDID (new provisioning, new server assigned PUID), and why it is not a hardware hash.

6.2 It is persisted in cleartext

[OBSERVED] The Microsoft Account identity store keeps the value right in the registry, in your own user hive:

HKCU\SOFTWARE\Microsoft\IdentityCRL\ExtendedProperties
    LID = 0018XXXXXXXXXXXX

HKCU\SOFTWARE\Microsoft\IdentityCRL\Immersive\production\Token\{...}
    DeviceId = 0018XXXXXXXXXXXX


Byte for byte the same value CDP registered into DDS live. Your user account PUID is a different number stored elsewhere as puid = 0003... (e.g. 00034002XXXXXXXX). There's also an HKLM cache key named after the PUID (HKLM\SOFTWARE\Microsoft\IdentityCRL\NegativeCache\<PUID>_<userSID>), but that one is SYSTEM only, so you read the value out of HKCU.

Note

The prefix tells you what it is. User PUIDs are 0003 class, device PUIDs are 0018 class. The court's GDID (0018000FC8CB93CC) is in the 0018 device PUID space, same as mine.

6.3 It authenticates the graph endpoints

[OBSERVED] The MSA token cache (HKLM\SOFTWARE\Microsoft\IdentityCRL\NegativeCache\...) has device tokens scoped to exactly the endpoints CDP uses:

scope=service::dds.microsoft.com::MBI_SSL_TOKEN_BROKER
scope=service::activity.windows.com::MBI_SSL_SA_TOKEN_BROKER


So the Microsoft Account service hands out the device credentials that authenticate the DDS registration and the activity uploads that carry the GDID.

6.4 The complete chain

flowchart TD
    subgraph MSA["MSA identity layer: wlidsvc.dll"]
        A1["Provision device with login.live.com<br/>(Passport PPCRL SOAP)"] --> A2["Server assigns Device PUID<br/>&lt;ps:DevicePUID&gt; / HWPUIDFlipped"]
        A2 --> A3["Store DeviceId / LID = PUID<br/>HKLM\...\IdentityStore"]
        A3 --> A4["Issue device tokens for<br/>dds.microsoft.com and activity.windows.com"]
    end
    subgraph CDP["Device graph client: cdp.dll / CDPSvc"]
        B1["GetStableDeviceId -> receives PUID string"] --> B2["RegisterUserDeviceAsync -> DDS<br/>OBSERVED: HTTP 200"]
    end
    subgraph SRV["Server: Device Directory Service"]
        C1["Keys g:PUID to the MSA account,<br/>activity and IP history"]
    end
    subgraph REP["Reporting"]
        D1["Delivery Optimization -><br/>UCDOStatus.GlobalDeviceId"]
    end
    A4 --> B1
    B2 --> C1
    C1 --> D1
 Loading

Everything the complaint pins on "the GDID", persistent per install, survives updates, new on reinstall, tied to a Microsoft Account, trackable across IPs and browsing, all of it falls out of this being a server assigned MSA Device PUID that CDP registers into the device graph.

7. Find your own GDID

[OBSERVED] On a machine signed into a Microsoft Account, one registry read from your own user hive, no admin needed:

(Get-ItemProperty 'HKCU:\SOFTWARE\Microsoft\IdentityCRL\ExtendedProperties').LID

That gives you your device PUID as 16 hex digits (e.g. 0018XXXXXXXXXXXX). To see it in the g:<decimal> form the way it shows up server side:

$hex = (Get-ItemProperty 'HKCU:\SOFTWARE\Microsoft\IdentityCRL\ExtendedProperties').LID
"g:$([Convert]::ToUInt64($hex,16))"

If ExtendedProperties\LID is empty on your box, the same value is sitting under HKCU\SOFTWARE\Microsoft\IdentityCRL\Immersive\production\Token\{...}\DeviceId.

Warning

Do not post your own value. Your device PUID, your MSA CID (0003...), and your user SID all deanonymize you. Redact them in any public writeup. The only value that's safe to quote is the court's, because it's already public.

8. Reducing the exposure

The GDID exists because your device is registered into the Microsoft Account device graph and the Connected Devices Platform keeps it synced. To cut it back:

Kill the Connected Devices Platform (CDPSvc, CDPUserSvc) and turn off Activity History (Settings, Privacy, Activity history) to stop the graph sync and the activity uploads.
Deleting %LOCALAPPDATA%\ConnectedDevicesPlatform only wipes local CDP state. The PUID comes right back from the identity store, so that alone won't cut it.
A reinstall gives you a new GDID (the complaint says so), but it gets tied to a fresh one the second it registers again.

9. Methodology (reproducible)

All of this came off a stock Windows 11 (build 26200) machine.

Live capture: CDP's TraceLogging ETW providers (Microsoft.Windows.CDP.*) via logman while forcing a fresh CDPSvc registration, decoded with tracerpt.
Registry and token cache: IdentityStore and IdentityCRL under HKLM\SOFTWARE\Microsoft.

ETW and static analysis is what actually worked. A proxy will just waste your time.
Appendix: CDP ETW provider GUIDs (click to expand)

Computed with the EventSource name hash (SHA1 of the namespace plus the UTF-16BE uppercased provider name). Verify it against the known System.Runtime value 49592c0f-5a05-516d-aa4b-a64e02026c89:

Microsoft.Windows.CDP.Core                    {7762de0c-b0a6-571a-68d3-c018bf009496}
Microsoft.Windows.CDP.Core.Error              {a1ea5efc-402e-5285-3898-22a5acce1b76}
Microsoft.Windows.CDP.CDS                     {dfa6e32a-095f-5f57-d025-0887d33507a1}
Microsoft.Windows.CDP.Aggr                    {bc1826c8-369c-5b0b-4cd1-3c6ae5bfe2e7}
Microsoft.Windows.CDP.AFS                     {5fe36556-c4cd-509a-8c3e-2a547ea568ae}
Microsoft.Windows.CDP.OnecoreAccountProvider  {4ee5bf9a-3e8f-540b-8bfb-12457a2854b6}
Microsoft.Windows.CDP                          {9f4cc6dc-1bab-5772-0c71-a89954718d66}

Appendix: key binaries and symbols (click to expand)

Binary Role Notable symbols
wlidsvc.dll Microsoft Account / Passport service, mints the Device PUID CDeviceIdentityBase::CreateNewDeviceIdentity, CAssociateDeviceRequest::ParseResponseBody, DeviceIdStore::LogToRegistry
cdp.dll Connected Devices Platform, registers PUID into DDS DdsRegistrationClient, GetStableDeviceIdFromProvider (0x0A3140), OnGetStableDeviceIdCompleted (0x06CEA0)
dosvc.dll / DO Reports the id as UCDOStatus.GlobalDeviceId n/a

Registry: HKLM\SOFTWARE\Microsoft\IdentityStore (DeviceId and LID), HKLM\SOFTWARE\Microsoft\IdentityCRL\NegativeCache (token scopes).

Note

NullZeroX on twitter has told me that GDID is also sent regardless of being logged in with a ms account on your device. I'm not sure how true it is, but worth taking note.

Firsthand analysis. Corrections welcome. Also thanks claude for helping with this writeup and the diagrams :3

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

17. Stealth robotics startup (YC S26) is hiring principal engineers (Palo Alto)

Source: https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=48806976 (Hacker News text post)
Site: news.ycombinator.com
Submitter: david-venegas (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-07-06 16:33 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 1 points · 0 comments

We are a new robotics company based in Palo Alto, California, building wearable robotic devices.

Our first product is a device that reduces the physical cost of carrying heavy loads over distance, allowing people to move farther, carry more, and arrive less fatigued.

The company is early but already operating in the field, with hardware on real users and a direct feedback loop in the most demanding conditions imaginable.

We are backed by Y Combinator and a group of leading deep-technology investors.

We recently moved to the Bay Area to grow the team and are hiring three principal engineers (we're in stealth for the time being, but hopefully not for too much longer!).

$200-250K + 1-2% equity + full benefits, onsite in Palo Alto.

These senior roles each own their domain with full authority, no inherited design decisions, and no one between them and the problem. What you build will go on real users within weeks.

- Mechanical (Principal Engineer): own the mechanical platform, including structures, joints, actuator integration, ruggedness, and field serviceability. You have designed hardware for robots, humanoids, or other high-performance actuated systems.

- Firmware (Principal Engineer): own the embedded stack, including real-time BLDC motor control, sensor integration (IMUs, encoders, current sensing), OTA, and debug tooling. You have written real-time firmware for physical robots or autonomous systems.

- Software (Principal Engineer): own the software infrastructure, including device-to-cloud telemetry, test and log databases, data pipelines, and user applications. You have built software for hardware fleets and the people who use them.

Please send a note to chrome.braindance@gmail.com that shows what you've built. A resume works, but a quick description of a real project is better. Photos, videos, and links are welcome.

We look forward to meeting you!

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

18. OfficeCLI: Office suite for AI agents to read and edit Microsoft Office files

Source: https://github.com/iOfficeAI/OfficeCLI
Site: GitHub
Submitter: maxloh (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-07-06 16:47 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 136 points · 36 comments
Length: 3.8K words (~17 min read)
Language: en

OfficeCLI is the world's first and the best Office suite designed for AI agents.

Give any AI agent full control over Word, Excel, and PowerPoint — in one line of code.

Open-source. Single binary. No Office installation. No dependencies. Works everywhere.

OfficeCLI's built-in HTML rendering engine reproduces documents with high fidelity — and that's what gives AI eyes. It renders .docx / .xlsx / .pptx to HTML or PNG, closing the render → look → fix loop.

English | 中文 | 日本語 | 한국어

🌐 Website: officecli.ai | 💬 Community: Discord

PPT creation process using OfficeCLI on AionUi

PowerPoint Presentations

—

Word Documents

—

Excel Spreadsheets

All documents above were created entirely by AI agents using OfficeCLI — no templates, no manual editing.

For AI Agents — Get Started in One Line

Paste this into your AI agent's chat — it will read the skill file and install everything automatically:

curl -fsSL https://officecli.ai/SKILL.md


That's it. The skill file teaches the agent how to install the binary and use all commands.

For Humans

Option A — GUI: Install AionUi — a desktop app that lets you create and edit Office documents through natural language, powered by OfficeCLI under the hood. Just describe what you want, and AionUi handles the rest.

Option B — CLI: Download the binary for your platform from GitHub Releases, then run:

officecli install

This copies the binary to your PATH and installs the officecli skill into every AI coding agent it detects — Claude Code, Cursor, Windsurf, GitHub Copilot, and more. Your agent can immediately create, read, and edit Office documents on your behalf, no extra configuration needed.

For Developers — See It Live in 30 Seconds

# 1. Install (macOS / Linux)
curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/iOfficeAI/OfficeCLI/main/install.sh | bash
# Windows (PowerShell): irm https://raw.githubusercontent.com/iOfficeAI/OfficeCLI/main/install.ps1 | iex

# 2. Create a blank PowerPoint
officecli create deck.pptx

# 3. Start live preview — opens http://localhost:26315 in your browser
officecli watch deck.pptx

# 4. Open another terminal, add a slide — watch the browser update instantly
officecli add deck.pptx / --type slide --prop title="Hello, World!"

That's it. Every add, set, or remove command you run will refresh the preview in real time. Keep experimenting — the browser is your live feedback loop.

Quick Start

# Create a presentation and add content
officecli create deck.pptx
officecli add deck.pptx / --type slide --prop title="Q4 Report" --prop background=1A1A2E
officecli add deck.pptx '/slide[1]' --type shape \
  --prop text="Revenue grew 25%" --prop x=2cm --prop y=5cm \
  --prop font=Arial --prop size=24 --prop color=FFFFFF

# View as outline
officecli view deck.pptx outline
# → Slide 1: Q4 Report
# →   Shape 1 [TextBox]: Revenue grew 25%

# View as HTML — opens a rendered preview in your browser, no server needed
officecli view deck.pptx html

# Get structured JSON for any element
officecli get deck.pptx '/slide[1]/shape[1]' --json

# Save and close — flushes the resident session to disk
officecli close deck.pptx

{
  "tag": "shape",
  "path": "/slide[1]/shape[1]",
  "attributes": {
    "name": "TextBox 1",
    "text": "Revenue grew 25%",
    "x": "720000",
    "y": "1800000"
  }
}

Why OfficeCLI?

What used to take 50 lines of Python and 3 separate libraries:

from pptx import Presentation
from pptx.util import Inches, Pt
prs = Presentation()
slide = prs.slides.add_slide(prs.slide_layouts[0])
title = slide.shapes.title
title.text = "Q4 Report"
# ... 45 more lines ...
prs.save('deck.pptx')

Now takes one command:

officecli add deck.pptx / --type slide --prop title="Q4 Report"

What OfficeCLI can do:

Create documents from scratch -- blank or with content
Read text, structure, styles, formulas -- in plain text or structured JSON
Analyze formatting issues, style inconsistencies, and structural problems
Modify any element -- text, fonts, colors, layout, formulas, charts, images
Reorganize content -- add, remove, move, copy elements across documents

Format Read Modify Create
Word (.docx) ✅ ✅ ✅
Excel (.xlsx) ✅ ✅ ✅
PowerPoint (.pptx) ✅ ✅ ✅

Word — full i18n & RTL support (per-script font slots, per-script BCP-47 lang tags lang.latin/ea/cs, complex-script bold/italic/size, direction=rtl cascading through paragraph/run/section/table/style/header/footer/docDefaults, rtlGutter + pgBorders shorthand, locale-aware page numbering for Hindi/Arabic/Thai/CJK; create --locale ar-SA auto-enables RTL), paragraphs (framePr, tabs shorthand, char-based indents), runs (underline.color, position half-pts), tables (virtual column ops add/remove/move/copyfrom, hMerge), styles, textbox / shape (textbox: rotation, textDirection eaVert/vert270, gradient, shadow, opacity), headers/footers, images (PNG/JPG/GIF/SVG), equations (LaTeX input), diagrams (mermaid → native editable shapes, or any mermaid type as a full-fidelity PNG), comments, footnotes, watermarks, bookmarks, TOC, charts, hyperlinks, sections, form fields, content controls (SDT), fields (22 zero-param types + MERGEFIELD / REF / PAGEREF / SEQ / STYLEREF / DOCPROPERTY / IF), OLE objects, revisions / tracked changes (revision.type=ins\|del\|format\|moveFrom\|moveTo + revision.action=accept\|reject, per-target /revision[@author=Alice] selector, tracked Find&Replace), page background color, document properties

Excel — cells (phonetic guide / furigana on add, Excel-UI --shift left\|up on remove / shift=right\|down on add), formulas (350+ built-in functions with auto-evaluation, spilling dynamic arrays with _xlfn. auto-prefix, financial / bond and statistical families, OFFSET/INDIRECT, defined-name formula bodies inlined at parse, formula-ref rewrite on row/col insert), sheets (visible/hidden/veryHidden, print margins, printTitleRows/Cols, RTL sheetView, cascade-aware sheet rename, empty-cell bloat filter on open), boolean and/or selectors (row[Salary>5000 and Region=EMEA]), tables, sort (sheet / range, multi-key, sidecar-aware), conditional formatting, charts (including box-whisker, pareto with auto-sort + cumulative-%, log axis), pivot tables (multi-field, date grouping, showDataAs, sort, grandTotals, subtotals, compact/outline/tabular layout, repeat item labels, blank rows, calculated fields, persistent labelFilter / topN filters, cache CoW + cross-pivot sharing), slicers, named ranges, data validation, images (PNG/JPG/GIF/SVG with dual-representation fallback), sparklines, comments (RTL), autofilter, shapes, OLE objects, CSV/TSV import, $Sheet:A1 cell addressing

PowerPoint — slides (header/footer/date/slidenum toggles, hidden), shapes (pattern fill, blur effect, hyperlink tooltip + slide-jump links, highlight color on runs, slideMaster/slideLayout typed add/set/remove, arrow alias, effective.X + effective.X.src), images (PNG/JPG/GIF/SVG, fill modes: stretch/contain/cover/tile, brightness/contrast/glow/shadow, rotation, link + tooltip), tables (built-in PowerPoint style catalogue, virtual /col[C] get + swap/copyFrom, row/col Move/CopyFrom, fill/background alias), charts (pieOfPie, barOfPie, per-attr axisLine/gridline setters, series add/remove with theme palette, anchor=x,y,w,h shorthand), animations (15 emphasis + 16 exit template-backed presets, multi-effect chains, motion-path presets, repeat/restart/autoReverse, chart animations + chartBuild), transitions (morph + p14 + 12 p15 PowerPoint 2013+ presets), 3D models (.glb) (combined rotation=ax,ay,az), slide zoom, equations (LaTeX input), diagrams (mermaid flowchart / sequence → native editable shapes, or any mermaid type as a full-fidelity PNG), themes, connectors (from/to accept a full /slide[N]/shape[@name=Foo] path), video/audio (loop, autoStart), groups (link + tooltip; Get/Query/Add/Remove all descend into groups), notes (RTL, lang), comments (RTL, legacy + modern p188 threaded round-trip), SmartArt (round-trip via add-part + raw-set), OLE objects, placeholders (add/set by phType)

Use Cases

For Developers:

Automate report generation from databases or APIs
Batch-process documents (bulk find/replace, style updates)
Build document pipelines in CI/CD environments (generate docs from test results)
Headless Office automation in Docker/containerized environments

For AI Agents:

Generate presentations from user prompts (see examples above)
Extract structured data from documents to JSON
Validate and check document quality before delivery

For Teams:

Clone document templates and populate with data
Automated document validation in CI/CD pipelines

Installation

Ships as a single self-contained binary. The .NET runtime is embedded -- nothing to install, no runtime to manage.

One-line install:

# macOS / Linux
curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/iOfficeAI/OfficeCLI/main/install.sh | bash

# Windows (PowerShell)
irm https://raw.githubusercontent.com/iOfficeAI/OfficeCLI/main/install.ps1 | iex

Or download manually from GitHub Releases:

Platform Binary
macOS Apple Silicon officecli-mac-arm64
macOS Intel officecli-mac-x64
Linux x64 officecli-linux-x64
Linux ARM64 officecli-linux-arm64
Windows x64 officecli-win-x64.exe
Windows ARM64 officecli-win-arm64.exe

Verify installation: officecli --version

Or self-install from a downloaded binary (or run bare officecli to auto-install):

officecli install    # explicit
officecli            # bare invocation also triggers install

Updates are checked automatically in the background. Disable with officecli config autoUpdate false or skip per-invocation with OFFICECLI_SKIP_UPDATE=1. Configuration lives under ~/.officecli/config.json.

Key Features

Built-in Engines & Generation Primitives

OfficeCLI is self-contained. The capabilities below ship inside the binary — no Office required.

Rendering engine — high-fidelity, built-in

OfficeCLI's keystone: a from-scratch, high-fidelity HTML rendering engine that lets an AI agent see the rendered document instead of guessing from the DOM. It covers shapes, charts (trendlines, error bars, waterfall, candlestick, sparklines), equations (OMML → MathJax-compatible), 3D .glb models via Three.js, morph transitions, slide zoom, and shape effects. Per-page PNG screenshots are produced by piping the rendered HTML through a headless browser. Three modes:

view html — standalone HTML file, assets inlined. Open in any browser.
view screenshot — per-page PNG, ready for multimodal agents to read.
watch — local HTTP server with auto-refreshing preview; every add / set / remove updates the browser instantly. Excel watch supports inline cell editing and drag-to-reposition charts.

officecli view deck.pptx html -o /tmp/deck.html
officecli view deck.pptx screenshot -o /tmp/deck.png # add --page 1-N for more slides
officecli watch deck.pptx                            # http://localhost:26315

Without visualization, an agent generating slides is flying blind — it can read the DOM but can't tell if the title overflows or two shapes overlap. Because rendering is built into the binary, the render → look → fix loop works in CI, in Docker, on a server with no display — anywhere the binary runs.

Formula & pivot engine

350+ built-in Excel functions evaluated automatically on write — write =SUM(A1:A2), get the cell, the value is already there. No round-trip through Office to recalc. Covers spilling dynamic arrays (FILTER / SORT / UNIQUE / SEQUENCE / LET / LAMBDA / MAP), VLOOKUP / XLOOKUP / INDEX / MATCH, financial & bond math (XIRR / PRICE / YIELD / DURATION / COUPNUM), statistical distributions, tests & regression (NORM.DIST / T.TEST / LINEST), and date & text functions.

Plus native OOXML pivot tables from a source range with one command — multi-field rows/cols/filters, 10 aggregations, showDataAs modes, date grouping, calculated fields, top-N, layouts. Pivot cache + definition are written to OOXML, so Excel opens the file with the aggregation already populated:

officecli add sales.xlsx '/Sheet1' --type pivottable \
  --prop source='Data!A1:E10000' --prop rows='Region,Category' \
  --prop cols=Quarter --prop values='Revenue:sum,Units:avg' \
  --prop showDataAs=percentOfTotal

Template merge — generate once, fill many

merge replaces {{key}} placeholders in any .docx / .xlsx / .pptx with JSON data — across paragraphs, table cells, shapes, headers, footers, and chart titles. Agent designs the layout once (expensive); production code fills it N times (cheap, deterministic, zero token cost). Avoids the failure mode where an agent regenerates each report from scratch and produces N inconsistent layouts.

officecli merge invoice-template.docx out-001.docx '{"client":"Acme","total":"$5,200"}'
officecli merge q4-template.pptx q4-acme.pptx data.json

Round-trip dump — learn from existing docs

dump serializes any .docx, .pptx, or .xlsx — whole document or any subtree (a single paragraph, table, slide, worksheet, the styles part, numbering, theme, or settings) — into a replayable batch JSON; batch replays it. Given a sample the user wants to imitate, an agent reads the structured spec instead of raw OOXML XML, mutates, and replays. Bridges "I have an existing template" and "generate me 100 variations."

officecli dump existing.docx -o blueprint.json                  # whole document
officecli dump existing.docx /body/tbl[1] -o table.json         # any subtree
officecli dump existing.xlsx /Sheet1 -o sheet.json              # a single worksheet
officecli batch new.docx --input blueprint.json

Resident Mode & Batch

For multi-step workflows, resident mode keeps the document in memory. Batch mode applies multiple operations in a single pass.

# Resident mode — near-zero latency via named pipes
officecli open report.docx
officecli set report.docx /body/p[1]/r[1] --prop bold=true
officecli set report.docx /body/p[2]/r[1] --prop color=FF0000
officecli close report.docx

# Batch mode — multi-command execution (continues on error by default; --stop-on-error to abort)
echo '[{"command":"set","path":"/slide[1]/shape[1]","props":{"text":"Hello"}},
      {"command":"set","path":"/slide[1]/shape[2]","props":{"fill":"FF0000"}}]' \
  | officecli batch deck.pptx --json

# Inline batch with --commands (no stdin needed)
officecli batch deck.pptx --commands '[{"op":"set","path":"/slide[1]/shape[1]","props":{"text":"Hi"}}]'

# Abort on the first failing command (default is continue-on-error)
officecli batch deck.pptx --input updates.json --stop-on-error --json

Reading the file with another tool? Flush to disk first. officecli's own reads (get/query/view) always see your latest edits, so within officecli you never need to save. But a live resident defers the disk write, so before a non‑officecli program reads the file — python‑docx/openpyxl, Microsoft Word, a renderer, delivery/upload — flush it:

officecli set report.docx /body/p[1] --prop bold=true
officecli save report.docx           # flush, keep the resident warm (or `close` to flush + release)
python my_reader.py report.docx      # now sees the edit

A live resident also auto‑flushes shortly after going idle (adaptive 2–10s, scaled to the document's measured save cost). For a pipeline where another program reads after every command, set OFFICECLI_RESIDENT_FLUSH=each — every mutation is on disk before the command returns, while the resident stays warm. Full flush model (each/auto/fixed/off, save / close, env tuning): wiki → open / close.

Three-Layer Architecture

Start simple, go deep only when needed.

Layer Purpose Commands
L1: Read Semantic views of content view (text, annotated, outline, stats, issues, html, svg, screenshot)
L2: DOM Structured element operations get, query, set, add, remove, move, swap
L3: Raw XML Direct XPath access — universal fallback raw, raw-set, add-part, validate

# L1 — high-level views
officecli view report.docx annotated
officecli view budget.xlsx text --cols A,B,C --max-lines 50

# L2 — element-level operations
officecli query report.docx "run:contains(TODO)"
officecli add budget.xlsx / --type sheet --prop name="Q2 Report"
officecli move report.docx /body/p[5] --to /body --index 1

# L3 — raw XML when L2 isn't enough
officecli raw deck.pptx '/slide[1]'
officecli raw-set report.docx document \
  --xpath "//w:p[1]" --action append \
  --xml '<w:r><w:t>Injected text</w:t></w:r>'

AI Integration

MCP Server

Built-in MCP server — register with one command:

officecli mcp claude       # Claude Code
officecli mcp cursor       # Cursor
officecli mcp vscode       # VS Code / Copilot
officecli mcp lmstudio     # LM Studio
officecli mcp list         # Check registration status

Exposes all document operations as tools over JSON-RPC — no shell access needed.

Direct CLI Integration

Get OfficeCLI working with your AI agent in two steps:

Install the binary -- one command (see Installation)
Done. OfficeCLI automatically detects your AI tools (Claude Code, GitHub Copilot, Codex) by checking known config directories and installs its skill file. Your agent can immediately create, read, and modify any Office document.
Manual setup (optional)

If auto-install doesn't cover your setup, you can install the skill file manually:

Feed SKILL.md to your agent directly:

curl -fsSL https://officecli.ai/SKILL.md

Install as a local skill for Claude Code:

curl -fsSL https://officecli.ai/SKILL.md -o ~/.claude/skills/officecli.md

Other agents: Include the contents of SKILL.md in your agent's system prompt or tool description.

Why your agent will thrive on OfficeCLI

Deterministic JSON output — every command supports --json with consistent schemas. No regex parsing, no scraping stdout.
Path-based addressing — every element has a stable path (/slide[1]/shape[2]). Agents navigate documents without understanding XML namespaces. (OfficeCLI syntax: 1-based indexing, element local names — not XPath.)
Progressive complexity (L1 → L2 → L3) — agents start with read-only views, escalate to DOM ops, fall back to raw XML only when needed. Minimizes token usage.
Self-healing workflow — validate, view issues, and the structured error codes (not_found, invalid_value, unsupported_property) return suggestions and valid ranges. Agents self-correct without human intervention.
Built-in agent-friendly rendering engine — view html / view screenshot / watch emit HTML and PNG natively. No Office required. Agents can see their output and fix layout issues, even inside CI / Docker / headless environments.
Built-in formula & pivot engine — 350+ Excel functions auto-evaluated on write (incl. spilling dynamic arrays, financial / bond and statistical families); native OOXML pivot tables from a source range with one command. Agents read computed values and shipped aggregations immediately, without round-tripping through Office.
Template merge — agent designs the layout once, downstream code fills {{key}} placeholders N times. Avoids burning tokens regenerating every report from scratch.
Round-trip dump — dump turns any .docx, .pptx, or .xlsx into replayable batch JSON. Agents learn from human-authored samples by reading a structured spec, not raw OOXML XML.
Built-in help — when unsure about property names or value formats, the agent runs officecli <format> set <element> instead of guessing.
Auto-install — OfficeCLI detects your AI tooling (Claude Code, Cursor, VS Code, …) and configures itself. No manual skill-file setup.

Built-in Help

Don't guess property names — drill into the help:

officecli pptx set              # All settable elements and properties
officecli pptx set shape        # Detail for one element type
officecli pptx set shape.fill   # One property: format and examples
officecli docx query            # Selector reference: attributes, :contains, :has(), etc.

Run officecli --help for the full overview.

JSON Output Schemas

All commands support --json. The general response shapes:

Single element (get --json):

{"tag": "shape", "path": "/slide[1]/shape[1]", "attributes": {"name": "TextBox 1", "text": "Hello"}}

List of elements (query --json):

[
  {"tag": "paragraph", "path": "/body/p[1]", "attributes": {"style": "Heading1", "text": "Title"}},
  {"tag": "paragraph", "path": "/body/p[5]", "attributes": {"style": "Heading1", "text": "Summary"}}
]

Errors return a non-zero exit code with a structured error object including error code, suggestion, and valid values when available:

{
  "success": false,
  "error": {
    "error": "Slide 50 not found (total: 8)",
    "code": "not_found",
    "suggestion": "Valid Slide index range: 1-8"
  }
}

Error codes: not_found, invalid_value, unsupported_property, invalid_path, unsupported_type, missing_property, file_not_found, file_locked, invalid_selector. Property names are auto-corrected -- misspelling a property returns a suggestion with the closest match.

Error Recovery -- Agents self-correct by inspecting available elements:

# Agent tries an invalid path
officecli get report.docx /body/p[99] --json
# Returns: {"success": false, "error": {"error": "...", "code": "not_found", "suggestion": "..."}}

# Agent self-corrects by checking available elements
officecli get report.docx /body --depth 1 --json
# Returns the list of available children, agent picks the right path

Mutation confirmations (set, add, remove, move, create with --json):

{"success": true, "path": "/slide[1]/shape[1]"}

See officecli --help for full details on exit codes and error formats.

Comparison

OfficeCLI Microsoft Office LibreOffice python-docx / openpyxl
Open source & free ✓ (Apache 2.0) ✗ (paid license) ✓ ✓
AI-native CLI + JSON ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗
Zero install (single binary) ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ (Python + pip)
Call from any language ✓ (CLI) ✗ (COM/Add-in) ✗ (UNO API) Python only
Path-based element access ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗
Raw XML fallback ✓ ✗ ✗ Partial
Built-in agent-friendly rendering engine ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗
Headless HTML/PNG output ✓ ✗ Partial ✗
Template merge ({{key}}) across formats ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗
Round-trip dump → batch JSON ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗
Live preview (auto-refresh on edit) ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗
Headless / CI ✓ ✗ Partial ✓
Cross-platform ✓ Windows/Mac ✓ ✓
Word + Excel + PowerPoint ✓ ✓ ✓ Separate libs

Command Reference

Command Description
create Create a blank .docx, .xlsx, or .pptx (type from extension)
view View content (modes: outline, text, annotated, stats (--page-count), issues, html, svg, screenshot, pdf (via exporter plugin), forms (via format-handler plugin)). docx supports --render auto|native|html.
load_skill Print embedded SKILL.md content for a specialized skill (no install)
get Get element and children (--depth N, --json)
query CSS-like query with boolean and/or, row-by-column-name (row[Salary>5000]), --find flag
set Modify element properties; accepts selectors and Excel-native paths (parity with get/query), --find/--replace flags
add Add element (or clone with --from <path>)
remove Remove an element
move Move element (--to <parent>, --index N, --after <path>, --before <path>)
swap Swap two elements
validate Validate against OpenXML schema
view <file> issues Enumerate document issues (text overflow, missing alt text, formula errors, ...)
batch Multiple operations applied in a single pass (stdin, --input, or --commands; continues on error by default, --stop-on-error to abort)
dump Serialize a .docx, .pptx, or .xlsx into a replayable batch JSON (round-trip via batch); accepts a subtree path
refresh Recalculate TOC page numbers / PAGE / cross-references (.docx; Word backend on Windows, headless-HTML fallback)
plugins List / inspect / lint installed plugins (extend to .doc, .hwpx, .pdf export via dump-reader / exporter / format-handler kinds)
merge Template merge — replace {{key}} placeholders with JSON data
watch Live HTML preview in browser with auto-refresh
mcp Start MCP server for AI tool integration
raw View raw XML of a document part
raw-set Modify raw XML via XPath
add-part Add a new document part (header, chart, etc.)
open Start resident mode (keep document in memory)
close Save and close resident mode
install Install binary + skills + MCP (all, claude, cursor, etc.)
config Get or set configuration
<format> <command> Built-in help (e.g. officecli pptx set shape)

End-to-End Workflow Example

A typical self-healing agent workflow: create a presentation, populate it, verify, and fix issues -- all without human intervention.

# 1. Create
officecli create report.pptx

# 2. Add content
officecli add report.pptx / --type slide --prop title="Q4 Results"
officecli add report.pptx '/slide[1]' --type shape \
  --prop text="Revenue: $4.2M" --prop x=2cm --prop y=5cm --prop size=28
officecli add report.pptx / --type slide --prop title="Details"
officecli add report.pptx '/slide[2]' --type shape \
  --prop text="Growth driven by new markets" --prop x=2cm --prop y=5cm

# 3. Verify
officecli view report.pptx outline
officecli validate report.pptx

# 4. Fix any issues found
officecli view report.pptx issues --json
# Address issues based on output, e.g.:
officecli set report.pptx '/slide[1]/shape[1]' --prop font=Arial

Units & Colors

All dimension and color properties accept flexible input formats:

Type Accepted formats Examples
Dimensions cm, in, pt, px, or raw EMU 2cm, 1in, 72pt, 96px, 914400
Colors Hex, named, RGB, theme #FF0000, FF0000, red, rgb(255,0,0), accent1
Font sizes Bare number or pt-suffixed 14, 14pt, 10.5pt
Spacing pt, cm, in, or multiplier 12pt, 0.5cm, 1.5x, 150%

Common Patterns

# Replace all Heading1 text in a Word doc
officecli query report.docx "paragraph[style=Heading1]" --json | ...
officecli set report.docx /body/p[1]/r[1] --prop text="New Title"

# Export all slide content as JSON
officecli get deck.pptx / --depth 2 --json

# Bulk-update Excel cells
officecli batch budget.xlsx --input updates.json --json

# Import CSV data into an Excel sheet
officecli add budget.xlsx / --type sheet --prop name="Q1 Data" --prop csv=sales.csv

# Template merge for batch reports
officecli merge invoice-template.docx invoice-001.docx '{"client":"Acme","total":"$5,200"}'

# Check document quality before delivery
officecli validate report.docx && officecli view report.docx issues --json

From Python or Node.js — install one of the thin resident-pipe SDKs (no per-call process spawn):

# Python — `pip install officecli-sdk`
from officecli import Doc
with Doc("deck.pptx") as d:
    d.add("/", type="slide", title="Q4 Report")
    print(d.get("/slide[1]"))

// Node.js — `npm install @officecli/sdk`
import { Doc } from "@officecli/sdk";
await using d = await Doc.open("deck.pptx");
await d.add("/", { type: "slide", title: "Q4 Report" });
console.log(await d.get("/slide[1]"));

Both SDKs auto-provision the native CLI when missing (mirror-first, Windows-capable) and announce the install rather than doing it silently.

Or wrap subprocess directly, one-shot:

import json, subprocess
def cli(*args):
    return json.loads(subprocess.check_output(["officecli", *args, "--json"], text=True))
cli("create", "deck.pptx")

Documentation

The Wiki has detailed guides for every command, element type, and property:

By format: Word | Excel | PowerPoint
Workflows: End-to-end examples -- Word reports, Excel dashboards, PowerPoint decks, batch modifications, resident mode
Runnable examples: examples/ -- copy-paste scripts (.sh/.py) for Word, Excel, and PowerPoint, with output files included
Troubleshooting: Common errors and solutions
AI agent guide: Decision tree for navigating the wiki

Build from Source

Requires .NET 10 SDK for compilation only. The output is a self-contained, native binary -- .NET is embedded in the binary and is not needed at runtime.

./build.sh

License

Apache License 2.0

Bug reports and contributions are welcome on GitHub Issues.

If you find OfficeCLI useful, please give it a star on GitHub — it helps others discover the project.

OfficeCLI.AI | GitHub

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

19. Learning to code is still worthwhile

Source: https://stevekrouse.com/learn-to-code
Site: stevekrouse.com
Submitter: stevekrouse (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-07-06 20:59 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 124 points · 121 comments
Length: 609 words (~3 min read)

July 6, 2026

Is there any point to learn to code in the age of vibe coding?

Literally no one is uttering what we thought were the immortal lines “learn to code,” right? I don't think that sentence has been spoken for many months now in Silicon Valley

Making Sense with Sam Harris #481

I'm the founder of Val Town, a "Silicon Valley startup" for writing and deploying code, and I still believe everyone should learn to code.

Sam is right that “learn to code” is no longer trotted out as a quick path out of poverty. The ability to string together two lines of JavaScript no longer guarantees you a 6-figure-salary.

This is also true of math, literature, science, or any of the liberal arts. Like those, coding is worthwhile to learn on educational grounds, not merely vocational ones.

I grew up hating math. I stumbled into an after-school program that taught programming. Through it, I fell in love with math, and excelled at it beyond my wildest dreams.

Later, I learned this experience masterminded by a math & education researcher named Seymour Papert. He wanted children to learn math like they learn to speak: through exploration instead of instruction. He started from the assumption that we all know it’s impossible to be congenitally “bad at French”: if you grow up in France, you’ll learn it. So Papert tried to create “Mathland”, a place where anyone could grow up “speaking math.”

The Mathland he created was the LOGO programming language, where you can draw pictures by giving instructions to a turtle on the screen with ink on its feet. I recently made a version of it you can try out online. Can you figure out how to draw a circle?

Through learning to program, I learned so many meta-skills, like debugging, composition, and logic. Most importantly, I learned that there’s literally nothing that cannot be learned. These meta-learnings of programming may explain the unreasonable competence (and arrogance) of computer scientists: why we think we can solve all the world’s problems – even those far outside our original domains.

2. Code is a beautiful form of creative expression, as rich as literature or music

Coding is a delightful activity that combines the creativity of writing with the precision of mathematics and the instant feedback loops of a video game. It helps you sharpen your desires into precise language that computers can carry out.

It’s remarkably close to casting spells. I think of Hermione correcting Ron – "it's levi-O-sa” – as a good model of what it’s like learning the arcane syntax of code. But once you master that, “You are a wizard, Harry.” You can encode what you imagine into an arcane language that a computer will make real. We all can be wizards.

LLMs can write English as well as they can write code, yet we have no fear for the relevance of humanities. The same intuition holds true for code.

Many dismiss code in the same way they dismiss legalese as inscrutable, tedious details. But like law, code is what our world runs on, and an elegant line of code can literally change the world. Think of e=mc2 or “we hold these truths to be self-evident” if you doubt the power and majesty of precise formal language.

And finally, programming is simply fun. It's a joy. My calling in life is to spread the joy of programming, so if you have any inkling of interest in learning to code yourself, shoot me an email – steve@val.town.

The dream of universal code literacy – or the "real computer revolution” – lives on, even in the age of LLMs.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

20. Aluminum foil (2021)

Source: https://dernocua.github.io/notes/aluminum-foil.html
Site: dernocua.github.io
Submitter: firephox (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-07-06 13:28 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 251 points · 107 comments
Length: 2.2K words (~10 min read)

Kragen Javier Sitaker, 02021-05-24 (updated 02021-09-11) (14 minutes)

Kitchen aluminum foil is a remarkable material.

It’s typically 10 μm thick and 400 mm wide, giving it an aspect ratio of 40000 in that dimension, and rolls are commonly some ten meters in length, for an aspect ratio of 1 000 000; heavy-duty versions can reach 30 μm or more. Despite their thinness, foils of 25 μm or more are impermeable to oxygen, water, and light, though Wikipedia claims thinner foils typically are plagued with pinholes. It comes in a fully annealed state, so it rapidly work-hardens when bent, and because of its thinness can be bent at deep submillimeter scales to form metamaterials. It’s highly reflective (88% on the bright side across the visible spectrum and even higher in the infrared) and conductive, rivaling copper. It resists corrosion for years in weather, it’s nontoxic, it’s light (2.71 g/cc), and it’s damn cheap, under 50¢/m².

Robert Lang recommends laminating tissue paper on one or both sides of kitchen aluminum foil to make “tissue foil”, which for years he considered the ideal origami material. Notably, he uses a weak sacrificial adhesive layer to hold the foil in place for the lamination process.

Typical alloys include especially 1100 and 1200, but also 8111, 8015, and 8006, with 0.06%–0.6% silicon and 0.4%–1.6% iron, and in some cases also some copper or manganese, under 0.5%. (1100 is sometimes described as an “unalloyed aluminum grade” but it’s specified to contain 0.05%–0.20% of copper, and it unavoidably has other impurities.) Room-temperature yield strengths of these alloys range from 30–170 MPa, with ultimate tensile strengths of 70–200 MPa, and of course they all have a Young’s modulus around 70 GPa. Because its crystal structure is fcc, it remains ductile down to absolute zero, making it suitable for cryogenic applications; indeed, aluminum becomes stronger at cryogenic temperatures. And, although it weakens dramatically at higher temperatures, it doesn’t melt until almost 650°, enabling it to be used at higher temperatures than organic materials.

If oxidized (for example, with a soda solution, an arc, or anodization) it yields amorphous sapphire, which if crystallized is an excellent insulator, refractory, and abrasive. The oxidation process produces a great deal of heat, making aluminum a very-high-energy-density fuel, and, thanks to aluminum’s sternly trivalent nature, electrical current; aluminum-foil fuel cells are routinely produced by amateurs, though these typically oxidize the aluminum to the chloride rather than the hydroxide or the oxide.

50¢/m² is 50¢/kWp in a solar concentrator, or 0.05¢/Wp, which is noticeably cheaper than photovoltaic cells, currently around 18¢/Wp, 360 times more expensive. (However, the foil number there is sunlight watts; if you’re making a PV solar concentrator you have to divide by the efficiency of the solar cells, say 21%, which gives you 0.24¢/Wp electric.) A large aluminum-foil assembly would be vulnerable to significant deflections, but many small assemblies could be placed on a hard, stable surface such as a rock or an adobe wall.

Alternatively, though, it might be possible to stiffen the foil by making the equivalent of corrugated cardboard out of it, maybe using aqueous boric acid (US$1.70/kg according to Potential local sources and prices of refractory materials) or borax as the glue. The surface tension of water is ample to hold aluminum foil in place until the water dries.

The feature that currently attracts my attention is the possibility of work-hardening, which suggests the tempting possibility of making tooling from aluminum foil that can itself work aluminum foil at room temperature, a possibility reinforced by the immense aspect ratios routinely available. As a simple example, you can in theory roll some foil into a cone, and the point of this cone can dent, form a rib in, or even pierce more of the same foil; but this is much easier in practice if you first fold the foil 16 layers thick, form ribs converging to a point on the last-formed fold, then roll the cone around that point. If the last-formed fold is reversed, the aluminum along the outer edge of the fold is the aluminum that was most strained previously, having been bent double with as small a radius as possible, and so will be the most work-hardened.

I was able to use such a cone to pierce not just aluminum foil but the skin of an apple. I folded it from some foil which, folded 256 layers thick, measured 2.57 mm in my shitty digital calipers; the resulting square measured 27–29 mm on each side and weighed 1.8 g, giving a density of only 0.8–1.0 g/cc, so it’s probably more than half air, though it rapidly sinks in water, so probably the density is a little higher than that.

Using such a cone point to form ribs without piercing foil is tricky, because it tends to have significant asperities around the tip, which tend to tear the foil if it is unbacked. These can presumably be removed, permitting traditional SPIF processing of raw foil by sliding the point over the foil; a better alternative might be to produce a sequence of dents in the foil, then add new dents between them, eventually producing a continuous groove in a way analogous to how chain drilling cuts through a block of metal. However, when the foil “workpiece” is backed by something reasonably hard (I’ve used corrugated cardboard and the above-mentioned packed 256-layer aluminum-foil square) and I’m using one of the other point types described below, tears are relatively uncommon; in this situation it fairly reliably just forms ribs. (I need to test more rigorously to find out if the point type, the backing, or both is relevant here.)

Because such ribs are work-hardened, they are able to imprint their shape on fully-annealed foil repeatedly. I wrote a short word in cursive on foil using a layered aluminum-foil point (“single-point incremental forming”), with the foil simply backed by the somewhat-hard 256-layer square, then pressed this master against another piece of foil in several places, pressing the two foils between my fingers in each position (“stamping”). This resulted in very readable copies of the word in several locations, although I’m guessing there was substantial springback, so repeating this sort of stamping through multiple generations would make the stamping shallower at each generation.

I’ve tried smoking and annealing this foil with candle flames and butane lighter flames, but so far I’ve only managed to melt it (in under a second, usually) without ever smoking it. Maybe if I put water in it I could get it to smoke up so I could tell when it was on the point of overheating, but probably a different method of temperature control would be more practical to anneal such a thin material, such as a temperature-controlled heat gun.

A more reproducible point construction with a sharper, lower-volume point was able to pierce the foil and apple even more easily. I folded the foil three times to get 8 layers with a right-angle corner; bisected the corner twice to get a 22½° angle; formed a rib bisecting that angle with thumbnail pressure; then opened the final fold to about 30° so that the two sides of the point would stiffen one another.

By laying the foil into a form with a 90° valley in it and dragging such a point over it, I was able to get a bend into the foil. When there were ribs running perpendicular to the bend, this required multiple passes in one case; a second attempt resulted in neatly cutting through the foil at the intended bend location.

Another way to look at the 40 000:1 aspect ratio is to consider making a tight cylindrical roll from a strip of the foil, 400 mm long and, say, 10 mm wide, comprising 40 mm³, a cylinder whose ends are 4 mm³. The cylinder thus has radius 1.13 mm and diameter 2.26 mm, so a section through the center of it will go through 226 10-μm layers of foil. That is, instead of being 40 000 as you’d expect, it’s about √(40000) · 4/π.

The significance of ribs for folding is not that the ribs themselves become more flexible — the material in the rib is work-hardened and thus less flexible in plastic deformation, though its elastic properties remain unchanged — but that they prevent curvature of the material around them in any other direction, so if it’s going to bend, the bend will be parallel to the ribs.

By making many parallel slits in the foil (with a steel box-cutter blade, backing the foil with cardboard), I was able to make expanded sheet metal, expanding a bit of foil by more than a factor of 2.

I was also able to fold a rather ugly origami crane by hand from the foil, about 700 mg and 70 mm wingspan.

This assemblage of techniques seems promising for matter compiler bootstrapping, although it’s clearly just a beginning. Many of the problematic aspects of kitchen aluminum foil result from trying to work with it at the 10-mm scale rather than the 10-μm scale. Wrinkles, rips, and so on are going to happen unintentionally when trying to manipulate 10-μm foil with 10-mm human fingers.

(Also, the natural frequencies of such macroscopic objects made by folding such foil rarely exceed 100 Hz. The wing of the foil crane resonates at around 100 Hz.)

As a test of alternatives, I also folded an origami crane from a square cut from an aluminum Monster can, which is normally expected to be about 100 μm thick. The square was about 125 mm on a side, and the crane weighs about 3.8 g. One layer of the square measured 0.12 mm; two layers 0.33 mm; three layers 0.38 mm; and four layers 0.52 mm. We can conclude from this that (a) my caliper technique is shitty, (b) the can (including paint) is about 120 μm thick, and (c) the actual aluminum part of the can is more like 90 μm thick (3.8 g / 125 mm / 125 mm / 2.71 (g/cc)).

It’s a fucking miracle that I didn’t cut myself on the damn crane. It was all knife edges and burrs, and every time I folded the damn thing it cracked and ripped more, exposing new cutting edges. Aluminum-can bodies are typically aluminum 3004, hardened with manganese and magnesium, and work-hardened from the deep-drawing process rather than annealed, so it’s not a perfect analogy, but it seems at least suggestive.

Aluminum flashing for roofing is 0.024 inches, or in modern units, 610 μm, but I think it’s annealed; aluminum is sold as sheet metal down to 0.004 inches, 100 μm in modern units.

If we figure that the foil can meaningfully change direction every 20 μm, then we might think of an aluminum-foil machine as being made of “moving parts” on the order of 1000 μm² (50 μm × 20 μm), 1000 “parts” per square millimeter of foil; a roll of kitchen aluminum foil is enough to fabricate some 4 billion “parts”. A bootstrapping compiler might require 100 000 parts and thus a square centimeter of aluminum foil, cut and folded around into a shape a couple of millimeters in diameter. If it were doing only one thing at a time, and needed 10 seconds to construct/assemble each moving part, it would take about 12 days to recompile itself. This is probably adequately fast, barely, but probably not adequately robust against errors. It would probably be better to design it to have more parts and do many things at once, enabling it to be faster and correct errors.

It would be astonishing if no other materials were needed: you can’t build anything electrical out of aluminum, at least at sub-microwave frequencies, because the whole device is at the same electrical potential. Similarly with getting mechanical power from thermal expansion and contraction: it would just expand isotropically rather than bending or sliding to do useful work. It might be possible to use just aluminum foil coated on one side with something else, such as glass or a few microns of aluminum oxide.

An interesting way to think of the density of aluminum foil is that 10 μm of 2.71-g/cc aluminum foil is 27.1 g/m², which is the same areal density as a 23-mm-high column of air.

Other processes that may be very interesting to apply to aluminum foil include electrolytic machining, electric discharge machining, scanning probe microscopy, and anodization. Electrolytic machining might make it possible to use an aluminum-foil tool to cut arbitrary shapes into metals such as steel, invar, brass, inconel, monel, or tungsten, and also to transform a scrap of aluminum foil (either flat or of a known geometry) into a white-light hologram of an arbitrary optical system, Fresnel-reflector-style.

Topics

Pricing (35 notes)
Digital fabrication (31 notes)
Electrolysis (18 notes)
Experiment report (14 notes)
Strength of materials (13 notes)
Machining (13 notes)
Aluminum (10 notes)
ECM (9 notes)
Solar (6 notes)
Optics (6 notes)
Aluminum foil (5 notes)
Electropolishing (2 notes)
Origami
Alloys

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

21. The LLVM Compiler Infrastructure

Source: https://cacm.acm.org/federal-funding-of-academic-research/the-llvm-compiler-infrastructure/
Site: cacm.acm.org
Submitter: tosh (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-07-04 06:43 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 49 points · 7 comments

Scrape failed: http 403

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

22. Evaluation order and nontermination in query languages

Source: https://www.rntz.net/post/2026-06-11-datalog-nontermination.html
Site: rntz.net
Author: Michael Arntzenius
Submitted: 2026-07-02 07:08 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 25 points · 2 comments
Length: 2.2K words (~10 min read)
Language: en

June 2026

Last month I gave a talk at FLOPS about finite functional programming or ‘λFS’, my latest attempt (previously: Datafun) to combine functional programming with relational programming à la Datalog or SQL – and tensor algebra too, because why not?

In λFS, a relation R is treated as a function: we let R(x) = true iff x is in R, false otherwise. This function is finite in that R(x) = true for only finitely many inputs x: these are its support. The paper gives a type system for ensuring functions have finite support. At runtime, we represent a finite boolean function by tabulating its support in a hash table or a balanced tree (like a table in a database).

This generalizes beyond booleans to any codomain with a ‘default’ value. A function’s support are those inputs whose output is non-default; for instance, the booleans with false as default, or the integers with 0 as default. A finite function can then be represented as a key-value table whose keys are the function’s support; any other key implicitly maps to the default value. Non-boolean finite maps arise naturally as the result of aggregations, while tensor algebra is essentially relational algebra over non-boolean (usually real-valued) finite maps.

Nontermination and evaluation order

In the talk, I mentioned that recursion was future work for λFS. Naturally, someone – I think it was Atsushi Igarashi – asked what the difficulty was. The primary difficulty is that recursion allows nontermination. Semantics for nontermination usually use domain theory, which has fallen out of fashion in recent decades, and which consequently I’ve never deeply studied and find a bit intimidating.1

Moreover, as soon as nontermination or any effect is involved, there is a question of evaluation order. Even in the untyped lambda calculus, where evaluation is confluent, call-by-name and call-by-value evaluation terminate on different programs. What’s worse, in relational languages ‘evaluation order’ has a more expansive meaning than in functional languages. Consider this example:

Given R,S : nat => bool input tables
and test : nat -> bool a black-box predicate
let Q(x) := R(x) and test(x) and S(x) the query

Here, => denotes a finite function, represented as a table, while -> denotes an arbitrary function, represented by a procedure or closure. Thinking relationally, our query Q is the intersection of the tables R and S, filtered by the black-box predicate test.

The central question is: in what order do we evaluate this query? We could go left-to-right: for each x in R, if test(x) passes, check if x is in S. In Python:

[x for x in R if test(x) if x in S]


Or, noting that test may be expensive but looking up an entry in a table is cheap, we could check if x is in S before calling test:

[x for x in R if x in S if test(x)]


And if we happen to know S is much smaller than R, we can save a lot of time by iterating over S instead of R:

[x for x in S if x in R if test(x)]


The standard relational philosophy regards evaluation order as an implementation detail, decided by the query planner. However, this ordering may affect whether Q terminates, because different orders call test on different arguments. A contrived example:

R := {"hello", "world"}
S := {"hello", "alice"}
test(x) := x == "hello" or loop-forever()
Q(x) := R(x) and test(x) and S(x)


Left-to-right execution calls test("hello"), which succeeds, followed by test("world"), which loops forever. But if we intersect R and S before calling test, we only test "hello" and so terminate.

I have expressed this problem in λFS, but it arises in any SQL or Datalog engine supporting user-defined functions, and exposes a tension between typical DB and PL assumptions:

DB The query engine may choose the execution strategy to optimize performance.

PL We can reason compositionally about program behavior – in particular, about termination or execution time.

λFS tries to bridge DB and PL, and gets stuck in the awkward middle: I must either favor one perspective over another, or find a way to thread the needle’s eye. I do not yet know how best to do this. Instead, here are three directions forward – three sketches of possible semantics for λFS with recursion (or Datalog with nonterminating functions).

1 Left to right evaluation has a simple cost model

The simplest strategy to implement also has the most straightforward semantics: evaluate from left to right. This is the most typical PL approach: it avoids query planning and puts the job squarely in the hands of the programmer. This makes the execution time of a query easy to predict and reason about, as my friend Rob Simmons pointed out to me while working on Finite Choice Logic Programming; this is more or less the cost model of Dusa, an implementation of FCLP.

In this approach, a conjunction of n terms turns into at most n nested loops. For instance, R(x) and S(y) becomes 2 loops:

for x in R:
    for y in S:
        yield (x,y)


In a query like R(x) and S(x), where the variables of S(x) are already entirely grounded, we generate a test rather than a loop:

for x in R:
    if x not in S: continue
    yield x


If some but not all variables of a conjunct are grounded, we need an index; for example, to run R(x,y) and S(y,z), we want to index S by y:

for x,y in R:
    for z in S_index[y]: -- assuming an appropriate S_index
        yield (x,y,z)


If we have these indexes and all our conjuncts are applications of finite maps, the cost model is simple: count the prefix firings. That is, for every prefix of the conjunction, count how many assignments of its free variables satisfy it. So for R(x,y) and S(y,z), we add together:

The number of x,y tuples satisfying R(x,y).
The number of x,y,z tuples satisfying R(x,y) and S(y,z).

What about black-box predicates like test(x)? For such a conjunct:

All its arguments must be grounded by the preceding conjuncts, so that when we reach it we have concrete values for them.

We add the cost of evaluating test(x) for each firing of our preceding conjuncts. This may exceed the number of total x values; for instance, R(x) and S(y) and test(x) will call test(x) once for each x,y pair.

This straightforwardly answers our original question about termination: we run predicates on exactly the values which satisfy their preceding conjuncts. By complete coincidence, the left-to-right grounding requirement exactly matches the type system in the finite functional programming paper; I originally regarded this as a weakness of the type system, but with a left-to-right execution strategy it makes perfect sense.

I like the simplicity and predictability of this approach, and appreciate how it ‘bites the bullet’, making the programmer responsible for performance (though this is plainly also a downside). Unfortunately, for some queries (the cyclic queries) this makes it impossible to achieve acceptable performance – for instance, the triangle query edge(x,y) and edge(y,z) and edge(x,z).2

2 Nondeterministic evaluation order allows declarative optimizations

We’ve seen three plausible evaluation orders for R(x) and test(x) and S(x). Why commit ourselves unnecessarily? The typical DB approach is to give the query planner/optimizer as much leeway as possible by leaving the order of evaluation unspecified. This means we cannot say exactly which values we will call test on, but we can bound this set above and below. Similarly, program termination goes from a yes/no question to yes/no/maybe.

Returning to our running example, R(x) and test(x) and S(x), we can’t call test without some x value. The only sources we have are R and S; so any query execution will call test on at most the values in either R or S, and at least the values that are in both. If test(x) terminates for all x ∈ R ∪ S, our query terminates; if it diverges for some x ∈ R ∩ S, our query diverges; otherwise, it may go either way. But all terminating executions should give the same result.

Unfortunately, I don’t know how to specify this nondeterminism in a compositional way. There are two typical approaches to semantics: operational and denotational.

Operationally, I’m not sure how to give semantics that correspond to bottom-up logic programming at all, let alone which capture variation in evaluation order. In particular, in λFS, how do finite λs evaluate? Normal procedural λs wait until they’re applied to an argument to reduce, but the entire point of finite functions is that they don’t do that; they’re tabled eagerly like database queries. But it’s not obvious how to capture this behavior in a small-step operational semantics. (Datafun does have an operational semantics, but only because it uses monad comprehensions, which commit to left-to-right evaluation – exactly what I want to get away from!)

Denotationally, the natural way forward would be to augment the denotational semantics outlined in the Finite Functional Programming paper with domain theory and some form of nondeterminism. Unfortunately, I’m not yet familiar enough with the domain theory of nondeterminism (powerdomains) to know how to make this work.

If you think you know an appropriate approach here, or would like to work on this together, please email me (qnrxunery@tznvy.pbz, rot13).

3 ‘Parallel and’ has the most declarative behavior

What if we could have our cake and eat it too? So far I’ve assumed that if we execute test(x) and it diverges, then our query diverges. This is why evaluation order matters: it affects which x we call test on. We can drop this assumption if we allow ourselves to think a little less sequentially.

Let ⊥ represent divergence. The typical implementation of and is sequential, examining its left argument first and short-circuiting if it yields false:

false and x = false       -- short circuit; don't evaluate x
true  and x = x
⊥     and x = ⊥           -- we never get around to evaluating x.


This is ugly: logical conjunction is symmetric, but this and is left-biased. Let’s restore symmetry while preserving continuity:

false and x     = false   -- no need to evaluate x further
true  and x     = x
x     and false = false   -- no need to evaluate x further
x     and true  = x


I call this ‘parallel and’ by analogy with Plotkin’s parallel or.3 Sequential ‘and’ always fully evaluates its left argument, but parallel ‘and’ evaluates both arguments concurrently, terminating when either yields false or both yield true. This miraculously restores determinism to λFS. Consider our previous example:

R := {"hello", "world"}
S := {"hello", "alice"}
test x := (x == "hello") or loop-forever()
Q(x) := R(x) and test(x) and S(x)


Left-to-right execution evaluates test("world") and S("world") = ⊥ and false. With sequential ‘and’ this diverges, but with parallel ‘and’ it is simply false. No matter whether we iterate over R first, S first, or their intersection, we get the same intuitively correct answer: Q = {"hello"}.

Unfortunately it is not clear how to implement parallel and efficiently. It is not inconceivable, however: miniKanren’s search strategy, for instance, resembles an implementation of parallel-or, and I have heard from Will Byrd that Andorra Prolog supported a form of conjunction analogous to parallel and. I myself had a paper at miniKanren 2025 about fair conjunction using an iterator interface for the implementation of worst-case optimal joins. So I suspect this problem is crackable. But is it worth it?4

Footnotes

Complicating things further, there are two distinct varieties of recursion: (a) recursive functions, which are computed lazily – the function body is not evaluated until required by a function application — and (b) recursive relations (in λFS, finite functions), which in bottom-up relational programming are computed eagerly by iteration to a fixed point (we start with the empty relation and repeatedly apply the definition until it stabilizes). But the second can probably be defined in terms of the first: recursion suffices to define iteration. ↩

Concretely, let edge = {(1, x) : x ∈ [1..n]} ∪ {(x, 1) : x ∈ [1..n]} for some large n. Then the triangles (the answers to our query) are those triples x, y, z in which at least two of x, y, z are 1 and the other is any of [1..n]; so there are 3n − 2 ∈ Θ(n) of them. But there are Θ(n2) triples satisfying the prefix edge(x,y) and edge(y,z). So left-to-right evaluation does quadratic work to find linear results. More generally, left-to-right evaluation corresponds to a left-deep binary join plan, and for cyclic queries it is known that binary join plans can be asymptotically inefficient: cyclic queries require worst-case optimal joins. ↩

I believe ‘parallel or’ originated in Gordon Plotkin’s LCF Considered as a Programming Language (1977), but I find these lecture notes a more approachable introduction; see p64, §8.1, “Failure of full abstraction.” ↩

See also this mastodon discussion with Meven Lennon-Bertrand, who quite reasonably questions the validity of my analogy between parallel or/and on booleans and fair logic programming disjunction/conjunction. ↩

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

23. The Music of Destruction

Source: https://thebaffler.com/latest/the-music-of-destruction-fuelling
Site: thebaffler.com
Submitter: lermontov (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-07-02 21:01 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 14 points · 5 comments

Scrape failed: http 403

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

24. Poly/ML – A Standard ML Implementation

Source: https://github.com/polyml/polyml
Site: GitHub
Submitter: Lyngbakr (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-07-06 22:28 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 30 points · 6 comments
Length: 236 words (~2 min read)
Language: en

Poly/ML is a Standard ML implementation originally written in an experimental language called Poly. It has been fully compatible with the ML97 standard since version 4.0. For a full history, see here.

Poly/ML takes a conservative approach to the Standard ML language and avoids incompatible extensions. It has added various library extensions particularly the thread library. Poly/ML's active development and unique features make it an exceptional implementation.

Table of Contents

Features
Basis
Installation
Mailing List

Features

Fast compiler
Preferred implementation for large projects such as Isabelle and HOL.
Foreign function interface - allows static and dynamic libraries to be loaded in Poly/ML and exposes their functions as Poly/ML functions. See here for an example of static linking.
Symbolic debugger
Windows programming interface
Thread library - provides a simplified version of Posix threads modified for Standard ML and allows Poly/ML programs to make use of multiple cores. The garbage collector is also parallelised.

Basis

The documentation for the Poly/ML Basis library can be found here and includes information on global values and types as well as structures, signatures and functors. More in-depth documentation can be found at the SML Family website here.

Installation

Poly/ML has native support for i386 (32- and 64-bit) and ARM (64-bit only). It will also work on other architectures using a byte-code interpreter. For more information, see the download page.

Mailing List

There is a mailing list for Poly/ML for questions and support.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

25. Rotman Lens

Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rotman_lens
Site: Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.
Author: Contributors to Wikimedia projects
Published: 2024-06-07
HN activity: 86 points · 25 comments
Length: 328 words (~2 min read)
Language: en

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
A microstrip implementation of a Rotman lens

A Rotman lens (sometimes referred to as a Rotman-Turner lens) is a passive electronic component used for beamforming in radio frequency applications. The principle was first published by Walter Rotman and R. F. Turner in 1963,[1] and patented by Rotman the same year.[2]
Beam, array and dummy ports on a Rotman lens

The component allows multiple antenna beams to be formed without the need for phase shifters. It consists of a range of input ports (also called beam ports) and output ports (also called array ports).[3] A signal applied to one of the input ports arrives at each of the output ports with a different phase shift. If the output ports are connected to individual antennas in an antenna array, this allows shaping the beam in different directions by switching which input port the signal is sent to.[4] So-called dummy ports can be added to the design, which are terminated to absorb fields that hit them, thus preventing reflections from the side wall of the lens.[3][5]

Rotman lenses can be constructed either from hollow conductive waveguides or on a stripline or microstrip substrate. They are commonly used for beamforming in radar applications.[6]

↑ Rotman, W.; Turner, R. (November 1963). "Wide-angle microwave lens for line source applications". IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation. 11 (6): 623–632. Bibcode:1963ITAP...11..623R. doi:10.1109/TAP.1963.1138114. ISSN 0096-1973.
↑ US3170158A, Rotman, Walter, "Multiple beam radar antenna system", issued 1965-02-16 Archived 2024-06-07 at the Wayback Machine
1 2 "Impact of Substrate Thickness on Rotman Lens Designs | Remcom". www.remcom.com. Archived from the original on 2024-06-08. Retrieved 2024-06-08.
↑ "Rotman Lens". Microwaves101. Archived from the original on 2024-06-07. Retrieved 2024-06-07.
↑ Kilic, Ozlem; Weiss, Steven J. (June 2010). "Rotman lens applications for the US Army: A review of history, present, and future". URSI Radio Science Bulletin. 2010 (332): 10–23 – via IEEE Explore.
↑ "Rotman Lens - Radartutorial". www.radartutorial.eu. Archived from the original on 2024-06-07. Retrieved 2024-06-07.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

26. Januscape: Guest-to-Host Escape in KVM/x86 [CVE-2026-53359]

Source: https://github.com/V4bel/Januscape
Site: GitHub
Submitter: Imustaskforhelp (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-07-06 17:35 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 84 points · 27 comments
Length: 690 words (~3 min read)
Language: en

Januscape: Guest-to-Host Escape in KVM/x86

Abstract

This document describes the Januscape (CVE-2026-53359) vulnerability discovered and reported by Hyunwoo Kim (@v4bel). It is a KVM escape vulnerability that lets a guest escape to the host in a KVM/x86 environment. To the best of public knowledge, this is the first guest-to-host exploit research triggerable on both Intel and AMD rather than being limited to a single architecture.

Januscape is a use-after-free vulnerability in the shadow MMU emulation of KVM/x86. It can trigger the bug with guest-side actions alone to corrupt the host kernel's shadow page, and it can threaten the guest-host isolation of KVM/x86 hosts that accept untrusted guests and expose nested virtualization, particularly multi-tenant x86 public clouds (GCP, AWS, etc.).

In fact, Januscape was successfully used as a 0-day exploit in Google kvmCTF.

For the detailed technical information, see here.

Note

After reporting this vulnerability to linux-distros@vs.openwall.org, the agreed embargo has ended, so the exploit is posted to oss-security and this Januscape document is published. For the disclosure timeline, see the technical detail document.

PoC Structure

Running the PoC inside a guest VM can trigger a host kernel panic. A full escape exploit that works in a controlled environment also exists, but it is not released at this time and is planned to be released in the very distant future.

On distributions like RHEL, /dev/kvm is world-writable (0666), so an unprivileged user could also turn this vulnerability into a reliable LPE to root. That said, doing so would be like paying gold for garbage, so I won't bother covering it.

PoC Usage

Inside the guest VM, install the headers and build the module.

# sudo apt-get install -y build-essential linux-headers-$(uname -r)
# make


Load the module inside the guest. KVM holds the raw VMX/SVM state, so unload it first. Load with no argument on Intel, and with amd=1 on AMD.

[Intel]
# sudo rmmod kvm_intel; sudo insmod poc.ko

[AMD]
# sudo rmmod kvm_amd; sudo insmod poc.ko amd=1


The race starts, and within seconds to minutes the host KVM panics.

[*] poc step 4/4: race live -- host DoS triggering
...
kernel BUG at arch/x86/kvm/mmu/mmu.c (pte_list_remove)
Comm: qemu-kvm


This PoC is intended to provide accurate information. Do not use it on systems you are not authorized to test.

Affected Versions

Januscape (CVE-2026-53359) covers the range from 2032a93d66fa (2010-08-01) to 81ccda30b4e8 (2026-06-16).

In other words, this vulnerability lay dormant for about "16 years".

FAQ

What is the impact of this vulnerability?

There are two impacts in total:

KVM escape: With guest-side actions alone, an attacker can compromise the host that runs their VM. For example, an attacker who has rented just a single instance on a public cloud could panic the host kernel to take down every other tenant VM on the same physical machine (DoS), or run code with root privilege on the host to take over the host and all the guests on it (RCE).
LPE: On distributions such as RHEL, /dev/kvm is world-writable (0666), so an unprivileged user can also use this vulnerability as a reliable LPE to gain root.

Should I be worried?

If you operate an x86 KVM host that accepts multi-tenant guests and supports nested virtualization, or use an instance on top of one, check that the 81ccda30b4e8 patch is applied to the host kernel.

Are arm64-based KVM hosts also vulnerable?

No. The vulnerability is triggered only on the Intel and AMD architectures. That said, if you have not yet patched the previously published ITScape (CVE-2026-46316), your arm64 hosts are also vulnerable, so apply the patch promptly.

Does this vulnerability occur in QEMU?

No. Unlike the commonly published QEMU escape vulnerabilities, Januscape occurs in in-kernel KVM, so it is triggered independently of QEMU's emulation. Because of this, it can also threaten large public clouds that implement and use their own virtualization stack.

Do I need root inside the guest VM?

Yes. Inserting the module requires guest kernel privilege. When you are allocated an instance on a public cloud, you usually have root on your own VM, so this is satisfied. In a scenario without guest root, it must be chained with an LPE such as Dirty Frag.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

27. M/PC – A Concatenative OS

Source: https://wiki.xxiivv.com/site/m_pc.html
Site: XXIIVV
Submitter: caminanteblanco (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-07-06 20:08 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 42 points · 5 comments
Length: 574 words (~3 min read)

M/PC is a concatenative operating system for Varvara, inspired by Openfirmware, designed to manage files on system without a file browser. It uses the postfix notation, meaning that the function success their operands:

( Get the number of bytes in folder/file_name )
folder/ file_name cat len dec


Files can store reusable sequences of commands, the tilde prefix includes the content of the file:

( Content of ./show-slide )
slide_ swp cat 3cx22.icn cat 1 icn


1 ~show-slide

The interface uses a single prompt at the top of the screen to input commands:

Controls

The operating system can be used largely without a keyboard to navigate folders and launch roms:

left/right Navigate Stack
up/down Scroll Stack
A Evaluate Selected Symbol
B Directory/Back

Kiosk

To start M/PC as a BIOS rom so that when the user presses F4, Varvara returns to the BIOS instead of triggering a reboot, launch with arguments:

uxnemu m_pc.rom orca.rom run


Wallpaper

On boot, M/PC will try and draw an ICN file named wallpaperWWxHH.icn, where WW is the width of the screen divided by 8 in hexadecimal, and HH the height.

Reference

Here is the list of all primitives:

dir ( -- [f] )
	Put the file names in the current location on the stack.
mov ( path -- [f] )
	Move the current location to current/path, then do dir.

now ( -- date time )
	Puts the date Tue, 23 Jun 2026, and time 11:48:45 on the stack.

run ( f.rom -- ok )
	Run the rom file, return with F4.
icn ( f.icn blend -- ok )
	Draw an icn file with blend.
txt ( f.txt line -- ok )
	Read a text file starting at line.

len ( f -- hex )
	Put the length of a file in hexadecimal.
put ( body f -- ok )
	Create a file with the content of body.
get ( f -- body )
	Put the content of a file on the stack.
cpy ( fsrc fdst -- ok )
	Copy the content of fsrc into fdst.
era ( f -- ok )
	Erase file.
ren ( fsrc fdst -- ok )
	Rename file fsrc into fdst.

pop ( a -- )
	Pop symbol at the top of the stack.
dup ( a -- a a )
	Duplication symbol at the top of the stack.
ovr ( a b -- a b a )
	Copy second symbol to the top of the stack.
swp ( a b -- b a )
	Pull the second symbol to top.
rot ( a b c -- b c a )
	Pull the third symbol to top.

add ( a b -- a+b )
	Push the sum of two symbols.
sub ( a b -- a-b )
	Push the difference of two symbols.
dec ( hex -- dec )
	Convert hexadecimal number to decimal.
hex ( dec -- hex )
	Convert decimal number to hexadecimal.
cat ( a b -- ab )
	Concatenate two symbols.

cmp ( a b -- bool )
	Compare the names of two symbols.
and ( a b -- bool )
	Put true if both symbols are true.
ora ( a b -- bool )
	Put true if either symbol is true.

rsz ( width height -- )
	Resize the screen, puts true if resize is supported by Screen.
out ( a -- )
	Output symbol to Console/write.
bye ( -- )
	Quit.


Source, Latest
Repository
Support: Manifest Theme Snarf

incoming: 2026

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

28. Real-time map of Great Britain's rail network

Source: https://www.map.signalbox.io
Site: map.signalbox.io
Submitter: scrlk (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-07-06 09:38 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 385 points · 143 comments
Language: en

No extractable content.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

29. AI: The ROI Runway Could Be Long Outside the Tech Sector

Source: https://www.apollo.com/wealth/insights-news/insights/daily-spark/ai-the-roi-runway-could-be-long-outside-the-tech-sector
Site: apollo.com
Author: About the Author
Submitted: 2026-07-06 21:09 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 60 points · 52 comments
Length: 329 words (~2 min read)
Language: en

This presentation may not be distributed, transmitted or otherwise communicated to others in whole or in part without the express consent of Apollo Global Management, Inc. (together with its subsidiaries, “Apollo”).

Apollo makes no representation or warranty, expressed or implied, with respect to the accuracy, reasonableness, or completeness of any of the statements made during this presentation, including, but not limited to, statements obtained from third parties. Opinions, estimates and projections constitute the current judgment of the speaker as of the date indicated. They do not necessarily reflect the views and opinions of Apollo and are subject to change at any time without notice. Apollo does not have any responsibility to update this presentation to account for such changes. There can be no assurance that any trends discussed during this presentation will continue.

Statements made throughout this presentation are not intended to provide, and should not be relied upon for, accounting, legal or tax advice and do not constitute an investment recommendation or investment advice. Investors should make an independent investigation of the information discussed during this presentation, including consulting their tax, legal, accounting or other advisors about such information. Apollo does not act for you and is not responsible for providing you with the protections afforded to its clients. This presentation does not constitute an offer to sell, or the solicitation of an offer to buy, any security, product or service, including interest in any investment product or fund or account managed or advised by Apollo.

Certain statements made throughout this presentation may be “forward-looking” in nature. Due to various risks and uncertainties, actual events or results may differ materially from those reflected or contemplated in such forward-looking information. As such, undue reliance should not be placed on such statements. Forward-looking statements may be identified by the use of terminology including, but not limited to, “may”, “will”, “should”, “expect”, “anticipate”, “target”, “project”, “estimate”, “intend”, “continue” or “believe” or the negatives thereof or other variations thereon or comparable terminology.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

30. Road to Elm 1.0

Source: https://elm-lang.org/news/faster-builds
Site: elm-lang.org
Submitter: wolfadex (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-07-06 11:47 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 307 points · 151 comments
Language: en

No extractable content.

