Hacker News Top 30 — 2026-05-25

Generated on 2026-05-25 03:29 UTC

1. Show HN: Audiomass – a free, open-source multitrack audio editor for the web

Source: https://audiomass.co/?multitrack=1
Site: audiomass.co
Submitter: pantelisk (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-24 15:25 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 207 points · 49 comments
Language: en

No extractable content.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

2. DeepSeek reasonix, DeepSeek native coding agent with high caching and low cost

Source: https://esengine.github.io/DeepSeek-Reasonix/
Site: Reasonix
Author: esengine
Submitted: 2026-05-24 13:02 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 465 points · 203 comments
Language: zh-CN

Related ongoing thread:

DeepSeek makes the V4 Pro price discount permanent - https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=48237663 - May 2026 (384 comments)

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

3. A fundamental principle of aeronautical engineering has been overturned

Source: https://www.wired.com/story/a-fundamental-principle-of-aeronautical-engineering-has-been-overturned/
Site: WIRED
Author: Ritsuko Kawai
Published: 2026-05-24
HN activity: 91 points · 54 comments
Length: 1.2K words (~6 min read)
Language: en-US

Aerodynamic drag is a major “barrier” in high-speed airplanes, automobiles, and bullet trains. This is because a design with less aerodynamic drag allows the aircraft to move at higher speeds with less energy.

When an aircraft or car body moves at high speed, a thin layer of air called the boundary layer is formed on its surface. This boundary layer has two states: laminar flow, in which air flows in an orderly fashion, and turbulent flow, which is chaotic.

The longer the air stays in the laminar-flow state with low friction, the smaller the air resistance becomes, but as the air speed increases, it transitions to turbulent flow. The key to reducing aerodynamic drag is delaying this transition to turbulence.

For more than 80 years, a basic principle of aeronautical engineering has been that the surface of an object must be smooth in order to reduce aerodynamic drag. This premise was based on the results of a 1940 study by Ichiro Tani, a Japanese scientist who demonstrated the relationship between surface roughness (an indicator of the state of the machined surface) and turbulent transition, arguing that surface roughness, which was unavoidable with the manufacturing technology of the time, prevented laminar flow from being realized.

However, in 1989 Tani reinterpreted the experimental data on rough-surfaced pipes obtained by fluid engineer Johann Nikulase in the 1930s, suggesting that “roughness may not necessarily only promote turbulent transition and increase fluid resistance.” (In physics, air is considered a fluid.) Inheriting this idea, a research group led by Yasuaki Kohama of Tohoku University demonstrated in the 1990s that fibrous rough surfaces, which have fine fibrous irregularities on their surface, have the effect of delaying transition under certain conditions.

The same Tohoku University research team recently announced a discovery that significantly advances this idea. Aiko Yakino, associate professor at Tohoku University's Institute of Fluid Science, and her research group were the first in the world to demonstrate that aerodynamic drag can be reduced by up to 43.6 percent simply by applying distributed micro-roughness (DMR), a surface roughness so fine and irregular that it cannot be distinguished by the naked eye.

This technology is fundamentally different from the rivulet (“shark skin”) process, which is a known air-drag-reduction technology. The rivulet process mimics the fine longitudinal grooves in shark skin, and by carving grooves approximately 0.1 millimeter wide along the direction of airflow, it aligns the vortices that occur near the wall surface of turbulent airflow areas. DMR, on the other hand, delays the switch from laminar to turbulent flow by means of random and minute irregularities. The flow zones it affects and the mechanisms it employs are based on completely different concepts.

Precise Measurement in a Wind Tunnel Without Support Bars

A key factor in this achievement was the use of a new wind tunnel method. Conventional wind tunnel experiments had structural limitations: The support rods and wires essential for supporting the model disrupted the airflow, negating the minute changes in air resistance caused by micro-scale roughness.

The world's largest 1-meter magnetic support balance system (1m-MSBS), owned by the Institute of Fluid Science, Tohoku University, has fundamentally solved this problem. This device can levitate a streamlined model approximately 1.07 meter in length inside a wind tunnel without contact using electromagnetic force. Because it does not use any support rods or other means, it completely eliminates interference with the airflow around the model.

Yakino and her team precisely measured the total drag coefficient on smooth and DMR-coated surfaces over a wide range of Reynolds numbers, from 0.35 x 10⁶ to 3.6 x 10⁶. (A Reynolds numbers is the ratio of inertial to viscous forces within a fluid; it’s a key predictor of whether fluid flow will be laminar or turbulent.

Two types of DMRs were used in this experiment: a convex pattern made of glass beads with diameters ranging from 38 to 53 micrometers and a concave pattern applied by sandblasting. The height of the DMR coating is only 1 percent of the thickness of the boundary layer and is classified as a “smooth surface” from a hydrodynamic point of view.

Experimental results showed that the critical Reynolds number at which the turbulent transition begins increased from approximately 1.9 × 10⁶ to 2.2 × 10⁶ for the DMR-coated model, and drag was dramatically reduced by up to 43.6 percent in the transition zone. Furthermore, the DMR-applied surface consistently showed a drag coefficient lower than that of the smooth surface up to the highest measured Reynolds number (3.6 x 10⁶).

A Mechanism to Suppress Friction Itself

Air resistance can be broadly divided into two types: pressure resistance and frictional resistance. Pressure resistance is caused by separation, where the airflow separates from the surface behind an object. On the other hand, frictional resistance is caused by the viscosity of the air flowing over the surface, and it decreases as the flow maintains a laminar state.

In order to clarify which of the two is responsible for the DMR effect, the research team used “large eddy simulation,” a computational method for numerical fluid dynamics in which large-scale turbulent eddies are calculated directly and small-scale eddies are approximated by a model. This experiment had an LES with a resolution of up to 45.38 million wall cells, and also used fluorescent paint and other materials on the model's surface to see how air flows. The integrated analysis combined “oil flow visualization,” in which the surface of a model is painted with fluorescent paint to visually check the air flow.

According to the researchers, the LES analysis established a conservative upper limit of pressure resistance (Cp ≈ 0.00021) that agrees with theoretical values within 1 percent from laminar flow calculations that do not intentionally introduce artificial disturbances. However, the amount of drag reduction observed in this study (ΔCD ≈ 0.001) is approximately five times this upper limit.

Even if the separation at the rear of the object were completely eliminated, only about 20 percent of the observed reduction can be explained. In other words, the numerical analysis quantitatively confirmed that the main factor in the reduction of aerodynamic drag by DMR is not the suppression of delamination but the reduction of frictional drag itself.

This principle is fundamentally different from the effect of dimples on golf balls. Dimples reduce pressure resistance by intentionally turbulizing the airflow and suppressing backward separation. DMR, on the other hand, delays the transition, thereby suppressing not pressure resistance but the wall friction itself. They are opposite mechanisms.

Advantages Over Shark Skin Processing

The strength of DMR's aerodynamic drag reduction lies in its extremely high passivity and omnidirectional nature. For the rivet process to be effective, grooves must be precisely cut along the direction of airflow. In contrast, DMR has a great advantage in that the surface roughness is random and does not depend on the direction of the flow.

In addition, since it requires neither moving parts nor electricity, a high drag-reduction effect can be achieved at a low cost. If DMR is applied to aircraft, it is expected to significantly reduce operating costs and carbon dioxide emissions by improving fuel efficiency.

The research team plans to further optimize the shape and distribution density of the DMR and to expand the applicable speed range in the future.

This story originally appeared on WIRED Japan and has been translated from Japanese.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

4. White Rabbit – sub-nanosecond synchronization for large distributed systems

Source: https://ohwr.org/projects/white-rabbit/
Site: Open Hardware Repository
Submitter: michaelsbradley (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-23 08:38 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 21 points · 5 comments
Length: 268 words (~2 min read)
Language: en

White Rabbit provides sub-nanosecond accuracy and picoseconds precision of synchronization for large distributed systems. It also allows for deterministic and reliable data delivery.
White Rabbit allows you to precision time-tag measured data and lets you trigger data taking in large installations while at the same time using the same network to transmit data.

sub-nanosecond synchronization
connecting thousands of nodes
typical distances of 10 km between nodes
Ethernet-based gigabit rate reliable data transfer
fully open hardware, firmware and software
multi-vendor commercially produced hardware

Contact

Maciej Lipinski

Tags

Documentation White Rabbit

Latest News

Job opportunity at CERN: FPGA developer

Feb 9, 2026

CERN is looking to recruit an FPGA and hardware designer to work on White Rabbit switch v4. The opening is in the frame of the CERN Experienced Graduates Opportunities. Anyone interested is very welcome to apply and if you have questions don’t hesitate to contact us!

Job opportunity at CERN: FPGA developer

May 5, 2025

CERN is looking to recruit an FPGA developer to work on the WR Technology and other exciting projects. The opening is in the frame of the CERN Experienced Graduates Opportunities. Anyone interested is very welcome to apply and if you have questions don’t hesitate to contact us!

Job vacancy at CERN to work on White Rabbit and RF

Sep 25, 2024

We have an open position at CERN to work for 2-3 years on the evolution of the eRTM board. It is a WR node whose jitter (integrated between 100Hz and 20MHz) is less than 100 femtoseconds, the most precise WR node I know of, originally designed by Mattia Rizzi and Tomasz Włostowski.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

5. Memory has grown to nearly two-thirds of AI chip component costs

Source: https://epoch.ai/data-insights/ai-chip-component-cost-shares
Site: Epoch AI
Author: Venkat Somala
Submitted: 2026-05-24 16:31 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 323 points · 347 comments
Length: 190 words (~1 min read)
Language: en

Epoch's work is free to use, distribute, and reproduce provided the source and authors are credited under the Creative Commons BY license.

Learn more about this graph

For each AI chip designed by Nvidia, AMD, Google, and Amazon, we estimate the per-chip cost of four component categories: memory (HBM), logic dies, advanced packaging (CoWoS), and auxiliary components. We then multiply those per-chip costs by estimated quarterly production volumes to get total component spending in each category, and compute each category’s share of total component spending per quarter from Q1 2024 to Q4 2025.

We find that memory’s share rose from 52% to 63% over this period, while packaging fell from 19% to 15% and auxiliary components from 15% to 9%. Logic die share stayed roughly constant near 13–14%. Total component spend on AI chips grew from approximately $22 billion in 2024 to $52 billion in 2025, with HBM spending alone accounting for roughly $20 billion of that increase.

Data

Analysis

Assumptions and limitations

Download this data

AI chip component cost shares by quarter

CSV, Updated May 21, 2026

Explore this data

AI Chip Components

AI chip supply chain consumption data.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

6. I spent 50 hours drawing a line graph

Source: https://www.dougmacdowell.com/50-hours-to-draw-some-lines.html
Site: Doug MacDowell
Author: Doug MacDowell
Published: 2026-05-18
HN activity: 462 points · 77 comments
Length: 1.5K words (~7 min read)
Language: en

Doug MacDowell
← Projects

Hand drawing data visualizations with artist Doug MacDowell

Description: I used to live on a quiet road on top of a huge hill. When leaves were on the trees it felt secluded, and when the leaves fell, the entire city would appear below as sparkling lights. Sometimes, I'd run into a neighbor.

"What are you working on these days?"
"Data visualizations." I told him.
"Ah, you using algorithms, machine learning, cloud computing, things like that?"
"No." I said. "I'm just trying to draw a line graph."

My neighbor thought I was getting into some complex sh**. But what's been more interesting to me lately than using powerbi, powerpoint, tableau, D3, python, illustrator, R

is learning to draw data by hand. 50 Hours to Draw Some Lines is about spending more than a week on something that software can accomplish in 20 minutes - and a catalog of resources and methods acquired along the way.

What do I mean by drawing data by hand? I made this data visualization (data viz) about a coffee maker computer by hand, using rulers, pencils, ink, and a lettering kit. Along with my flubs, flukes, and acclimation with tools - it took me 50 hours to make. It's statistically accurate, carefully crafted, and like Hackaday said "right out of a 1970's college textbook". It's how professionals might visualize data before computers could do it for them.

↑ A professional draftsman of the 1920's may cringe at the imperfections in my line graph above. They can suck it.

There are books about hand drawn data viz, and these are my favorite. Nearly all are available online for free, and can be referenced for instruction/inspiration. Tufte's book sucked me in and spit me out as a hardcore data viz enthusiast. Dubois' sociological and artistic experimentation are my favorite to revisit over again. Williard Brinton's book from 1914 smells awesome (it's in my collection). And William Willard's instructions are blunt and to the point - I bet he was a cool shop teacher.

The Visual Display of Quantitative Information - Edward R. Tufte - 2001
W.E.B. Du Bois's Data Portraits - Whitney Battle-Baptiste, Britt Rusert - 2018
Graphic Methods for Presenting Facts - Willard C. Brinton - 1914
Graphic Presentation - Willard C. Brinton - 1939
A Practical Course in Mechanical Drawing for Individual Study and Shop Classes - William Franklin Willard - 1910
Charts and Graphs - Karl G. Karsten - 1925
Engineering Drawing - Frank Zozzora - 1953
Freehand Drafting for Technical Sketching - Anthony E. Zipprich - 1924

↑↑ Is this artwork by Jiří Lindovský a data viz? Is it a narrow skyscraper? A Cheez-It? CPU? A line graph? ... Whatever it is, this drawing was made using the same techniques covered here. By learning to hand draw data viz, you can also learn about art. In fact, this whole thing is really about making art. One of the best parts of art, is playing with tools.

These are the basic tools and materials needed to hand draw data viz...

Paper - smooth bristol is best, 14 x 17 in. or larger
T-square - provides a level guide for your drawing
Ruler - it's important to have a measurement tool
Drawing board - I use cement board from a hardware store, at least 3 x 3 ft preferred
Painter's tape - must-have for holding paper and t-square down, I like the wide variety
Pencils - a classic mechanical BIC is my favorite
Pens - most anything works, I like Micron pens
Eraser - erasing graphite to reveal crisp ink lines is a special thing, Staedler erasers are great
Triangle - slides along the t-square, used to draw vertical lines and angles
Circle stencil - very important tool, this is used to create consistent line weights
Ink - this one with a spider person is my favorite
Lettering kit - not required, but a very fun vintage tool to create nice lettering

To start a hand drawn data viz, begin with a grid. Drawing a grid is not only a necessary first step, but a calm, mindful process to enjoy while becoming comfortable with the tools. Practice by positioning paper on the drawing board using the t-square as a level. Cut a long piece of tape and wrap it around your torso and spin around 3 times (the fuzzies from your clothes help avoid the tape sticking too much to the paper). Then place the tape horizontally across the top edge of the paper, holding it in place.

Adding margins is always a good idea and will establish the workspace. If the paper is 20 x 24 inches, measure one inch in on each side. Using a pencil, t-square, ruler, and triangle, draw some margin lines. The new workspace is 18 x 22 inches. Keep going, using a ruler, make a mark every inch on the margin lines and using the straight edge tools again, make lines at each mark. There are now 396 squares mapping out the workspace. Call it a night, or divide the squares even more, and draw more lines. Everything done to create hand drawn data comes back to this grid. In the end, all the pencil lines will be erased, revealing the most satisfying, clean, crisp inked lines imaginable. But we're not there yet.

When I started, I thought I'd use a fat marker like a Sharpie to draw the lines of my line graph. That doesn't work. It's nearly impossible to create a quality line with the stroke of a pen alone. I needed a way to control the weight of the line and cleanly connect every data point accurately. I found that the best way to make a professional, proper data line, is to use circles.

↑ Using a pencil, plot data points onto the grid with a small dot. Grab a circle stencil and create a circle around each dot - this sets the line weight. With a debit card (or a small ruler), connect the outer edge of one circle, with the circle next to it. It's surprising how intuitive this feels while seeing the lines begin to form. I like my connector lines to overlap slightly, letting me control the style of line joins (miter/bevel/round).

↓ A while back I was walking alone in an alleyway when a large, off-leash rottweiler appeared and stared me down. I felt scared. Thankfully, the rottweiler was interested in something else and went on his way. At this stage it's time to use ink, and it can feel scary. (carefully) Trace over the connector lines in ink using a pen. Like how the rottweiler left and my fear relieved, the same feeling happened here. At this point, I reward myself with a treat, and give one to the rottweiler too.

Using an eraser and a light touch, begin erasing the pencil marks near the lines. The ink should stay in place, the pencil lines disappear, and endorphins surge from the brain. Coloring in the lines with a pen or paint brush is the last step to finish the lines of the graph. But! Lines are just part of a data viz. To make it complete a few final touches are needed.

A debate among artists is whether or not to sign their work. Alphonse Mucha prominently signed much of his work, but his signature is almost hidden in his most monumental paintings. Data viz guru Edward Tufte (aka ET) believes a vivid display of authorship is essential. Marcel Duchamp signed a urinal.

Signature or not, the choice of text elements is important. Text can be added free-hand, or with a tool called a lettering kit. When I bought my lettering kit I didn't know what all the little pieces were that came with it. If some were missing from the kit would it matter? Definitely. The small metal pieces are reservoirs and nibs. The reservoir holds the ink, and the nib sits inside the reservoir, controlling the ink being let out. They are different sizes and need to match. These need cleaned out after each use - soap, water, tooth brush, and computer duster did the trick for me.

Adding a title, axis labels, annotations, and authorship (if you choose) are the final elements needed to finish the hand drawn data viz! The remaining pencil marks can be erased, leaving only ink. I found that I actually like leaving some pencil marks from the grid as an artifact of the process, and a clue that this is something made by hand.

At this point, I sit back and enjoy my hard work.

I don't live on a quiet road on top of a huge hill anymore. I actually live downtown in a city and my life and work are quite different. I query databases that have gathered data for a long time - this is sometimes complicated work. Like many people, I can't spend my time drawing data. However, my time devoted to hand drawing data has left me with a question that wonderfully impacts me each time I think about it...

Why did I spend 50 hours making something that PowerPoint could make in 20 minutes?

Subscribe

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

7. Constraint Decay: The Fragility of LLM Agents in Back End Code Generation

Source: https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.06445
Site: arXiv.org
Author: [Submitted on 7 May 2026]
Submitted: 2026-05-24 12:55 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 187 points · 96 comments
Length: 224 words (~1 min read)
Language: en

View PDF HTML (experimental)

Abstract:Large Language Model (LLM) agents demonstrate strong performance in autonomous code generation under loose specifications. However, production-grade software requires strict adherence to structural constraints, such as architectural patterns, databases, and object-relational mappings. Existing benchmarks often overlook these non-functional requirements, rewarding functionally correct but structurally arbitrary solutions. We present a systematic study evaluating how well agents handle structural constraints in multi-file backend generation. By fixing a unified API contract across 80 greenfield generation tasks and 20 feature-implementation tasks spanning eight web frameworks, we isolate the effect of structural complexity using a dual evaluation with end-to-end behavioral tests and static verifiers. Our findings reveal a phenomenon of constraint decay: as structural requirements accumulate, agent performance exhibits a substantial decline. Capable configurations lose 30 points on average in assertion pass rates from baseline to fully specified tasks, while some weaker configurations approach zero. Framework sensitivity analysis exposes significant performance disparities: agents succeed in minimal, explicit frameworks (e.g., Flask) but perform substantially worse on average in convention-heavy environments (e.g., FastAPI, Django). Finally, error analysis identifies data-layer defects (e.g., incorrect query composition and ORM runtime violations) as the leading root causes. This work highlights that jointly satisfying functional and structural requirements remains a key open challenge for coding agents.

Submission history

From: Paolo Papotti [view email]
[v1] Thu, 7 May 2026 15:44:40 UTC (401 KB)

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

8. Using HTTP/2 Cleartext for a server in Go 1.24

Source: https://www.clarityboss.com/blog/go-http2-cleartext-h2c-cloud-run
Site: ClarityBoss
Author: Dan McGee
Published: 2026-05-18
HN activity: 68 points · 6 comments
Length: 564 words (~3 min read)
Language: en

In our application, we use long-lived server-sent event streams (SSE). These are set up to have a really long timeout and lifetime - 15 minutes in our setup. However, Google Cloud Run has a known issue in that client disconnects are not propagated to Cloud Run when using HTTP/1.1 to communicate with the backend service. Thus, I started looking into using HTTP/2 for services.

Cloud Run terminates TLS at the frontend, but can forward traffic as either HTTP/1.1 or HTTP/2 cleartext (h2c) traffic. Normally, HTTP/2 always uses TLS, but HTTP clients and servers can often be configured to use a cleartext version of the protocol. Cloud Run also makes you select the protocol to be used. This is basically the “HTTP/2 with Prior Knowledge” setup noted in RFC 9113, section 3.3.

Configuring a Go server for HTTP/2 cleartext

Our first cut of h2c support predated the Go 1.24 changes I will go into more detail below. Most posts and guides on the internet will point you toward the old outdated approach, but I’ve included it below so it is easier to see the before and after, and migrate your own code if you need to.

Before Go 1.24 (old approach)

To use h2c, you had to use the golang.org/x/net/http package, and go through a convoluted setup.

import (
	"net/http"
	"golang.org/x/net/http2"
	"golang.org/x/net/http2/h2c"
)

handler := ...
// the existing `handler` must be wrapped, attached to server, then configured
h2s := &http2.Server{}
handler = h2c.NewHandler(handler, h2s)
srv := &http.Server{
	Addr:              fmt.Sprintf("%s:%d", "", 9888),
	Handler:           handler,
	ReadHeaderTimeout: 5 * time.Second,
	ReadTimeout:       10 * time.Second,
	WriteTimeout:      35 * time.Second,
	// https://cloud.google.com/load-balancing/docs/https/request-distribution#timeout-bes
	IdleTimeout: 620 * time.Second,
}
err = http2.ConfigureServer(srv, h2s)
if err != nil {
    ...
}


Go 1.24+ (new approach)

With Go 1.24, no x/net/http2/h2c wrapper is needed anymore, and the setup is a lot more readable. You can configure protocols directly on http.Server.

Reference: Go 1.24 net/http release notes.

handler := ...
srv := &http.Server{
	Addr:              fmt.Sprintf("%s:%d", "", 9888),
	Handler:           handler,
	ReadHeaderTimeout: 5 * time.Second,
	ReadTimeout:       10 * time.Second,
	WriteTimeout:      35 * time.Second,
	// https://cloud.google.com/load-balancing/docs/https/request-distribution#timeout-bes
	IdleTimeout: 620 * time.Second,
}
srv.Protocols = new(http.Protocols)
srv.Protocols.SetHTTP1(true)
srv.Protocols.SetUnencryptedHTTP2(true)


Testing locally before deployment

Testing is pretty simple. This command will fail if HTTP/2 cleartext isn’t set up properly.

curl -i --http2-prior-knowledge http://localhost:9888


Terraform Cloud Run configuration

Once your Go service can speak HTTP/2 cleartext, it needs to be configured in Cloud Run appropriately. If you’re doing it via the Cloud Run console, follow the HTTP/2 for services documentation. We’re doing it via terraform - this snippet below gives a general idea of the configuration.

# Many settings have been omitted that are not relevant to this post.
resource "google_cloud_run_v2_service" "api" {
  name                 = "api"
  location             = var.primary_region
  invoker_iam_disabled = true
  ingress              = "INGRESS_TRAFFIC_INTERNAL_LOAD_BALANCER"

  template {
    containers {
      ...
      ports {
        name           = "h2c"
        container_port = 9888
      }
    }

    # Default is 80; with idle SSE connections, we can easily scale higher.
    max_instance_request_concurrency = 200
    # Default is 300s, but with SSE, we want to allow long-lived connections.
    timeout = "900s"
  }

  lifecycle {
    ignore_changes = [client, client_version, template[0].revision]
  }
}


No real changes were needed at the load balancer level, since HTTPS is used to communicate with Serverless NEGs, and it seems like it properly upgrades the connection to HTTP/2 during that negotiation. Also, the default timeouts for serverless backends is 60 minutes, not 30 seconds like some other backends.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

9. Microsoft open-sources “the earliest DOS source code discovered to date”

Source: https://arstechnica.com/gadgets/2026/04/microsoft-open-sources-the-earliest-dos-source-code-discovered-to-date/
Site: arstechnica.com
Submitter: DamnInteresting (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-24 01:21 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 440 points · 154 comments
Language: en

https://opensource.microsoft.com/blog/2026/04/28/continuing-...

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

10. Build Adafruit projects right from Firefox

Source: https://www.firefox.com/en-US/landing/adafruit/
Site: Firefox
Submitter: mch82 (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-22 03:13 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 128 points · 39 comments
Length: 100 words (~1 min read)
Language: en

Use Web Serial to connect, code, and control compatible hardware devices directly from your browser.

Recommended by Adafruit for Web Serial programming

Firefox gives Adafruit users a direct path from idea to connected hardware project — no extra tools or complex setup required.

Connect directly to your boards

Use Web Serial to communicate with compatible devices from Firefox, right from supported web tools.

Less setup, more making

Open Firefox, connect your device, and start coding without a separate desktop app.

Built for the open web

Firefox is open source and made by Mozilla, the people-first organization behind an independent web.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

11. Mastering Dyalog APL

Source: https://mastering.dyalog.com/README.html
Site: mastering.dyalog.com
Submitter: tosh (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-24 11:42 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 128 points · 36 comments
Length: 346 words (~2 min read)

Toggle in-page Table of Contents

Mastering Dyalog APL#

The “Mastering Dyalog APL” book is the de facto standard for people who are looking to learn Dyalog APL from a book. In today’s world technology changes rapidly, so a printed book about a programming language is at risk of becoming outdated.

Attention

This online version is a work in progress. It is missing chapters and sections and the content here may undergo heavy revision.

Feel free to open a new issue on GitHub if you would like to give feedback or to suggest corrections to any eventual mistakes/typos you encounter. Alternatively, you can send an email to mdapl@dyalog.com.

The first edition of “Mastering Dyalog APL” is an excellent resource but is becoming more and more outdated as the years go by and Dyalog APL evolves. For that matter, an updated and more modern version of the book is being created out of Jupyter Notebooks (available in this GitHub repository) to provide for a more interactive learning experience for those who like to read and experiment. A static online version also exists, and a printed version will be made available for those of you who prefer to hold a paper book in their hands.

The first edition dates back to November of 2009 and was written by Bernard Legrand, with most grateful acknowledgements to the contributors:

Kim S. Andreasen

Daniel Baronet

Gitte Christensen

Peter Donnelly

Morten Kromberg

John Scholes

Adrian Smith

Tim JA. Smith

This version you are reading is a rework by Rodrigo Girão Serrão, with most grateful acknowledgements to all the GitHub contributors and all the people who reported issues with this rework, and in particular to Adám Brudzewsky.

Whenever possible, the prose and examples are taken verbatim from the first edition of the book. When needed, the book’s explanations and examples are updated and rewritten. Finally, new sections/chapters are being added to cover things that didn’t exist back in November of 2009, in Dyalog APL 12.0. You can consult the changelog to review the content that this rework introduced, when compared to the original version.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

12. Bug 1950764: Work Around Crash on Intel Raptor Lake CPU

Source: https://phabricator.services.mozilla.com/D301917
Site: phabricator.services.mozilla.com
Submitter: luu (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-22 22:43 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 12 points · 0 comments
Length: 259 words (~2 min read)

Differential D301917

Bug 1950764 - Work around crash on Intel Raptor Lake CPU.

Needs ReviewPublic

Actions

Authored by glandium on Thu, May 21, 9:16 PM.

Edit Revision
Update Diff
Download Raw Diff
Edit Related Revisions...
Edit Related Objects...
View Stack in Lando
New Changes
Mute Notifications
Flag For Later

Tags

None

Referenced Files

F71229157: D301917/new/.1779766090.diff
Mon, May 25, 3:28 AM

F71228492: D301917.1779765607.diff
Mon, May 25, 3:20 AM

F71215280: D301917.1779754207.diff
Mon, May 25, 12:10 AM

F71198856: D301917.1779743010.diff
Sun, May 24, 9:03 PM

F71165271: D301917.1779705882.diff
Sun, May 24, 10:44 AM

F71161831: D301917.1779700900.diff
Sun, May 24, 9:21 AM

Unknown Object (File)
Sat, May 23, 8:54 PM

Unknown Object (File)
Sat, May 23, 8:54 PM

View All 14 Files

Subscribers

tnikkel

Details

Reviewers

gsvelto
Bugzilla Bug ID
1950764

Diff Detail

Repository
rFIREFOXAUTOLAND firefox-autoland
Branch
HEAD

Event Timeline

glandium created this revision.Thu, May 21, 9:16 PM

Herald added a project: secure-revision. · View Herald TranscriptThu, May 21, 9:16 PM

phab-bot published this revision for review.Thu, May 21, 9:16 PM

phab-bot changed the visibility from "Custom Policy" to "Public (No Login Required)".

phab-bot changed the edit policy from "Custom Policy" to "Restricted Project (Project)".

phab-bot removed a project: secure-revision.

tnikkel added a subscriber: tnikkel.Thu, May 21, 9:26 PM

Harbormaster completed remote builds in B972906: Diff 1280481.Thu, May 21, 9:46 PM

Revision Contents

Changeset List

Files
History
Commits
Similar

Path	Size

Cargo.lock

Cargo.toml	3 lines

third_party/

rust/

zlib-rs/

src/

deflate/

sym_buf.rs	13 lines

Diff 1280481

View Options

Cargo.lock

Loading...

View Options

Cargo.toml

Loading...

View Options

third_party/rust/zlib-rs/src/deflate/sym_buf.rs

Loading...

Log In to Comment

Privacy · Cookies · Legal

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

13. Noroboto: Lying Fonts and Mitigation in Rust

Source: https://tritium.legal/blog/noroboto
Site: tritium.legal
Author: Tritium Legal Technologies Limited
Submitted: 2026-05-22 14:55 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 63 points · 27 comments
Length: 2.2K words (~10 min read)
Language: en

What if your font is lying to your AI?

LegalTech's Mythos Moment

Modern legal tech stacks in 2026 are Rube Goldberg machines of open-source and proprietary products from Word to LibreOffice, to python-docx and PDFium, to tesseract, node.js and dozens of UI libraries like SuperDoc, PDF.js and Office.js. Through those pipelines are pushed artifacts of decades-old written specifications which span tens of thousands of pages.

In addition to the venerated OSS parts of these stacks exist partial, proprietary implementations of these specs. Many of these have been spun up in the last year with the assistance of coding agents.

Meanwhile even the oldest, grayest-beard OSS maintainers in the ecosystem complain of specification complexity.

What if an adversary were to try to take advantage of this complexity and the imperfections in these implementations? Could these imperfections be leveraged for a tactical legal advantage?

I reached out to my friends at the LegalQuants and recruited a team to answer this question, and you can read the analysis of the "lexploit" discussed below and about our new "Red Team" mission here: link.

Noroboto.ttf

The "noroboto.ttf" "lexploit" is straightforward: create a new malicious font definition which is embedded in a document according to the specification and lies about the Unicode representation of its glyphs.

TrueType

Among many other things, TrueType fonts like those distributed with Windows and macOS contain outlines and a cmap (or character map) which maps Unicode code points to these outlines.

The Unicode specification which is huge.

In addition to code points for scripts such as Latin and CJK, among many others, it also reserves ranges of code points for "private use".

The simplest "full obfuscation" noroboto attack works by swapping valid Unicode-encoded scripts in the subject document with Unicode code points occupying these so-called "Private Use Areas" of Unicode.

These glyphs typically render as "tofu" or some other unknown glyph in most graphical applications, or as a glyph from a fallback font definition as determined by such applications.

You can check that out here.

For "PUA" code points LibreOffice, for example, seems to fallback to Wingdings.

But noroboto provides a glyph for these PUA code points. And those glyphs are metric compatible with the replaced font. Their underlying Unicode mapping, however, is incomprehensible garbage.

This only works because the Word and PDF specifications allow for font definitions to be embedded in their containing documents. Embedding fonts is critical to maintain compatibility and pixel-tight rendering across platforms. And consistent rendering is especially important in legal documents where font metrics determine page layout and pagination, and page numbers can have legal meaning.

Noroboto.py

With the help of ChatGPT 5.4 we had a proof-of-concept for full obfuscation within a few hours.

On the left of the above GIF is what the user sees. When the text is copied and pasted, however, you get the Unicode representation in an arbitrary non-Noroboto font. It's garbage. You can see a version of the code here: https://github.com/LegalQuants/noroboto.1

We opted for Python to maximize legibility, but that somewhat backfired given the "vibes heavy" implementation.2

Testing

An early testing against a version which leveraged a 1-to-1 mapping was defeated by ChatGPT 5.5 in Codex using "high effort". ChatGPT 5.5 deobfuscated in two ways.

First, given the simple PUA-to-glyph deterministic mapping, ChatGPT 5.5 treated deobfuscation as a basic cryptoanalysis exercise. It sussed out our "monoalphabetic" cipher and broke our "simple substitution cipher with side channels left intact".3 ChatGPT's second approach was to note that we had erroneously left the original "name" value in the glyph definition which could be reverted by reading the TTF.

Time to pull out the big guns: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Polyalphabetic_cipher.

We updated noroboto.py in this commit to exclude that "name" field and in this commit to include a 4-to-1 mapping which is randomly applied by the text replacement algorithm.

We also perturb the font slightly across the four separate PUAs to avoid comparing the outlines and collapsing them back to a 1-to-1 mapping.

Although these changes have limitations, they seemed to supply enough stochasticity to throw off ChatGPT's simple cipher. But the frontier models in agentic harnesses with their inference-time computing modes enabled (aka "thinking") all still manage to crack the "full" obfuscation document by shelling out to something, rendering the document and OCR'ing that result.4

It turns out obfuscating the entire document is enough signal to encourage these LLMs to try different approaches.5

A live demonstration of full obfuscation is here: https://noroboto.io.

We touched on in our LegalQuants post the ethics and legality of using the Noroboto attack6, but technically the much more effective approaches are both partial obfuscation and Unicode replacement.

Extensions: Partial Obfuscation and Replacement

It turns out, agents are somewhat lazy.

Thus, if they are presented with what appears to be a document containing legible Unicode code points, they often take that apparent happy path.

Total obfuscation fails this test in the smartest models, but even the best are fooled when a document is only partially obfuscated or the text of the document is replaced.

We don't release any code on these two approaches but we present two example sets of documents in DOCX and PDF.

Example DOCX PDF
Full obfuscation full.docx full.pdf
Partial obfuscation partial.docx partial.pdf
Replacement replaced.docx replaced.pdf

Partial Obfuscation

What's the point of partially obfuscating a legal document?

The most obvious case is to just disguise an adversarial term with a higher probability of success.

In testing our partial obfuscation example, we hid the fact that the NDA's confidentiality terms carry on to "successors and assigns".

This isn't particularly egregious but was a useful test case.

We asked the model "Does anything in this document extend my confidentiality obligations to successors or assigns?", and some, particularly inexpensive platforms, returned incorrect results for DOCX.

Now some might argue this is fraudulent if it's intended to mislead the other party, but we don't necessarily express that opinion.

Replacement

The replacement extension of "noroboto" is the most effective.

In the replacement attack, instead of mapping the glyphs to PUA code points, we map them to Unicode values that create a different meaning.

In our example, we caused the human-visible word "Maryland" to be replaced with the Unicode representation of "Delaware".

This process isn't as simple as the obfuscation attack because it requires, in the worst case, a new embedded font for each replaced glyph. In the above image, we represent each additional font as "ext [n]", but this can likely be compressed in longer replacement attacks to maximize font re-use.7

All of the platforms we tested were fooled by this approach and happily reported that the agreement provided for Delaware governing law when presented with a DOCX file.8. Most even trusted the Unicode values in PDF.

The Red Team hypothesizes that the agentic harnesses are "lazy" and prefer to rely on a facially valid Unicode string rather than undertake to render the document and run an expensive OCR computation. This laziness is likely correlated with the length of the document.

Proof of Concept Mitigation in Rust

So how might we handle this in Tritium?

Trust, but verify.

We want to retain embedded font support to ensure layout and pagination accuracy, but we first run a check against the ASCII glyphs to ensure they represent the characters they purport to represent via their Unicode cmap value.

That accuracy value is 1.0 minus the error rate, which we calculate as the Levenshtein distance between the expected ASCII string and the OCR result.

fn normalize(text: &str) -> String {
    text.to_lowercase()
        .split_whitespace()
        .collect::<Vec<_>>()
        .join(" ")
}

fn character_accuracy(expected: &str, actual: &str) -> f64 {
    let expected = normalize(expected);
    let actual = normalize(actual);

    let distance = strsim::levenshtein(&expected, &actual);
    let expected_len = expected.chars().count().max(1);

    1.0_f64 - (distance as f64 / expected_len as f64)
}

With this accuracy criterion, we want to generate a font atlas which provides a pristine OCR environment such that anything other than a 1.0 accuracy score indicates a potentially deceptive font.

...

const WIDTH_PADDING: u32 = 10;
const HEIGHT_PADDING: u32 = 10;

const OCR_ASCII_VALIDATION_CHARACTERS: &str =
    "thequickbrownfoxjumpsoverthelazydogTHEQUICKBROWNFOXJUMPSOVERTHELAZYDOG0123456789";

...

Here we limit our analysis to ASCII alphanumeric codes for this simple proof of concept.

We also set a padding value to ensure the glyphs in the font atlas have a sufficient buffer from the edge for OCR.

fn append_right(left: &image::DynamicImage, right: &image::DynamicImage) -> Result<image::DynamicImage> {
    let left = left.to_rgba8();
    let right = right.to_rgba8();

    let new_w = left.width() + right.width() + WIDTH_PADDING;

    let padded_right_height = right.height() + (2 * HEIGHT_PADDING);
    let (new_h, left_y_offset, right_y_offset) = if left.height() > padded_right_height {
        (
            left.height(),
            0,
            left.height() - (right.height() + HEIGHT_PADDING),
        )
    } else {
        (padded_right_height, padded_right_height - left.height(), 0)
    };

    let mut canvas = image::RgbaImage::from_pixel(
        new_w,
        new_h,
        image::Rgba([0, 0, 0, 255]), // background
    );

    // bottom-align images
    canvas.copy_from(&left, 0, left_y_offset)?;
    canvas.copy_from(&right, left.width(), right_y_offset)?;

    Ok(image::DynamicImage::ImageRgba8(canvas))
}

We'll now go character-by-character and render to the font atlas to keep it simple, rather than relying on a more robust shaping library like HarfBuzz to generate the image.

We provide a rather inefficient allocation algorithm to extend the font atlas for each new character.

Again, a production implementation will at a minimum pre-calculate this atlas size or use a shaping engine.

pub fn ascii_glyph_accuracy(data: &[u8]) -> Result<f64> {
    let Ok(mut engine) = ocr::Engine::new() else {
        bail!("Couldn't start OCR engine."); // should return an error if we don't have an OCR engine.
    };

    let num = ttf_parser::fonts_in_collection(data).unwrap_or(1);
    let mut scale_context = swash::scale::ScaleContext::new();

    for i in 0_usize..num as usize {
        let Some(font_ref) = swash::FontRef::from_index(data, i) else {
            continue;
        };

        let mut scaler = scale_context
            .builder(font_ref)
            .size(104.0)
            .hint(true)
            .build();
        let charmap = font_ref.charmap();

        // check ASCII codes, excluding space at 32
        let mut full_image: Option<image::DynamicImage> = None;
        for char in OCR_ASCII_VALIDATION_CHARACTERS.chars() {
            let glyph_id = charmap.map(char);
            let Some(image) = swash::scale::Render::new(&[swash::scale::Source::Outline])
                .render(&mut scaler, glyph_id)
            else {
                bail!("Couldn't make glyph for: {char}");
            };
            let Some(dynamic) =
                image::GrayImage::from_raw(image.placement.width, image.placement.height, image.data)
                    .map(image::DynamicImage::ImageLuma8)
            else {
                bail!("Couldn't copy swash image to image::DynamicImage.")
            };
            if let Some(existing) = full_image.take() {
                full_image = Some(append_right(&existing, &dynamic)?);
            } else {
                full_image = Some(dynamic);
            }
        }
        let Some(full_image) = full_image else {
            bail!("No atlas compiled.");
        };

        let Ok(characters) = engine.process_impl(&full_image) else {
            bail!("No characters read from atlas.");
        };
        let characters: String = characters.iter().map(|character| character.char).collect();
        return Ok(character_accuracy(
            &characters,
            OCR_ASCII_VALIDATION_CHARACTERS,
        ));
    }
    bail!("Didn't find a good font.")
}

We then pass the atlas (i.e., full_image) to our platform-specific ocr::Engine implementation.

In 2026, macOS and Windows provide these facilities natively, and the Tritium implementation leverages those, while providing for a model-based approach on Linux.

In the production build, you would generally not want to re-instantiate the OCR engine for each check, but it may make sense given the infrequency with which embedded fonts are encountered in certain contexts.

Last, we run the eval.

Our simple testing harness looks like the following.

#[test]
fn noto_font_has_ascii() {
    let data = include_bytes!("fonts/noto.ttf");
    let accuracy = ascii_glyph_accuracy(data).expect("Glyphs should OCR.");
    assert!((accuracy == 1.0));
}

#[test]
fn notoroboto_font_has_bad_ascii() {
    let data = include_bytes!("fonts/noroboto.ttf");
    let accuracy = ascii_glyph_accuracy(data).expect("Glyphs should OCR.");
    assert!((accuracy < 1.0), "got: {accuracy}");
}

We confirm a perfect OCR for the ASCII portion of Google's Noto font, and an imperfect one for an example noroboto variant which swaps the M and D Unicode code point and glyph.

Fortunately the replacement attack requires at least a single failure in OCR although identification cannot be deterministically guaranteed.

To support others in this effort, we are working on releasing a simple open-source reference implementation which will be added as an update to this post once available.

We look forward to community feedback on this consideration and response.

We treat any embargo on the covered subject matter as having expired given prior art on 22 May 2025: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2505.16957 which we discovered during the course of this project. ↩

Some might sneer at this proof-of-concept as "AI slop", but that's somewhat the point. While a lot of commentary following Project Glasswing and Mythos announcements were focused on the strength of that model, many folks rightly pointed out that off-the-shelf frontier models were capable of the same type of bug discovery. The "Mythos moment" for legal tech may in fact be the discovery that these types of attacks are trivial to produce given those same off-the-shelf models. ↩

This same result is achieved by the model in Tritium which does not provide any cipher tools. ↩

As an aside, this is not necessarily a total loss for the attacker who has now forced the opposition out of its comfort zone. The victim's pipeline will lose a lot of layout information supplied by the DOCX specification and be required to do its own segmentation to regain structure from the boxed-characters provided by the OCR. It may foreclose automated edit suggestions via Word add-ins, for example. ↩

It is worth noting that free-tier models which may or may not provide "thinking" modes often not only failed to summarize the obfuscated document but also hallucinated its content. One model suggested the disclosing party was "Google, Inc." ↩

There are good data-protection reasons that one might legitimately obfuscate the text of its digital publications which we do not address here. ↩

We deliberately omit some of the technical requirements of this attack to avoid widespread replication. As noted above, even consumer-grade language models are capable of engineering these attacks with minimal guidance. ↩

This example has important legal consequences, but for a more lay example, imagine altering a dollar value in the same way. The human reviewer might see $2,000,000 while its LLM understood the price to be $1,000,000. ↩

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

14. Scientists solve 200-year-old puzzle of how tobacco plants make nicotine

Source: https://www.york.ac.uk/news-and-events/news/2026/research/200-year-old-puzzle-tobacco-plants-nicotine/
Site: University of York
Author: University of York
Submitted: 2026-05-22 12:16 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 52 points · 17 comments
Length: 484 words (~3 min read)
Language: en-GB

News

Posted on Monday 18 May 2026

Scientists have uncovered how tobacco plants naturally make nicotine, solving a mystery that has puzzled researchers for nearly two centuries.

The puzzle of how tobacco plants produce nicotine ha been around since the late 1820s

The discovery, published in Nature Communications, could lead to safer production of medicines and vaccines using tobacco plants, without the unwanted nicotine.

Nicotine, the chemical that makes tobacco products addictive, has been used by humans for over 10,000 years. But despite decades of study, scientists never fully understood how plants like Nicotiana tabacum - the main source of tobacco - actually build the nicotine molecule.

Scientists have now discovered the missing genes and enzyme that tobacco plants need to make nicotine, and recreated the process in the lab and inside living plants, proving how it works.

Contamination

Dr Benjamin Lichman, from the Centre for Novel Agricultural Products (CNAP) at University of York’s Department of Biology, said: “Tobacco plants can be used in biotechnology as platforms for producing vaccines or other pharmaceutical products, but it is plagued by the presence of nicotine which contaminates the products and requires processing to remove it.

“The puzzle of how tobacco plants produce nicotine, however, has been around since the late 1820s, when nicotine was first extracted from the plants. Since then no-one had cracked the mystery of how it was made. It is a big moment in plant science and biochemistry that we now have the answer we have been chasing for more than 200 years!

“With this new knowledge we can remove or repurpose the nicotine that is produced naturally by the plant and create better biotechnology tools, and there is also exciting potential for the future to adapt tobacco's nicotine forming system to make useful pharmaceutical compounds.”

Glucose molecule

The team, which included researchers from the University of Copenhagen, discovered that nicotine is initially formed attached to a glucose molecule, which is added to give its building blocks the energy boost they need to snap together. However, the glucose is removed at the final step, appearing to vanish. This hidden step explains why the mystery endured for so long.

Benjamin Schwabe, a University of York PhD student and first author of the study, also discovered the exact structures of two special plant enzymes - NaGR and NicGS - that help assemble the nicotine molecule from smaller pieces. The molecule itself is made of two connected rings, each made in a different part of the plant’s metabolism. One comes from a vitamin-like compound, and the other from an amino acid related to protein building.

Dr Lichman said: “It is exciting because it has real-world applications. A close relative of tobacco, Nicotiana benthamiana, is already used in “molecular farming” to produce life-saving drugs and vaccines.

“It opens up new ways to use tobacco plants for good: not in cigarettes, but for medicines and other valuable products.”

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

15. Greg Brockman interview [video]

Source: https://fs.blog/knowledge-project-podcast/greg-brockman/
Site: Farnam Street
Submitter: prakashqwerty (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-24 08:29 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 183 points · 184 comments
Length: 357 words (~2 min read)
Language: en-US

The Knowledge Project Podcast

The AI race, the future of AGI, and the inside story of OpenAI.

Greg Brockman is the co-founder and President of OpenAI, the company behind ChatGPT and GPT-5. He was the first engineer at Stripe before leaving in 2015 to help start OpenAI.

In this rare conversation, Greg goes inside the moments that built, and nearly broke, the most important AI company in the world.

Featured clips

06:05

Breakthrough Moments at OpenAI

15:44

Sam Altman's Firing

32:22

Is AI Going Parabolic?

40:38

Why ChatGPT No Longer Shows Reasoning

01:04:44

AI and Job Loss

Available Now: YouTube | Spotify | Apple Podcasts | Transcript

Greg explains how the original Napa offsite produced the three-step technical plan OpenAI has followed for a decade and the real reason OpenAI had to abandon its pure nonprofit structure. He then walks through the 72 hours after Sam Altman was fired: where he was when he got the board call, why he quit the same day, how the “Phoenix” backup company was designed at Sam’s house the next morning, and the moment Ilya Sutskever’s tweet changed everything.

From there, the conversation turns forward: whether we’re in a global AI race, how much of OpenAI’s own code is now written by AI (“it’s hard to know what percent is not“), why OpenAI stopped showing reasoning traces, what a compute-constrained world means for who gets access to AGI, and Greg’s answer to the question everyone is really asking: What happens to your job?

+ Check out the Granola Notes.

Transcript

Get transcripts, early access, ad-free episodes, and so much more. Learn more or sign up now.

Already a member? Head over to the Members Only area to access transcripts and other Member Only content.

The Knowledge Project

A podcast about mastering the best of what other people have already figured out. The Knowledge Project focuses on insights and lessons that never expire. You’ll walk away from every episode with actionable insights that help you get better results and live a more meaningful life.

Never miss an episode

A podcast about mastering the best of what other people have already figured out.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

16. Defeating Git Rigour Fatigue with Jujutsu

Source: https://ikesau.co/blog/defeating-git-rigour-fatigue-with-jujutsu/
Site: ikesau.co
Submitter: ikesau (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-24 18:39 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 106 points · 105 comments
Length: 568 words (~3 min read)
Language: en-ca

This post assumes a basic level of familiarity with the jujutsu version control system. If you haven't used jujutsu, you'll still get the gist of the idea, but I recommend reading Steve's Jujutsu tutorial after.

When developing a large feature, writing Good Commits is hard.

And by Good Commits, I mean something like:

define types add DB functions server CRUD client API client UI

This allows reviewers to step through your pull request in small bites, with each set of changes scoped to a single aspect of the feature.

So, naturally, here's what I do instead:

define types add DB functions WIP test code server CRUD client API and UI fix DB function fix UI bug refactor CRUD fix another UI bug

Latter commits overwrite work that was done in earlier commits and the story breaks.⚖️

Jujutsu makes it easier to hop around commits and iterate quickly on compartmentalized changesets, but it's still effortful and I get averse.🤖

jj absorb helps somewhat, as does jj squash -i, but they both have their downsides:

absorb assigns the changes based on whichever previous commit most recently touched those files, which sometimes doesn't actually correspond to which commit should own these particular changes.
squash can get you stuck in merge conflict hell if your boundaries aren't extremely clean.

So here's a solution to this problem of "git rigour fatigue" that I've come up with.

For this example, let's represent commits visually. Imagine red represents changes to the type definitions, blue to the UI and so on:

Mayhem. Our first commit is a mix of red and blue. We touch red in multiple places!

To fix this, let's create our ideal commit history first, using jj new -B messy-first -m 'red'

Then we can do the rest. (I switch to jj new -A red -m 'blue' at this point)

Then we squash all the commits with actual changes in them into one with jj squash --from messy-first..messy-last --into messy-first

Then we use jj squash -i --from messy-first --into red and pick out the red changes, putting them into the red box:

And so on:

Eventually everything's in the right place and the "everything commit" is empty.

For large features, I find this workflow far easier than having to maintain strict git rigour for the lifecycle of the feature's development. It's easier to make improvised commits with temp debugging state in them and tidy it all up in one sweep at the end.

preemptions:

I don't have a good name for this technique. "Doing Commits Like A Big Pile Of Laundry", perhaps?
This is different from (and, imo, superior to) jj split:

With split, if I miss a hunk that should have been in red, I have to split again and squash.
This technique more easily allows sorting the easiest hunks at the beginning without worrying about how it will effect the commit sequencing.
This reason why doing it all at the end is (often) better than using jj squash -i as you go is because the final state of the everything commit is guaranteed to not have any conflicts. Creating a new "fix red and green" commit and interactively squashing that into your red and green commits might break your blue commit if it happens to touch one of the affected files.
A downside to this technique is that there's no guarantee that every commit will compile, which might be a dealbreaker.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

17. Getting an old Computer online with Android Ethernet tethering

Source: https://82mhz.net/posts/2026/05/getting-an-old-computer-online-with-android-ethernet-tethering/
Site: 82mhz.net
Submitter: speckx (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-21 18:03 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 41 points · 16 comments
Length: 432 words (~2 min read)
Language: en

May 21, 2026
Categories
Reading time: 3 minutes

I enjoy playing around with old computers and software from the 90s and early 2000s. My childhood computer was the Amiga 500 which I still have and which I love dearly, but the Windows 9x/XP era of computing is the most nostalgic for me because this coincides with my teenage years and my early 20s, and there are just so many great things about it; 3dfx games, the early internet, Napster, ICQ, Winamp... it was a fascinating time in tech.

One problem with computers from this time period is how to get them online. They either have no wifi or severely outdated wifi modules which at best do WEP encryption, but they can't connect to a modern WPA encrypted wifi network. So in order to get them online you would either have to downgrade the security of your wifi network (terrible idea), set up a dedicated wifi network for these machines with only WEP security enabled (also terrible) or connect them via ethernet, which is easy enough as long as you have an Ethernet connection available.

But what if you want to get an old Windows 9x/XP-era computer online somewhere where there is no ethernet connection? Here's a deceptively simple way to do it:

Get a cheap USB-C to Ethernet adapter from Ebay/Amazon
Connect this to your (Android) 1 phone and via a short Ethernet cable to the Ethernet port of the computer in question
Enable "Ethernet Tethering" in the phone's settings

And that's it. As long as you have automatic network configuration via DHCP enabled on the PC, the phone should automatically assign an IP address to the PC and bridge its wifi connection to the wired network through the Ethernet adapter. And this should work with every old (and new) computer, as long it has an Ethernet port.

I admit, it's not the prettiest of solutions (I need to get a shorter Ethernet cable), but it works and it's really simple to set up. So why did it take me so long to figure this out? I have no idea.

I tested this with a USB-C docking station which has an Ethernet port too, and it worked just as well, but required external power to the docking station, meaning an extra power cable is required.

1

I don't have an iPhone, so I have no idea if it would work with iOS, too.

If you would like to send me a message, comment or share this post, you can do so here:

Send me an E-Mail
Reply on Mastodon
Share on Mastodon

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

18. Scammers are abusing an internal Microsoft account to send spam links

Source: https://techcrunch.com/2026/05/21/scammers-are-abusing-an-internal-microsoft-account-to-send-spam/
Site: TechCrunch
Author: Zack Whittaker
Published: 2026-05-21
HN activity: 274 points · 150 comments
Length: 507 words (~3 min read)
Language: en-US

For months, scammers have been taking advantage of a loophole that allows them to send spammy emails from an internal Microsoft email address typically used for sending legitimate account alerts.

It’s not clear how the scammers are abusing the system, but they have been able to set up new Microsoft accounts as if they are new customers and use that access to send out emails purportedly from the tech giant, potentially tricking people into thinking these emails are genuine.

Microsoft doesn’t yet appear to have gotten a handle on the issue.

Last week, I received several, similarly structured emails containing subject lines and web links to scammy sites from Microsoft across different email accounts. These crudely made emails were sent from msonlineservicesteam@microsoftonline.com, an email account that Microsoft uses to send important notifications to users, such as two-factor authentication codes and other critical alerts about their online account.

Some of these emails’ subject lines resembled official emails that would alert users to fraudulent transactions, while other emails claimed to have a private message waiting for the recipient at a web address mentioned in the email body.
Image Credits:TechCrunch (screenshot)

In a social post on Tuesday, anti-spam nonprofit The Spamhaus Project said it had also seen Microsoft’s account notification email address being abused to send spam and that the activity dated back “several months.”

“Automated notification systems should not allow this level of customization,” wrote Spamhaus. The nonprofit added that it has notified Microsoft of the issue.

When contacted by TechCrunch earlier this week, Microsoft acknowledged our inquiry but did not comment by press time.

In a statement provided after publication by Emelia Katon, representing Microsoft via a third-party public relations agency, the company said: “We are actively investigating and taking action against these phishing reports to help keep customers protected. This includes further strengthening our detection and blocking mechanisms, while removing accounts that violate our Terms of Use.”

This is the latest in a rash of incidents in which hackers or scammers have abused company systems to trick unsuspecting customers in recent months. Earlier this year, hackers broke into a platform used by fintech firm Betterment to send out fraudulent notifications that purported to triple the value of any crypto users send in — a widely known scam used to steal people’s cryptocurrency.

Back in 2023, hackers similarly abused access to an email account run by Namecheap to send out phishing emails aimed at stealing people’s credentials.

Other users commenting on social media say that other companies’ email addresses are also being used to send out spam, suggesting the issue is not limited to Microsoft.

Updated with a response from Microsoft.

When you purchase through links in our articles, we may earn a small commission. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

Zack Whittaker

Zack Whittaker is the security editor at TechCrunch. He also authors the weekly cybersecurity newsletter, this week in security.

He can be reached via encrypted message at zackwhittaker.1337 on Signal. You can also contact him by email, or to verify outreach, at zack.whittaker@techcrunch.com.

View Bio

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

19. Perceptual Image Codec: What Matters in Practical Learned Image Compression

Source: https://apple.github.io/ml-pico/
Site: apple.github.io
Submitter: ksec (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-24 12:01 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 96 points · 31 comments
Length: 251 words (~2 min read)
Language: en-US

About

We introduce PICO (Perceptual Image Codec) — the first learned codec that is both practical, and optimized directly for the human visual system. To derive it, we perform a comprehensive study of modeling choices for practical learned codecs, and search over millions of model configurations to jointly optimize over perceptual quality and on-device runtime.

Based on large-scale subjective user studies, PICO provides 2.3-3× bitrate savings against AV1, AV2, VVC, ECM and JPEG-AI, and 20-40% bitrate savings against the best learned codec alternatives. At the same time, on an iPhone 17 Pro Max, it encodes 12MP images as fast as 230ms, and decodes them in 150ms — faster than most top ML-based codecs run on a V100 GPU. Different from most learned codecs, PICO furthermore comes with cross-platform robustness guarantees.
Interactive comparison across different images. PICO (Ours) is fixed on the left. Select an image and comparison method from the overlay buttons, then drag the slider to compare. Best viewed on a large screen.

Comparisons of state-of-the-art traditional and learned codecs across different considerations of practicality.

Comparisons of state-of-the-art traditional and learned codecs. Perceptual BD-rates are based on human ratings from a large-scale subjective study. Speed benchmarks on iPhone 17 Pro Max use identical compiler optimizations.

Citation

If you find our work useful, please cite:

@article{tatwawadi2026pico,
  title={What Matters in Practical Learned Image Compression},
  author={Tatwawadi, Kedar and Rahimzadeh, Parisa and Sun, Zhanghao and Chen, Zhiqi and Yang, Ziyun and Nair, Sanjay and Hasteer, Divija and Rippel, Oren},
  journal={arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.05148},
  year={2026}
}

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

20. Childhood Computing

Source: https://susam.net/childhood-computing.html
Site: susam.net
Submitter: blenderob (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-24 12:07 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 165 points · 88 comments
Length: 941 words (~5 min read)
Language: en

By Susam Pal on 24 May 2026

I recently stumbled upon a nice blog post titled Childhood Computing. It made me think about my own childhood computing experience. I am much older than the author of the aforementioned post, but like them, I too love computers. I have for most of my life.

In 1992, when I was eight years old, my parents decided to transfer me to a new school because of its curriculum. They did not know it then, and it probably did not even matter to them, but this new school had a computer lab. That was quite remarkable for its time. I grew up in a very tiny industrial town. The computers in the lab were hand-me-downs from the silica factory around which the town was built. We got only about two hours of time per month in the computer lab, but the little time I got there opened up a whole new world for me.

Before entering the lab, we had to leave our shoes at the door. 'These are expensive machines. We must keep them free of dust', our teacher would say. It was a ritual. The computers were very old IBM PC compatible machines, mostly with monochrome cathode-ray tube (CRT) monitors. They had no hard disks at all. They had a few hundred kilobytes of RAM. Every time, we performed the same ritual. Insert a 5¼-inch floppy disk to load MS-DOS into memory. Then insert another disk to load LOGO.COM. Then write small Logo programs and watch the turtle move. I have written more about that early Logo programming experience here: FD 100. Further, since there were no hard disks and storage was at a premium, nothing was ever saved. The moment you turned off the computer, all your work vanished. So saving a program meant literally writing the program down in a physical notebook.
Video capture of IBM Personal Computer Logo [MP4]

Since I had so little time with an actual computer, most of my Logo programming happened with pen and paper at home. I would 'test' my programs by tracing the results on graph paper. Eventually, I would get about thirty minutes of actual computer time in the lab to run them for real. One particular Logo program I still remember very well drew a house with animated dashed lines, where the dashes moved around the outline of the house. Everyone around me loved it, copied it and tweaked it to alter the details and add their own little touches. That must have been my first 'free and open source software'. The 'licence' was 'do whatever you want but show me if you make any interesting modifications'. The distribution system was entirely analogue: classmates copied the code into their notebooks with pencils, then went back to their machines in the lab and typed it back into the computer.

Occasionally, when we successfully completed the Logo programming exercises our teacher set us as challenges, he would let us play computer games too. The first computer game I ever played was Moon Bugs. Some of my favourite games were Space Invaders, Bricks and Grand Prix Circuit. Space Invaders inspired me to write my own game, but the little GW-BASIC programming I knew back then and the very limited access to computers I had then were insufficient to write anything more sophisticated than simple text-based input/output programs. But eventually, in 2022, as an adult, I did manage to write an Invaders-like game, which you can find here: Andromeda Invaders. It has an auto-play mode too, like some games had back when I was a kid. If you wait five seconds, the game starts playing by itself. It is quite fun to watch. Although thirty years too late, writing this game fulfilled a childhood dream!

One of my buddies liked the game called Digger developed by Windmill Software. It soon became my favourite as well. The game came on a self-booting disk, so we did not have to go through the elaborate ritual of first inserting a floppy disk to load DOS. We could insert the Digger floppy disk directly and the computer would boot and start the game immediately.
Video capture of Digger [MP4]

Another computer game I remember fondly was Grand Prix Circuit by Accolade Inc. I really loved typing the command GPEGA to launch the game, knowing that in a moment I would be greeted with its excellent opening music. Grand Prix Circuit blew my mind. As a child who only knew how to draw basic two-dimensional geometrical shapes with Logo and GW-BASIC, I found it astounding that a computer program could create a projection of a three-dimensional fictional world that you could navigate with keyboard inputs. How was it even possible, I wondered.
Video capture of Grand Prix Circuit [MP4]

It has been over thirty years since then, but the memories and the feelings still remain fresh in my mind. There are times when I can close my eyes and recall the buzzing sound of the dozen or so computers running in the lab, the beeps from the power-on self-tests (POST) and the distinctive, strangely pleasant smell of the closed, air-conditioned room. For some reason, that smell is one of the strongest memories I have from those days. I have never been able to describe it well, but once in a while I encounter it in very unexpected places, like a corridor somewhere, or a store, and it takes me right back to those early days of childhood computing. Those childhood computing experiences form some of my strongest and most vivid memories. They were such magical experiences, full of wonder and exploration.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

21. Why is Vivado 2026.1 dropping Linux support for free tier?

Source: https://adaptivesupport.amd.com/s/question/0D5Pd00001YQLdMKAX/why-is-vivado-20261-dropping-linux-support-for-free-tier-?language=en_US
Site: adaptivesupport.amd.com
Submitter: zdw (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-24 04:14 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 304 points · 185 comments
Length: 1 word (~1 min read)
Language: en-US

Loading

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

22. LAN-LOK: The Antarctic DOS Sabotage Game Lost for 34 Years

Source: https://alphapixeldev.com/lan-lok-the-antarctic-dos-sabotage-game-lost-for-34-years-part-1/
Site: AlphaPixel Software Development
Author: Chris Hanson
Published: 2026-05-13
HN activity: 57 points · 10 comments
Length: 3.5K words (~16 min read)
Language: en-US

An exercise in reconstructing (and maybe modernizing) history.

AlphaPixel often gets called upon to work on legacy codebases, sometimes VERY legacy. We have contact with code from the 80s and 90s on a regular basis, in a variety of dialects and languages, and stored and archived in various difficult containers and mediums.

While NDAs and confidentiality mean we often can’t talk about our paid projects, we recently had an interesting side project that used the same processes, only it was all for fun, so we can talk all about it.

The task: Revive the only known Antarctic-native game, LAN-LOK.

May 2025: Now archived and playable in-browser via emulation at Archive.org: https://archive.org/details/Lanlok

Introduction

LAN-LOK is a small but remarkable piece of digital history: a DOS game written at Palmer Station, Antarctica in early 1991. Created after the installation of the station’s first peer-to-peer local area network (PalmerLAN), the game captures - through humor, satire, and surprisingly accurate mechanics - the daily realities of early LAN administration in one of the most isolated research communities on Earth.

For more than three decades LAN-LOK remained essentially unknown outside the U.S. Antarctic Program. It never appeared on bulletin boards, never circulated as shareware, and left no trace in public software archives or early web indexes. The only surviving evidence was the executable itself, player score data, and the memories of the people who lived and worked at Palmer and McMurdo Stations during the early 1990s.

AlphaPixel founders Chris and Mindy Hanson worked in McMurdo in the 1994 season, and Chris was exposed to and played LAK-LOK via the InfoSys department's culture. Years later, he discovered a copy of it still intact and archived it for later entertainment. In 2025, while doing file organization on the archives, he noticed it again, and decided to try to recover and run it. He attempted to contact anyone who still remembered it through social media, and failed (outside of the few people he worked with who introduced him to it in McMurdo). Finally, he contacted Al Oxton ("ajo"), the central character-nemesis of LAN-LOK, who confirmed a few of the details.

Though “Evil Al” appears as the antagonist inside the game, Oxton had no role in its development. Instead, he recalls LAN-LOK simply as a popular diversion created by “one of the beakers” (Antarctic slang for research scientists) during the chaotic rollout of the station’s first LAN. The title screen credits the actual authors Mark Chappell and Shane Maloney and provides a precise timestamp: “Developed at Palmer Station, February–March 1991.” February-March is typically station closing at the end of the summer season, so Mark and Shane may have been Palmer winter-over reserchers.

This rediscovery positions LAN-LOK as one of the very few verifiable examples of Antarctic-native-born software: a game written in and shaped entirely by the machines, people, and degraded sanity of a remote research base at the dawn of its digital era. Below, we will document what is known about LAN-LOK, and in later blog posts we may attempt to decompile, update and modernize LAN-LOK straight from the 16-bit DOS execuatble, no source is currently available.

Origins at Palmer Station (February–March 1991)

LAN-LOK was created in a very specific technical and cultural moment at the United States' Palmer Station, Antarctica research station, during the late austral summer or early winter season of 1991. The station had recently deployed its peer-to-peer local area network, referred to at various points as GrapeVine and PalmerLAN. It was in this transitional environment that two researchers Mark Chappell and Shane Maloney developed LAN-LOK. Their names, along with precise creation dates, appear on the game’s startup splash screen:

“by Mark Chappell and Shane Maloney Developed at Palmer Station, February–March 1991.”

Additional confirmation comes from an email reply I received from Al Oxton, one of the Palmer crew and the real-life inspiration for the in-game antagonist “Evil Al.”

Tue, Dec 9, 2025

The game was written at Palmer by one of the beakers about the time we were installing the first peer2peer network. GrapeVine. PalmerLan. The name of the author of the LAN-LOK code is in the startup splash and in the code: "by Mark Chappell and Shane Maloney...Developed at Palmer Station, February-March 1991". The game was popular but that is all the backstorey I can come up with. Some of the names in the PLAYERS copy I have sort of indicate I took the game to McMurdo for my last Winter(s) there: Carl, Wendy, Sliz... I've not played LAN-LOK for years

The technical context of Palmer Station in 1991 shaped the game’s tone and mechanics. The introduction of a shared network brought new challenges, printer lockups, shared-resource contention, confusing DOS prompts, and occasional catastrophic user errors. These frustrations were quickly turned into humor, and LAN-LOK became a playful/painful reflection of the station’s growing pains as it moved into a more connected era.

LAN-LOK was not simply a pastime but a product of its moment: a locally-written game that passionately captured the experience of building a network at the end of the world, created by the strung out people living it.

The Game’s Concept and Humor

At its core, LAN-LOK is a competitive race between sabotage and repair.

You, the player, are the saboteur. Your goal is to “crash the network” by disabling as many machines as possible in five minutes. The AI-controlled “Evil Al” is the fixer, constantly working through a queue of broken systems and bringing them back online. Every time you take a machine down, you gain points; every time Al restores one, you lose ground. The entire game is built around this tug-of-war.

Mechanically, the loop is:

Choose a target by typing its real hostname (e.g., lab, Calvin, library, Hobbs).
Choose an attack method:

“Soft” attacks that lock the LAN (print spam, abusive mail).
“Hard” attacks that delete directories (del *.*) or reformat drives (format c:).
Watch Evil Al work through your damage, undoing your work as quickly as he can.

The humor is dark and very sysadmin-specific. Every “attack” mirrors a real DOS-era failure mode: jammed printers, misaddressed email, dangerous wildcard deletes, and the nightmare of formatting the wrong disk. The twist is that LAN-LOK explicitly rewards what sysadmins dread: users who manage to do the worst possible thing in the shortest amount of time.

The joke is sharpened by the hostnames and characters:

The network map shows actual Palmer machines with whimsical names like Calvin, Hobbs, rabbit, Susi, and Tfive.
Your own workstation, SKUA, is off-limits; nuking it is an automatic loss.
Evil Al’s portrait, bearded, slightly manic, in knit cap, is a caricature of the real Al Oxton, the network wizard who, in real life, spent his time preventing exactly this kind of chaos.

The result is a very specific kind of Antarctic gallows humor: the people who depend on the LAN most are the ones gleefully role-playing its destruction. Anyone who has ever sysadmin'ed knows this is an only slightly-fractured looking glass.

The Origins and Descendants of the Break/Fix Game Mechanic

Twenty-one years after LAN-LOK, Disney’s Wreck-It Ralph (2012) introduced the fictional arcade game Fix-It Felix Jr. In that game, the villain Ralph smashes the windows of an apartment building, and the player, controlling Felix, climbs the building repairing the damage with a magic hammer while dodging new attacks. It's clearly sort of inspired by Donkey Kong, with the big destructive brute antagonist and the cute quirky protagonist.

Conceptually, one character’s job is to wreck, another character’s job is to repair in real time, and gameplay is about how efficiently the repair character can stay ahead of the destruction.

LAN-LOK is structurally very close to this, but inverted in terms of perspective:

The player is in the Ralph role, deliberately breaking things.
The game's Evil Al is effectively Felix, silently and tirelessly fixing them in the background.
The scoring is explicitly based on how far ahead you can get of the repair process.

There’s no evidence of any direct influence, but LAN-LOK (1991) is an earlier, real-world example of this break/fix game mechanic: it builds an entire scoring and tension model around an opponent repair agent undoing your damage as quickly as possible.

Other Games With Similar Break/Repair Loops

LAN-LOK isn’t alone in exploring destruction and repair, but the asymmetric sabotage-vs-fix framing is unusual. It sits alongside a small family of games that use similar ideas in different ways:

Atari’s Rampart (arcade, 1990) alternates between a battle phase, where cannons blast holes in opponents’ castle walls, and a build & repair phase, where you race a timer to patch damaged walls with Tetris-like pieces so that at least one castle remains fully enclosed.

Nintendo’s Wrecking Crew (1984–85) predates both LAN-LOK and Wreck-It Ralph. It puts Mario (and Luigi in two-player mode) in the role of a demolition worker tasked with breaking down specific walls, ladders, and other objects while enemies and Foreman Spike interfere.

Decades later, Viscera Cleanup Detail flips the usual shooter fantasy by casting the player as a space-station janitor cleaning and repairing a facility after some unseen hero’s ultra-violent battle. Tasks include mopping blood, disposing of bodies, and fixing bullet holes and damage. While there’s no active antagonist continuously making new messes, it shares LAN-LOK’s core joke: the real work in these worlds is done by the people who fix everything after the “fun” part. LAN-LOK anticipates that sensibility, using Evil Al as the poor sap cleaning up the player’s carnage in real time.

Viewed in hindsight, LAN-LOK reads like an early, niche implementation of the same break/fix dynamic that Wreck-It Ralph later popularized for a mass audience, but filtered through a 1991 Antarctic LAN and the quirky polar (and bipolar!) personalities on it. The humor works because everyone on station knew both sides of the loop: they had all broken things (not just the LAN, Antarctica is famous for DESTROYING equipment, and sometimes people), and they all depended on someone to put them back together again.

Gameplay Overview

LAN-LOK’s gameplay is a tightly constrained five-minute sabotage race built around a simple but effective loop: you break the network, and Evil Al fixes it. Your score depends entirely on how far ahead you can stay of his repair queue. The result is a small, fast, deliberately stressful DOS game that captures the rhythm of early polar sysadmin life with surprising accuracy.

Core Objective

“Try to crash the network by disabling as many of its computers as possible in 5 minutes. You fight against the efforts of Evil Al, who attempts to restore the machines.”

Your goal is to inflict escalating levels of damage on ten real hostnames drawn from Palmer Station’s PCs, while not accidentally destroying your own workstation (SKUA). Evil Al repairs systems in first-in, first-out order, meaning every action you take increases the backlog he must clear. The gameplay is built around this queue, every attack creates future repairs; every repair erases your score gains.

Target Selection

Before launching an attack, you must choose a machine to sabotage. LAN-LOK requires:

Typing select
Pressing Enter
Typing the exact hostname, letter-for-letter. This is important.

If you mistype the name, you’re rewarded with an intentionally obnoxious error message and must reselect. This makes hostname literacy, not just reaction time, a core skill. It’s a mechanic only someone living on a real LAN in 1991 would think to include.

Valid targets include: lab, labstore, admin, rabbit, Calvin, Hobbs, Susi, library, ratt, and Tfive.

Your system, SKUA, is never a valid target. Formatting it immediately ends the game in failure.

Attack Methods

Once a target is selected, you choose the method of destruction. Each attack differs in speed, likelihood of success, point value, and the time required for Evil Al to fix it.

1. Print

Simulates jamming the LAN through a print job.

High success rate
Low repair time
Modest points
Quick to execute

It represents one of the most common failure modes of early network printing. (That, and PC LOAD LETTER.)

2. Send Mail

Another “soft failure” attack akin to spam or misaddressed internal email.

Similar to Print
Causes lightweight LAN disruption
Low-value but fast

Both Print and Mail are low-risk ways to keep the repair queue full.

3. Delete Directory (del *.*)

A more serious attack.

Higher points
Lower success probability
Longer repair time

This models accidental (or malicious) wildcard destruction, the scourge of DOS administrators everywhere. The Unix equivalent is of course rm -rf / as root, but I don't have any knowledge of Unix machines at Palmer in the 90s. We had a few SUN workstations and an SGI IRIS at McM in 1994.

4. Format Disk (format c:)

The nuclear option.

Most points by far
Hardest to pull off
Very long repair time
Failure yields nothing and wastes precious time

A special rule makes formatting Hobbs even harder but worth extra points, setting it up as the boss node of the game.

Evil Al’s Repair Queue

Evil Al fixes systems in the order you sabotaged them, a strict FIFO queue. That means:

Soft attacks fill the queue quickly but also clear quickly
Hard attacks slow the queue dramatically
The entire scoring race depends on overwhelming Al faster than he can unwind your damage

Scoring

Scoring is the net of Points gained when you disable a machine and Points lost when Al repairs it.

Win Conditions

The game can end early in your favor through any of three routes:

Successfully reformatting Hobbs while holding 400+ points
Disabling nine or more computers at once
Reaching over 1000 points in a single run

Lose Conditions

Failure occurs immediately if:

Your final score is under 60 points, or
You accidentally format your own machine (SKUA). This is not only punitive but thematically perfect, every sysadmin has a horror story of someone formatting the wrong disk.

Player History

The surviving LAN-LOK score tables provide the only historical record of who actually played the game during its life at Palmer and later McMurdo Station. The list contains a mix of real first names, nicknames, and station in-jokes, entries such as Carl, WENDY, Sliz, Mark, Shane, and others.

According to Al Oxton, these names confirm that the game did not remain confined to Palmer. He carried a copy with him to McMurdo during later winters, where new players added themselves to the leaderboard. Because the game tracks wins, losses, and mean scores across sessions, the scoreboard reflects genuine sustained play rather than one-off experimentation.

I don't recognize most of the names. The authors Mark and Shane are near the top of the high scores. My personal memory is that Carl and WENDY are probably Carl and Wendy Norris, spouses who were both part of the Antarctic program long-term and were at MCM in 94/95. I had contact with them peripherally when fixing their computers and network. Yes, my own job was PCTECH, the McM equivalent to Evil Al.

Running LAN-LOK Today

Because modern 64-bit versions of Windows can no longer execute 16-bit DOS programs, LAN-LOK must be run through an emulator. The easiest and most reliable option is DOSBox, which recreates a full DOS environment independent of the host operating system.

0. Download LAN-LOK

https://alphapixeldev.com/wp-content/uploads/2025/12/Lanlok.zip

1. Install DOSBox

Download DOSBox for your platform. https://www.dosbox.com/download.php?main=1

Install it once it is downloaded.

All versions run LAN-LOK identically due to DOSBox’s consistent emulation layer.

2. Create a Game Directory

Unzip and place the LANLOK.exe executable and accompanying PLAYERS file into a dedicated folder, for example:

C:\Users\xenon\Documents\Games\LANLOK

Keeping the game in its own directory ensures the working environment stays clean and prevents accidental writes elsewhere. It may be helpful to avoid spces in the path, for ease of typing within the DOSBox internal CMD emulation.

3. Mount the Directory in DOSBox

Launch DOSBox and mount the directory as a virtual drive:

mount c C:\Users\xenon\Documents\Games\LANLOK

DOSBox treats this folder as drive C: inside the emulator.

4. Run the Game

At the DOS prompt inside DOSBox:

lanlok.exe

The game starts immediately. All keyboard interaction seems to work as originally intended, and LAN-LOK’s text-mode UI renders correctly at default DOSBox settings.

5. Timing Considerations

LAN-LOK is not speed-sensitive and does not rely on CPU timing loops. The default DOSBox cycles setting is sufficient. If needed, you can adjust performance with:

ctrl + F11 (slow down) ctrl + F12 (speed up)

But I haven't needed to.

6. Saving and Restoring Scores

LAN-LOK stores player profiles and scores in its working directory. As long as DOSBox mounts the same folder each time, scoreboards persist across sessions just as they did originally.

7. Optional: Create a DOSBox Shortcut

To launch the game without typing commands every time, you can preconfigure DOSBox:

Add this to your DOSBox configuration (dosbox.conf) under the [autoexec] section:

mount c C:\games\lanlok
c:
lanlok.exe

Running DOSBox will now start LAN-LOK automatically.

"Why don’t we just wait here for a while… see what happens" -R.J. MacReady

LAN-LOK is more than a forgotten DOS curiosity, it is a preserved moment in the daily life of Antarctic research stations during the earliest days of their local area networks. It captures the frustrations, humor, and personalities that shaped computing at Palmer Station as it transitioned from isolated standalone PCs to a shared (fragile) LAN.

Its mechanics are simple, but they reflect real operational challenges of the era: printer stalls, destructive wildcard deletes, catastrophic drive formats, and the constant pressure on the sysadmin to keep everything running. The fact that LAN-LOK then traveled to McMurdo and accumulated a new roster of players gives it an unusual status as a cultural artifact, an executable passed hand-to-hand by SneakerNet in one of the most remote and bizarre communities on earth.

Today, with DOS long gone from modern systems, emulation through DOSBox lets LAN-LOK run exactly as it did more than three decades ago. That makes it possible not only to preserve the software but to understand the working environment, humor, and improvisational creativity of the people who built and maintained Antarctic computing in the early 1990s.

Rediscovering LAN-LOK brings that history back into view, one hostname, one broken machine, and one frazzled sysadmin at a time, in a flashback to a time when ABEND stoked levels of terror in an Antarctica Sysadmin even greater than a Skua attacking you for your grilled cheese, or watching The Thing and The Shining back to back after station close.

So ends part one of this blog. But like The Thing, we're leaving the door open for a sequel. I've identified the likely development language as Microsoft C, likely 6.x (1989) or possibly QuickC 2.5 (1989). My intent is to try decompilation with Reko ( https://github.com/uxmal/reko?tab=readme-ov-file ) or maybe Claude-Code-guided Ghidra ( https://quesma.com/blog/chromatron-recompiled/ ) and possibly some automated analysis and fixup of the decompiled code. Then, address any 16-bit to 64-bit architecture issues, and swap out the input and graphics code to SDL. Since this is just a hobby project, I'm going to explore how much of the rework can be assisted by LLM/AI tools and coding assistants, to evaluate if this strategy is practical for real-world customer situations.

Since starting, I've spoken to Al Oxton, Mark Chappell and Shane Maloney. Anyone else who recalls playing LAN-LOK, please feel free to get in touch with me!

The path to rescuing old code and data and making it useful again is a journey, often akin to building a rope suspension bridge one plank at a time, while suspended in mid-air. Sometimes while being attacked by natives, a la Indiana Jones. Often there are interlocking chicken and egg problems, where the obvious solution won’t work because of one minor issue, which then cascades and snowballs into bigger problems. It’s not uncommon to find a bug or omission in some old tool you need to use, and when you go to fix it, you find the tool can no longer be compiled by modern toolchains, necessitating reconstruction of a side environment just to fix the problem that’s blocking you on the main endeavor. We’ve jokingly used the term “Software Archaeologist” in some contexts like these. In the modern AI era, decompilation and reverse engineering capabilities have become vastly more powerful and available.

AlphaPixel solves difficult problems every day for clients around the world. In the past we’ve done extraordinary things, like recovering deleted forensic video evidence from SD cards, having old failed hard drives refurbished to rescue critical data, reverse-engineering proprietary data formats to liberate valuable siloed information, even desoldering surface mount chips and sucking their brains out with hardware exploitation devices. We’ve worked on common and exotic architectures and operating systems and environments from the 8-bit to the 64-bit, Motorola, Intel, ARM, RISC-V, PA-RISC, DEC Alpha, Power, and microcontrollers.

If you have a difficult problem you’re facing and you’re not confident about solving it yourself, give us a call. We Solve Your Difficult Problems.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

23. I keep bouncing off the Scheme language

Source: https://www.sicpers.info/2026/05/i-keep-bouncing-off-the-scheme-language/
Site: Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programmers
Author: Graham
Published: 2026-05-22
HN activity: 134 points · 55 comments
Length: 443 words (~2 min read)
Language: en-US

I have a huge appreciation for the Scheme programming language. I just seem to be unable to get it to stick in my head. This seems like a huge revelation for someone who named their blog after the Scheme textbook, but there it is. This post is the public admission I need to make, to keep me accountable for trying again. And again.

One problem is that I’m an inconsistent LISPer. The first software I ever got paid for was an Emacs major mode for the GLE plotting language, which didn’t do much beyond syntax highlighting. But I didn’t really get deeply into Emacs customization or automation, so I still have to look at the manual or my outdated copy of Writing GNU Emacs Extensions whenever I want to do anything.

I’m OK at reading Scheme. During my investigations of AI coding assistants for the project that became Chiron Codex, I created a Smalltalk-like live environment with a module browser for the Racket dialect. Obviously an LLM generated the code, but I felt comfortable following along and understood what it was doing, reading and Trusting the Tests. And when I look at Scheme that other people have written, I think I get what’s going on.

My difficulty is with thinking the way that lets me write Scheme. I have the ALGOL neurotype. When I think about a programming problem, I think in terms of the sequence of instructions I need the computer to do, and the memory locations that can hold the information the computer needs to track. After decades of working with OOP, I can quickly identify smaller computers that run smaller programs to make it easier, but only because I’ve got experience using the Simula-derived, neurologically ALGOL-based OOP strands like Java and Smalltalk-80.

This is, unfortunately, a failure that breeds failure. I’ve started two web app projects recently, including SE100, the reading list for the SICPers podcast. In each case, I’ve thought about using GNU Artanis but ultimately fallen back into my ALGOL mindset (the SE100 catalog uses the Go programming language, for example).

I think Scheme makes for some powerful software that’s pleasant to read: when I use Linux, I use GNU Guix and GNU Shepherd. I want to contribute to that ecosystem, I just have to get over the hump that I know the other, more complex way better, and be willing to play junior developer with some unfamiliar tools. This is my admission. Check back in a while to hold me accountable to this.

About Graham

I make it faster and easier for you to create high-quality code.

This entry was posted in GNU, tool-support. Bookmark the permalink.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

24. Building Pi with Pi

Source: https://lucumr.pocoo.org/2026/5/24/pi-oss/
Site: Armin Ronacher
Author: Armin Ronacher
Published: 2026-05-24
HN activity: 33 points · 7 comments
Length: 1.9K words (~9 min read)
Language: en

written on May 24, 2026

Pi is now part of Earendil, but in the important sense it is still Mario’s project. He has been living with its issue tracker longer than I have, and he has been exposed to the weirdness of the new form of agent traffic in Open Source projects for longer too. This post is mostly a reflection of my own experience after spending more time in the tracker, using Pi to work on Pi, and watching what I have learned about it so far.

Slop Issues

Unsurprisingly, we are using Pi to build Pi. That sounds like a cute dogfooding thing but it really helps understand what we do. An interesting effect of building with agents is that it changes the role of the issue tracker a tiny bit. The issue descriptions are not just messages from a user to a maintainer because we also use them as inputs for prompts in Pi sessions. It is something I might hand to my clanker1 and say: “understand this, reproduce it, inspect the code, and propose a fix.”

That means the shape of the issue matters in a new way. A bad issue was always annoying, but at least a lot of issues were vague. Now we are also dealing with a class of issues that are 5% human and 95% clanker-generated and largely inaccurate shit. A bad issue that contains a plausible but wrong diagnosis creates extra work.

The most frustrating failure mode right now is that people submit issues that are not in their own voice. They contain an observed problem somewhere, but it has been thrown into a clanker and the clanker reworded it and made a huge mess of it. Typically, it was prompted so badly that the conclusions produced are more often than not inaccurate but always full of confidence. The result is complete guesswork on root causes, fake-minimal repros, suggested implementation strategies, analogies to adjacent but often the wrong code, and long lists of error classes that might or might not matter.

That is worse than no diagnosis.

I don’t want to point to specific issues because I really do not want to bad mouth anyone, but it is frustrating. It is also frustrating because when I give that issue to Pi, Pi sees the wrong diagnosis too. It does not treat the issue body as a rumor. It treats it as evidence. It will happily go down the path that the issue already prepared for it, because the prose is confident and the code references look plausible. We use a custom slash command called /is, which specifically has this instruction in it:

Do not trust analysis written in the issue. Independently verify behavior and derive your own analysis from the code and execution path.

Unfortunately, it does not fully work, because when humans first throw their issue through the clanker wringer, their clanker expands scope almost immediately. What was once a very narrow and fact based bug observation, turns into a much expanded surface area full of hypotheses. So at least personally, I increasingly want issue reports to be condensed to what the human actually observed:

I ran this command.
I expected this to happen.
This happened instead.
Here is the exact error or log.

That is enough. If you used an LLM to understand the problem, great, maybe leave it as a follow-up comment. But the issue and the issue text should be something you own. If you do not know the root cause, say that. I too can operate a clanker, and I would rather do this myself than use your slop. If your repro is a guess, say that. If the only hard fact is one stack trace, give me the stack trace and stop there.

Slop Begets Slop

That we’re seeing issues full of slop is just a result of the present day quality of these machines. Sadly, their failures in creating good issues extend to a lot of code that is generated. Not all of it, but a lot of code. Over and over I keep running into them over-engineering the hell out of issues and implementations.

If you tell them that “this malformed session log crashes the reader,” the clanker will often add a tolerant reader. Then it will add a fallback, then maybe a migration, then more debug output, then a test for all of this. None of this is necessarily wrong in isolation, but it can be the wrong move for the system.

At Pi’s core is a rather well-designed session log with invariants that must be upheld. The clanker’s present-day behavior is to just assume that no such invariants exist, and instead to make the system work with all kinds of malformedness, blowing up the complexity in the process.

Almost always, the correct fix is not to handle the bad state, but to make the bad state impossible. This matters a lot for persisted data such as Pi session logs. They are opened, branched, compacted, exported, shared, and analyzed. The goal here is to never write bad session data. Yet if you just let the clanker roam freely, it will attempt to handle every case of bad data in the session log with a more permissive reader.

I have complained about this plenty, but working on Pi’s code base continues to reinforce the point. This is one of the ways LLM authored code grows so much needless complexity. All these models see a local failure and try to locally defend against it. As maintainers we have to keep pulling the conversation back to the global invariant, which is harder than it should be, and it’s laborious.

Volume Is The Problem

Then there is the issue of volume. The tracker is receiving a lot of issues and PRs, and a significant fraction of them are clearly LLM-assisted. Some are good, none are excellent, and most are just bad. The total throughput is a maintenance problem by itself.

As you might know, Pi’s issue tracker is automated to close all issues and pull requests from new contributors, and there is a manual process by which we might reopen some of them or approve individuals. So auto-close -> reopen -> close again is an interesting statistic for us to look at.

I pulled the public GitHub tracker data while writing this over the last 90 days. Excluding Earendil members, that leaves 3,145 external issues and pull requests. Of those, 2,504 were auto-closed because they were from non-approved individuals. 17% were reopened. For pull requests the number is worse: less than 10% were merged.

Many of the issues and PRs are complete slop and in some cases the humans did not even realize that they created them. Sources of low-quality spam include OpenClaw instances, as well as some skills that people put into their context that seemingly encourage issue creation.

GitHub clearly is not built to deal with this new form of Open Source, but I’m increasingly feeling the need to put the blame less on GitHub than on all the people involved who make that experience painful. If your clanker shits on someone else’s issue tracker then it’s not the fault of GitHub, it’s yours alone.

Careful Parallelism

Pi might be built with Pi, but we’re quite far off today from where Bun and OpenClaw already are: fully detached, automated software engineering. Maybe we will reach that point, I don’t know. Today it does not seem like we know how to pull off a dark factory and we also don’t yet have the desire. That said, there is quite a bit of parallelism going on, and it is mostly for reproducing issues.

The small setup we use for this is three tiny pieces in Pi’s own committed .pi folder. /is (for analyze issue) is a prompt for analyzing GitHub issues: it labels and assigns the issue, reads the full thread and links, then explicitly tells the agent not to trust the analysis in the issue and to derive its own diagnosis from the code. Then an extension adds a prompt-url-widget which watches the prompt before the agent starts, recognizes the GitHub issue or PR URL that /is (or the PR equivalent) put into the prompt, fetches the title and author with gh, renders that in a little UI widget, and renames the session. It also rebuilds that state on session start or session switch, so if we reopen an older investigation the window still tells the developer which issue it belongs to.

In practice this means it’s possible to have several Pi windows open, each running /is against a different issue, and the UI keeps the investigations visually distinct while the agents do their independent reproduction and code reading. Once the investigations are done, one can work through them sequentially. To finish off everything, /wr (wrap it up) is the matching wrap-up prompt: it infers the GitHub context from the session, updates the changelog, drafts or posts the final issue comment with a disclaimer, commits only the files changed in that session, adds the appropriate closes #... when there is exactly one issue, and pushes from main.

Open Source Is About Hard Problems Worth Fixing

You will have noticed this already but Open Source in a post-AI world is under a strange new pressure. We are getting more code, more projects, and more issues. Projects appear with no real users, or a temporary audience of one, and even projects with thousands of stars can have a shelf life of weeks.

For us, Pi’s harness layer is worth maintaining carefully because it solves hard coordination problems and creates a platform we and others can build on. We also know that coordination and cooperation lifts us all up. Many times the right answer is not to work around a problem locally, but to make the upstream behavior correct. Mario has been very good at refusing to make Pi paper over every misconfigured gateway, and we’re trying to preserve that discipline. When a gateway behaves correctly, everybody benefits.

Sadly that type of thinking is quickly disappearing because these machines make local workarounds cheap, so code accumulates local defenses against every misbehavior. Instead of humans talking to humans about where a fix belongs, one human and one machine work around the problem in isolation.

Keep in mind that AI has not increased the number of people who need software, or the number of maintainers who can review it. It has mostly increased the amount of code and the number of projects competing for attention. Some of that is healthy, but a lot of it fragments effort that should be shared.

We need stronger foundations, not weaker ones. Open Source needs more collaboration, not more isolated work with a machine. Human communication is hard, and it is tempting to avoid it when you can sit alone with your clanker. But isolation is not where Open Source derives its value. The value is in the community and the structure that lets projects outlive their original creators.

To me, clanker is a much preferable term for agent. Agency lies with humans, not with machines. Calling these things agents I still believe is a mistake, but alas.↩

This entry was tagged ai, open-source and pi

copy as / view markdown

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

25. Ruby for Good

Source: https://ti.to/codeforgood/rubyforgood
Site: Tito
Author: Team Tito
Submitted: 2026-05-24 15:49 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 123 points · 52 comments
Length: 170 words (~1 min read)
Language: en

Aug 27th to Aug 30th

Registration is all inclusive; we'll provide you with shared lodging, all your meals, snacks while we're hanging out in the evenings and some of the best socializing you've ever had. Plus we're probably going to have some great swag too :)

We're looking forward to making the world a better place with you!

Tickets Prices in USD

Additional Information

The Ruby for Good event is an annual event happening this year in the Washington DC area where programmers from all over the globe get together over a long weekend to build and contribute to projects that help our communities. Think hanging out in a communal space for a weekend with developers and designers to build something useful for nonprofits and social sector organizations. After the event the projects live on as open source projects.

Refund/Exchanges: After Jun 7th we will be unable to offer refunds but we will happily help coordinate transfers until Jul 20th.

Venue

Shepherd's Spring, 16869 Taylors Landing Road Sharpsburg, Maryland 21782

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

26. DeepSeek makes the V4 Pro price discount permanent

Source: https://api-docs.deepseek.com/quick_start/pricing
Site: api-docs.deepseek.com
Submitter: Tiberium (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-22 15:59 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 543 points · 495 comments
Length: 307 words (~2 min read)
Language: en

The prices listed below are in units of per 1M tokens. A token, the smallest unit of text that the model recognizes, can be a word, a number, or even a punctuation mark. We will bill based on the total number of input and output tokens by the model.

Model Details​

MODEL	deepseek-v4-flash(1)	deepseek-v4-pro
BASE URL (OpenAI Format)	https://api.deepseek.com
BASE URL (Anthropic Format)	https://api.deepseek.com/anthropic
MODEL VERSION	DeepSeek-V4-Flash	DeepSeek-V4-Pro
THINKING MODE	Supports both non-thinking and thinking (default) modes
See Thinking Mode for how to switch
CONTEXT LENGTH	1M
MAX OUTPUT	MAXIMUM: 384K
FEATURES	Json Output	✓	✓
Tool Calls	✓	✓
Chat Prefix Completion（Beta）	✓	✓
FIM Completion（Beta）	Non-thinking mode only	Non-thinking mode only
PRICING	1M INPUT TOKENS (CACHE HIT)(2)	$0.0028	$0.003625 (75% off(3))$0.0145
1M INPUT TOKENS (CACHE MISS)	$0.14	$0.435 (75% off(3))$1.74
1M OUTPUT TOKENS	$0.28	$0.87 (75% off(3))$3.48
Concurrency Limit(4)	2500	500

(1) The model names deepseek-chat and deepseek-reasoner will be deprecated in the future. For compatibility, they correspond to the non-thinking mode and thinking mode of deepseek-v4-flash, respectively.
(2) For all models, the input cache hit price has been reduced to 1/10 of the launch price. This price adjustment takes effect from 2026/4/26 12:15 UTC.
(3) The deepseek-v4-pro model API pricing will be officially adjusted to 1/4 of the original price after the 75% discount promotion ends on 2026/05/31 15:59 UTC.
(4) For more details on concurrency limits, please refer to Rate Limit & Isolation

Deduction Rules​

The expense = number of tokens × price. The corresponding fees will be directly deducted from your topped-up balance or granted balance, with a preference for using the granted balance first when both balances are available.

Product prices may vary and DeepSeek reserves the right to adjust them. We recommend topping up based on your actual usage and regularly checking this page for the most recent pricing information.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

27. Flick (YC F25) Is Hiring Front End Engineer to Build Figma for AI Filmmaking

Source: https://www.ycombinator.com/companies/flick/jobs/Tdu6FH6-senior-frontend-engineer
Site: Y Combinator
Submitter: rayruiwang (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-24 17:00 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 1 points · 0 comments
Length: 406 words (~2 min read)
Language: en

Figma + Cursor, for AI Filmmaking

Senior Frontend Engineer

$100K - $200K•0.10% - 1.00%•Sunnyvale, CA, US / Remote

Job type

Full-time

Role

Engineering, Frontend

Experience

3+ years

Visa

Will sponsor

Skills

React, TypeScript

Connect directly with founders of the best YC-funded startups.

Apply to role ›

Ray Wang

Founder

About the role

About Us

Flick is defining the future interface for AI native filmmaking. Think Figma and Cursor, but for creating AI films.

Founded by Engineer who built Instagram Stories + Award winning filmmaker, we are a team of Tech + Artist.
Well-funded by top VCs.
Checkout our recent launch post
Award-winning AI Films created using Flick

The Role

As our founding front-end engineer, you’ll lead the development of the core experience of Flick — our canvas, timeline, and creative tooling. You will work directly with the founders, and have the opportunity to shape the future interface for AI visual storytelling.

What you’ll do

Lead the architecture and development of our editor UI from the ground up (canvas, timeline, node graph, playback).
Rapidly prototype and iterate on new creative workflows to validate ideas and user experience.
Establish best practices for code quality, performance, testing, and maintainability.
Collaborate closely with design, product, and AI backend teams to shape the end-to-end user experience.
Drive key technical and product decisions as part of the founding engineering team.

Requirements

Experience owning and leading technical initiatives on high-performance web applications.
Strong expertise with modern front-end tooling (React, TypeScript, build systems, CI/CD).
Deep experience optimizing complex UX interactions, especially in editors, canvases, visual builders, or multimedia tools.
Ability to design scalable UI architectures and manage large, dynamic client-side state.
A passion for creating fast, intuitive, and beautiful creative interfaces.
Startup mindset: you thrive in fast-moving environments, take ownership, and solve ambiguous problems at scale.

Nice-to-have

Experience with video editors, creative canvas, animation/keyframe systems, design tools, node-graph editors, or similar.
Love films and art.
Have contributed in open-source projects, and coding for fun outside of regular work.

About Flick

Flick is defining the future interface for AI native filmmaking. Think Figma and Cursor, but for creating AI films.

Founded by Engineer who built Instagram Stories + Award winning filmmaker, we are a team of Tech + Artist.
Well-funded by top VCs.
Checkout our launch video
Award-winning AI film created using Flick
People talk about us on social

Founded:2025

Batch:F25

Team Size:2

Status:Active

Location:San Francisco

Founders

Ray Wang

Founder

Zoey Zhang

Founder

Similar Jobs

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

28. Book Review: On the Calculation of Volume

Source: https://www.stephendiehl.com/posts/calculation_of_volume/
Site: Stephen Diehl
Author: Stephen Diehl
Published: 2026-05-20
HN activity: 33 points · 11 comments
Length: 1.7K words (~8 min read)
Language: en

Solvej Balle's On the Calculation of Volume is a planned septology about a Danish antiquarian book dealer who falls out of time, and the first five volumes are one of the most original and brilliant literary projects I've read in years. The premise is the one you have seen a hundred times. The protagonist, Tara Selter, wakes up on the eighteenth of November. The day passes. She goes to sleep. She wakes up. It is the eighteenth of November. Her husband Thomas, who lives with her in a stone house in northern France, has no memory of the previous iteration. She does. It takes a familiar science fiction idea and makes it feel fresh, intimate, and deeply human. I read all five over a week in San Sebastian, sitting in the bright Atlantic light of the Basque coast while reading about a woman who can't leave a single grey rainy day in northern France, and the books were only better for the contrast. Mild spoiler warning: I'll describe the shape of each book but not its turns. Skip to the bottom if you want to come to the cycle clean.

The first volume is the small one, around two hundred pages, minimalist in both plot and prose. The minimalism is the point. Tara has returned to Clairon-sous-Bois from a book fair in Paris with a small burn on her hand from a hotel heater and a Roman sestertius in her bag, and we meet her on day one hundred and twenty-two of the loop. By then she has the day memorized to the second. The blackbird sings at the same instant every morning. The cup is where she left it. Thomas, beautifully indifferent to the cosmological catastrophe he is sleeping through, asks her about her trip. She tells him. He listens. He has listened a hundred and twenty-two times. There is something sisyphean about a marriage where one of you has to begin the conversation again from scratch every morning. The writing here is the kind of plain prose that takes a whole career to learn how to write. Short sentences. Present tense. Almost no metaphor. A naturalist's field notebook, kept by someone who has begun to understand that the field is closing in. Barbara J. Haveland's English translation is so unobtrusive you forget the book was written in another language. Volume I is a phenomenology textbook in the disguise of a novel, and the disguise is so good that the textbook keeps surprising you with feeling.

A year passes inside the day, and in the second volume Tara goes traveling. She has worked out by then that the eighteenth restarts wherever she happens to be sleeping, so she can take the loop with her. She rides trains. She crosses Europe. She follows snow up to Norway and crepuscular light down to the south, anything that might serve as evidence of the season she has been denied. The trick of Volume II is that it is a travelogue turned inside out. The world is supposed to be the still backdrop against which the traveler moves. Here the traveler is the still one. She is the same November eighteenth wherever she goes. It is the world that keeps shifting under her, a palimpsest written and overwritten on the same Wednesday, and the shifts are rendered so attentively that the book becomes a slow, hallucinatory survey of how light behaves in different latitudes when the same day is happening to it. The sestertius travels with her, opening into a lovely tangent about the Roman empire and the routes its money once took, and by the end of the book Tara's senses have sharpened to a pitch where the prose itself begins to breathe differently. The world, she writes, is whispering in a new language. Her husband, who appears in this volume mostly as someone she telephones from foreign hotels, has begun to feel the strain of being loved by a woman who is aging at a rate his calendar refuses to acknowledge.

And then, in the third volume, the project does something nobody saw coming. Tara meets someone else. His name is Henry Dale. He is a sociologist. He has been inside the day longer than she has, and he has a young son in America whom he visits every loop at his ex-wife's house. Imagine being four years old and meeting your father every morning, knowing he is the same and knowing also that he carries with him a freight of time you cannot see. The book never over-stresses the heartbreak, letting it sit the way it lets everything sit. Tara and Henry try to figure out what they are to each other. The volume is, in part, about how dignified people behave when the universe has made them, against their will, into a liminal society of two. Then Olga arrives, with her plan to reorganize the loop into a fairer society. Then Ralf, with his plan to spend each iteration of the day stopping every preventable accident on the planet. The four of them have nothing in common except the day, and the novel is too honest to pretend that the day is enough. The marriage with Thomas has by now become the book's quietest engine of dread. Tara is older. Thomas is not. Every morning he wakes up younger than the woman who has come home to him.

By Volume IV they have moved into a big house outside Bremen, and the four have become fifty. Volume IV does something I have rarely seen at this scale in serious literary fiction. The singular voice breaks. The careful "I" of the first three books gradually, and then unmistakably, becomes a "we," and the book begins to read like extended meeting minutes from the most interesting commune ever convened. The residents argue about everything. They argue about what to call themselves. They argue about whether the day should be measured from sunrise or from the moment of arrival. They argue about food, because food consumed inside the loop is gone from the loop forever, and a population of fifty is a meaningful pull on a finite breakfast. They argue about healthcare in a world where every wound resets at midnight. They argue, in other words, about the load-bearing architecture of any society, and they argue at a pace and an articulacy that is recognizably the kind of conversation that only happens when people have nothing to lose and everything to figure out. The whole project is apophatic, an attempt to build a vocabulary for their condition by exhaustively naming what it is not. The volume keeps the metaphysics inside the kitchen. The questions about language and identity never float free of the bread. Someone is always doing the dishes. The book ends on a hinge I will not describe, except to say that it earns the turn.

Volume V is the settling. The exhilaration of Volume IV gives way to something stranger and gentler, the texture of a second life slowly making itself plausible. The community has habits now. Some of the loopers have begun to write. Some have begun to teach. Some have figured out, the way people figure out anything important, that you can build a tolerable existence on a foundation of repetition if you stop arguing with the foundation. New arrivals appear at the door, and the work of welcoming them, of explaining the day to a stranger who has just discovered they are inside it, becomes a kind of vocation. The central insight of the cycle, after five books, clarifies itself. The project is the great novel of dailiness. Joyce gave us one Dublin day at six hundred pages of close attention. The series is the same Wednesday written eleven hundred times over, and somehow still not done. Not a novel that contains daily life among its themes. A novel about the daily as such. The eighteenth of November is the prosaic distilled into philosophy. Mornings. Bread. Light at a window. The same conversation begun gently for the thousandth time. What a life is, these five volumes suggest, when you take away the future and you take away the past, and you are left with the present examined at the resolution of a Vermeer. Book VI arrives in May 2027, with one more to follow. The engine, after five books, shows no sign of fatigue, and the project keeps getting larger by getting smaller.

I recommend these books to anyone who keeps a notebook and wants a beautiful, quiet, understated meditation on life wrapped in metaphysical curios. Anyone who has written down what the morning light looked like on a particular Wednesday and felt slightly embarrassed about doing it. Anyone whose work involves going back to the same thing over and over until it finally starts to make sense. If you have ever caught yourself cataloging the way your kitchen table looks at six in the morning and felt something that was neither boredom nor revelation but a third thing, calmer than both, then Solvej Balle has written the books you did not know were possible, and she has written five of them and is still going. They are, sentence by sentence, some of the most beautiful prose being published anywhere right now. They are also, taken together, a serious and unembarrassed meditation on time, on selfhood, on what a person is when she is no longer accumulating history, and on what a marriage is when only one of you is aging into it. Tara cannot leave the eighteenth of November. None of us can leave today either. Eternal recurrence treats this as a test. The absurd treats it as a climb. Balle treats it as a practice. The prosaic, attended to, is the depth. The repetition, accepted, is the meaning. The measure of a life is one you would say yes to twice, and these books leave you wondering whether her one day, lived a billion times, is really so different from our own lives.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

29. Time to talk about my writerdeck

Source: https://veronicaexplains.net/my-first-writerdeck/
Site: Veronica Explains
Author: vkc
Published: 2026-05-23
HN activity: 458 points · 278 comments
Length: 2.2K words (~10 min read)
Language: en

I have an attention problem.

A couple of weeks ago, I decided to convert my old laptop into a writerdeck, a dedicated writing device free from the distractions of the modern internet.

Lots of folks build really elaborate offline devices for this, and I'd love to do that... someday. Right now I have no shortage of projects and the point is to get writing, so I used what I had: a six-year-old laptop which still runs great, has plenty of power, but isn't getting much use anymore.

Crucially, this laptop has an excellent keyboard, and a matte screen, which makes it awesome to type on for long stretches, and functional enough in the daylight (I like to sit outside with my dog and write). It's also a System76 Galago Pro (not sponsored), which means it's already Linux friendly and has great support in the kernel.

Setting up a tty instead of a desktop

Now, you could certainly just use a regular desktop OS and keep it offline, although that's easier said than done. I don't think you can fully remove the browsers from a modern Mac or Windows PC. At least not in a supported way.

Of course, I'm a Linux user, and I have any number of options. I could have gone with a simple desktop or window manager and just not installed a browser, but I wanted something that really broke the desktop OS muscle memory and forced me into thinking about my words with intention.

I opted for a tty-based setup, using Debian (Trixie at the time of writing). Console only- no x11 or Wayland, no desktop getting in my way.

Installing Debian is easy enough. I use the text-based installer mode, and for this writerdeck, I opted to skip full-disk encryption (there's nothing on this device that isn't going to be public anyway).

Folks always tell me they get hung up on things because they don't set themselves up with sudo on Debian. If you're coming from Mint or Ubuntu or virtually any other desktop-oriented distro, this could trip you up. If you want to use sudo for admin tasks, skip adding a root password. That'll disable root and set you up as a sudo user.
Leave this blank if you want to use a sudo user! A lot of folks don't know about this quirk and get into trouble if they're coming from other distros.

On the desktop setup screen, I chose to remove all desktop features, because again, I want this thing to be a minimal device. Just me and the words, no GUI getting in my way.
I removed the selection for "Debian desktop environment" and "GNOME" here. This way it's just a tty.

When things wrap up, you'll be greeted with a bland console login. Perfect place to get started.
It's boring. Perfect.

Installing network-manager

After signing in for the first time and making sure I was up-to-date with a quick sudo apt update and a sudo apt upgrade, I chose to replace the regular network stack with the network-manager package. Mainly to get access to the very good curses tool nm-tui for connecting to networks.

nm-tui is a thousand times easier than editing config files for setting up network devices. And while I will be working mostly offline with this device when I'm away from home, I do appreciate the ability to connect it to the network to back up files should the need arise.

After installing network-manager with sudo apt install network-manager, you can use nm-tui to scan for available Wi-Fi networks and get hooked up. Depending on your hardware, you might also have WAN access here. Pretty cool.
Having a TUI for networking is a nice quality-of-life improvement.

Installing neovim and kmscon

I couldn't wait any longer, I installed neovim as soon as I could with sudo apt install neovim. I didn't want to edit with nano. Nothing personal, I'm just a vim user all the way now.

Normally I use traditional vim but I opted for neovim as I'm trying to get to know it a bit more.

Then, I installed kmscon, which for Debian Trixie needed to be added from backports.

First, I updated my Debian source list by editing the file at /etc/apt/sources.list to add the following two lines:

deb http://deb.debian.org/debian/ trixie-backports main contrib non-free non-free-firmware
deb-src http://deb.debian.org/debian/ trixie-backports main contrib non-free non-free-firmware

A quick sudo apt update and then I can simply run sudo apt install -t trixie-backports kmscon. This will install the kmscon package from backports, as well as its dependencies, and set it to automatically start on boot. Next reboot, you'll see the familiar tty, but now it's scalable with ctrl-plus and ctrl-minus, like most modern web browsers.

From here, I have a totally functional writerdeck. I could be done here and be reasonably satisfied with an offline, pleasant writing experience. But I wanted a few more nicities which I've grown accustomed to.

tmux for multiplexing and a pretty status bar

Next, I installed tmux for basic terminal tiling and a pretty status bar. This is packaged for Debian (and virtually everyone else), and is installed with sudo apt install tmux.

I also installed acpi for battery details, and light to control the screen backlight. You can install these at the same time with sudo apt install acpi light. I set these up in my .tmux.conf file, which is kept in your home directory. Here's how I used them.

ACPI for battery readouts

Once the acpi package is installed, you should be able to see your battery with acpi -b (assuming your laptop has a battery which is detected with acpi, which has worked so far on every laptop I've tried in my house).

So, to get the specific percentage and nothing more, you can pipe acpi -b into grep like so:

acpi -b | grep -m1 -o -P '.{0,2}%'


This grep is a bit hard to understand, so let's break it down:

-m1 says stop reading the file after one line. I did this because some laptops I've used have multiple batteries, and I only care about the primary battery. You can probably leave this out if acpi -b only returns a single line.
-o prints only the matched parts of the line. I don't want a large printout with the remaining time. You might!
-P interprets the pattern as a Perl-compatible regular expression. Then '.{0,2}%' gets us the percent sign and the two numbers preceding the percent. (This won't show "100%" but I can live with that, because this laptop doesn't get there anymore.)

I wanted to replace the default details in the tmux status bar with a battery readout, so I do so with the following in my .tmux.conf:

# give me a battery readout instead of the time
set-window-option -g status-right "#(acpi -b | grep -m1 -o -P '.{0,2}%')"

Light for brightness

Next, we can use the very simple light command we installed earlier to control the brightness. On my laptop, F8 and F9 have brightness indicators printed on the keys, so it's a perfect fit.

light -U 10 decreases the brightness by ten percent, and light -A 10 increases it.

So, to bind F8 and F9 to decrease/increase brightness control, I simply add this to my .tmux.conf:

# keybinding for brightness
bind -n F8 run-shell 'light -U 10' # decrease
bind -n F9 run-shell 'light -A 10' # increase


Now, next time I start tmux, I'll have brightness controls. Very neat!

Additional tmux customization

Lastly, I like the status line for tmux at the top of the screen, because neovim puts a status line at the bottom of the screen. That's achieved by adding set -g status-position top to the .tmux.conf file.

Also, I have a habit of specifying the color. I think it's green by default but I set it anyway (I might change it in the future, who knows) with set -g status-style bg=green.

So, my final tmux.conf looks like this:

# bar position and color
set -g status-position top
set -g status-style bg=green

# keybinding for brightness
bind -n F8 run-shell 'light -U 10' # decrease
bind -n F9 run-shell 'light -A 10' # increase

# give me a battery readout instead of the time
set-window-option -g status-right "#(acpi -b | grep -m1 -o -P '.{0,2}%')"

This isn't a tmux lesson, but by default, to do a split, you use Ctrl-B to break out of regular mode and into the tmux command mode, and then the % key to split vertically, or " to split horizontally. Ctrl-B, then an arrow will move your focus between panes.

Someday, I'll do a formal tmux lesson. Moving on!

neovim and vimwiki

I know a lot of folks won't want to use neovim or vim, opting instead for emacs or helix or micro or nano or blammo or something else I didn't mention (but someone's about to).

That's great. I'm happy for you. I'm a vim user though, so that's what I set up.

neovim includes some reasonably great colorschemes which you can try out with the :colorscheme option. I chose blue, which fit my retro vibe just fine, but you could pick anything you want or even write one yourself from scratch.

I added that to my .config/nvim/init.vim file with colorscheme blue, and I also added set linebreak so that way words would wrap to the next line (I don't normally do this on my desktop but this thing's one job is writing).

Lastly, I set up vimwiki, which I already covered in a separate blog post. The only thing that's changed is instead of installing vimwiki with a plugin, on Trixie it's packaged, so you can install it with sudo apt install vim-vimwiki.

Installing Syncthing

I set up syncthing according to the Syncthing docs, which are pretty good and I won't repeat those too much here.

I set up syncthing to connect my writerdeck's vimwiki folder to my server's writing folder, which is a subdirectory inside another, more private vimwiki setup. I do it this way so that if there's sensitive notes in my desktop vimwiki, they don't sync to the writerdeck. If I had encryption on this device, I wouldn't mind that though, and I might set up password-based LUKS encryption just to gain access to my vimwiki diary on the writerdeck.

The one place where I strayed from a stock syncthing setup is that because I don't have a desktop with a traditional browser, I had to set my syncthing web GUI to be listening on all addresses instead of just 127.0.0.1. I don't love this approach, but again, this thing has nothing private on it. A better way would be to set up a SOCKS proxy and connect that way, but that's a topic for a future post.

Setting it up to autologin

The last thing I did to make this writerdeck my own was to set up automatic login.

I want to be able to open this up and start writing quickly- autologin is a simple way to get there.

Autologin with kmscon

Because I installed kmscon, this is pretty easy, just update the (gasp) systemd service with sudo systemctl edit kmsconvt@tty1.service.

Then, I just added the following:

[Service]
ExecStart=
ExecStart=/usr/bin/kmscon --login -- /bin/login -f my_username_goes_here


This tells kmscon to start what comes after the -- after --login. In my case, that's the default /bin/login program with the parameter -f and then my username.

Launching tmux on boot

After kmscon signs me in, I want tmux to automatically launch into vimwiki. But only if I'm on the main tty (the default virtual terminal).

I can do this easily by adding a small bash if/then to my .bashrc:

# Launch tmux if we aren't already running tmux and we're in the default tty
if [ -z "${TMUX}" ] && [ $(tty) == "/dev/pts/0" ]; then
        exec tmux new-session -d 'vim -c VimwikiIndex' \; attach
fi


This works by checking to make sure we're not in tmux already (which would be recursive and bad), and it also makes sure we're in the first virtual tty. If those two conditions are met, then it launches a new tmux session with the command vim -c VimwikiIndex (which tells vim to connect to the Vimwiki index). It then attaches to that session.

After using it for a few projects, I love it.

I've had this thing going for a week or so now, and I've used it to write this blog post, the script for the companion video, and another future script I'm working up right now. And it's awesome.

I may extend this idea with a spell checker, or perhaps set up a "writerdeck terminal" in my workspace using an old 486, to really bring myself back to a more intentional experience (with an even better keyboard!).

The point is to write more, and to be less distracted doing so. I have always struggled immensely with the fact that the browser nags at me. I get notifications about apps needing my attention. My music player tells me the next song we're playing. It's all very convenient, and very distracting.

I'm trying to be more intentional with my tech choices. I want devices that do one thing really well, and that when I'm done with that one thing, I can put them away, and do something else. I don't want everything to follow me around everywhere.

If that's you, maybe you would benefit from a writerdeck. For me, it's been great. :)

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

30. The C64 Dead Test Font

Source: https://www.masswerk.at/nowgobang/2026/c64-dead-test-font
Site: Now Go Bang! — mass:werk / Blog
Author: mass:werk, Norbert Landsteiner
Submitted: 2026-05-24 03:57 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 129 points · 25 comments
Length: 3.8K words (~17 min read)
Language: en

May 24, 2026

A deep dive into the font of the “Dead Test” diagnostic cartridge of the C64, including an Easter egg, a look into the implementation, and, finally, some Commodore 8-bit character ROMs for download.

Recently, having a cursory look around at the Web, this yielded an alarming result: there’s apparently no documentation of the iconic font of the C64 Dead Test cartridge, no character chart, no read-out, nothing of note. A scandalous omission, we’re attempting to remedy here, for once.
(The same font, BTW, is also implemented in the more advanced Rev. 586200 diagnostic cartridge, Commodore part № 326070-01, the one using a test harness, and the similar Rev. 588220 for the SX64.)

The Cartridge Font

The C64 “Dead Test” diagnostic cartridge Rev. 718220 (Commodore part № 314139-03) famously comes with a special font, embedded in its ROM, thus not using the built-in Character ROM of the C64, in fact requiring none of the built-in ROMs to be working (hence the name), as it comes all in stand-alone package. (We’ll see later how it does this.) Its display font is somewhat special and is, to my knowledge, not used anywhere else and, maybe for this very fact, instantly recognizable to anyone who has ever seen it.

And this is what the display of the “Dead Test” cartridge looks like:
Screenshot of the C64 Dead Test diagnostic cartridge in action.
Source: zimmers.net (processed for CRT-like appearance; N.L.)

Jus as a reminder, here’s the normal font used by the C64 (here the upper-case/graphics set):
Upper-Case/Graphics characters of the C64 by screen code, range 0-127.

The Dead Test cartridge implements just 58 characters of these (screen codes $00–$39) without any reverse video characters:
Characters implemented by the C64 Dead Test diagnostic cartridge by screen code.

As the attentive reader may observe, this only implements upper-case letters, digits, and a few punctuations and mathematical operators. $1B–$1F ( [ £ ] ↑ ← ) are drawn directly from the normal character set, as are $28–$2F ( ( ) * + , − . / ). An extra blank takes the place of the "at" character ( @ ) in the normal character set at $00 (a smart move for a diagnostic cartridge, but this feature is actually never used), and the box border characters ╭ ╮ ╰ ╯ ─ │ are implemented in the range of $22–$27, where we normally find " # $ % & '. And then there’s a mysterious, C-shaped character at $21 (normally the exclamation mark ! ), which isn’t referred to anywhere in the ROM, neither as an operand nor in any data section.

(If you attempted to display any other screen codes, the fill pattern $AA, fine vertical stripes of 10101010 as in "▥", would be displayed instead, but this doesn’t happen with the cartridge.)

Visually, this is another Computer™ font, made of boxy character shapes stylized by rectangular lumps (and slightly rounded, if the resolution allows for this). There have been others, like the “901447m” character ROM for the PET:
Sample of the ‘901447m’ character ROM of unknown origin for the Commodore PET.

Clearly, these have all been inspired by the MICR (Magnetic Ink Character Recognition) character set E-13B, consisting of just 14 glyphs, the digits 0-9 and 4 additional marks:
MICR (Magnetic Ink Character Recognition) set E-18B.

The digits of the Dead Test font actually give a pretty close impression of this, much closer than most similar fonts, with just the shape of the digit “3” deviating somewhat for of a more boxy look:
Digits as rendered by the C64 Dead Test diagnostic cartridge.

The alphabetic characters (A–Z) align with this style, favoring a spread over a 6 × 7 pixels box centered at the top, with the characters “M” and “W” spreading in a wider 7 × 7 box to the right.

Admitteddly, the thin single-pixel vertical strokes won’t do well on a consumer-grade CRT color TV set, but, if you were a service technician or a professional field repair person with access to this cartridge, you probably also had access to a professional monitor (along with the cosy feeling of being somewhat special).

An Unexpected Out-of-Season Easter

It’s this close relation to the MICR E-18B font that brings us closer to the true nature of our mystery character #0x21, a character never to be displayed, since it isn’t referenced anwhere in the cartridge’s code:
C64 Dead Test diagnostic cartridge screen code #0x21.

So, what is this, a slightly misshaped or heavily stylized character “C”, maybe intended as part of the “chicken lips” logo, missing its second half?

No! — It’s the “transit” symbol of the MICR set, used as a delimiter for bank routing codes!
“Transit” symbol of the MICR set E-18B.

This is an explicit nod to the MICR set, and a legitimate Easter egg, hidden in a font!
(And its only fair and fitting that this should take the place of the exclamation mark.)

Implementation

It is a somewhat underappreciated fact that the C64 is actually two machines in one: the architecture that we dearly know as the Commodore 64, and a Commodore Max.
Commodore pamphlet “Introducing the Commodore Max Machine™.” (1982), pages 2 & 3 of 18.
→ Open in a new window/tab. · Source: archive.org.

The Commodore Max, known as the Commodore Max Machine in Japan, also as the Commodore Ultimax in the USA and as the VC-10 in Germany (announced but never released), was a short-lived attempt at a low-budget home computer featuring many of the C64 core ingredients, introduced in 1982 and discontinued the same year.
The Commodore Max packs the SID, the VIC II, the MOS 6510 and a single CIA along with just 4K (or 2K, depending on the source — I think, this is 2K usable memory with $0000–$01FF reserved for the zero-page and the processor stack, and $0400–$07FF reserved for the video memory, with a total amount of 4K addressable RAM in the range of $0000 to $0FFF), no user port and a membrane keyboard. Crucially, the Commodore Max doesn’t include any ROM and relies entirely on cartridge ROM.

The C64 has a neat trick when in it comes to cartridges: there are two pins/signals on the cartridge / expansion port, _GAME and _XROM, to configure the machine depending on the type of cartridge attached to it. If _GAME is low and _XROM is high (normal), the C64 goes into Ultimax mode for use with Commodore Max (Ultimax) cartridges.
The cartridge / expansion port of the Commodore C64.

Ultimax mode configures the C64 for the following memory map:

$0000-$0FFF  ....  RAM   (4K)
$1000-$3FFF  ....   -
$4000-$7FFF  ....   -
$8000-$9FFF  ....  ROML  (8K)
$A000-$BFFF  ....   -
$C000-$CFFF  ....   -
$D000-$DFFF  ....  I/O
$E000-$FFFF  ....  ROMH  (8K)


Like on the Commodore Max, there are now just 4K of addressable RAM ($0000–$0FFF) and two addressable 8K ROM banks (ROML at $8000–$9FFF and ROMH at $E000–$FFFF). The I/O area at $D000–$DFFF conveniently remains the same as in standard C64 mode. As we may see, the built-in C64 ROMs, including the character ROM, are banked out. Moreover, ROMH crucially includes the 6510 system vectors including the RESET vector specifying the start address. Thus, the cartridge stands entirely on its own.
(The outgoing signals _ROML and _ROMH select which cartrige ROM area is addressed. For an 8K cartridge, this is ROMH at $E000–$FFFF, which includes the system vectors required for start-up.)

Quite a number of early C64 game cartriges, like Omega Race, are actually Ultimax cartriges and, thanks to this compatibility mode, run just the same on the C64.

The Dead Test cartridge uses the same trick to circumvent the built-in ROMs of the C64: it’s an 8K Ultimax cartridge with ROM code at $E000–$FFFF and a start address (reset vector) of $E000.

The font (i.e., the character matrices) is implemented starting at $EAD8 with the remaining cartridge space filled with $AA:

→ skip the listing

58 character matrices (screen codes $00-$39)

screen code $00

EAD8: 00    ;  ........
EAD9: 00    ;  ........
EADA: 00    ;  ........
EADB: 00    ;  ........
EADC: 00    ;  ........
EADD: 00    ;  ........
EADE: 00    ;  ........
EADF: 00    ;  ........

screen code $01

EAE0: 7E    ;  .******.
EAE1: 42    ;  .*....*.
EAE2: 42    ;  .*....*.
EAE3: 7E    ;  .******.
EAE4: 46    ;  .*...**.
EAE5: 46    ;  .*...**.
EAE6: 46    ;  .*...**.
EAE7: 00    ;  ........

screen code $02

EAE8: 7E    ;  .******.
EAE9: 62    ;  .**...*.
EAEA: 62    ;  .**...*.
EAEB: 7E    ;  .******.
EAEC: 62    ;  .**...*.
EAED: 62    ;  .**...*.
EAEE: 7E    ;  .******.
EAEF: 00    ;  ........

screen code $03

EAF0: 7E    ;  .******.
EAF1: 42    ;  .*....*.
EAF2: 40    ;  .*......
EAF3: 40    ;  .*......
EAF4: 40    ;  .*......
EAF5: 42    ;  .*....*.
EAF6: 7E    ;  .******.
EAF7: 00    ;  ........

screen code $04

EAF8: 7E    ;  .******.
EAF9: 42    ;  .*....*.
EAFA: 42    ;  .*....*.
EAFB: 62    ;  .**...*.
EAFC: 62    ;  .**...*.
EAFD: 62    ;  .**...*.
EAFE: 7E    ;  .******.
EAFF: 00    ;  ........

screen code $05

EB00: 7E    ;  .******.
EB01: 60    ;  .**.....
EB02: 60    ;  .**.....
EB03: 78    ;  .****...
EB04: 70    ;  .***....
EB05: 70    ;  .***....
EB06: 7E    ;  .******.
EB07: 00    ;  ........

screen code $06

EB08: 7E    ;  .******.
EB09: 60    ;  .**.....
EB0A: 60    ;  .**.....
EB0B: 78    ;  .****...
EB0C: 70    ;  .***....
EB0D: 70    ;  .***....
EB0E: 70    ;  .***....
EB0F: 00    ;  ........

screen code $07

EB10: 7E    ;  .******.
EB11: 42    ;  .*....*.
EB12: 40    ;  .*......
EB13: 6E    ;  .**.***.
EB14: 62    ;  .**...*.
EB15: 62    ;  .**...*.
EB16: 7E    ;  .******.
EB17: 00    ;  ........

screen code $08

EB18: 42    ;  .*....*.
EB19: 42    ;  .*....*.
EB1A: 42    ;  .*....*.
EB1B: 7E    ;  .******.
EB1C: 62    ;  .**...*.
EB1D: 62    ;  .**...*.
EB1E: 62    ;  .**...*.
EB1F: 00    ;  ........

screen code $09

EB20: 10    ;  ...*....
EB21: 10    ;  ...*....
EB22: 10    ;  ...*....
EB23: 18    ;  ...**...
EB24: 18    ;  ...**...
EB25: 18    ;  ...**...
EB26: 18    ;  ...**...
EB27: 00    ;  ........

screen code $0A

EB28: 04    ;  .....*..
EB29: 04    ;  .....*..
EB2A: 04    ;  .....*..
EB2B: 06    ;  .....**.
EB2C: 06    ;  .....**.
EB2D: 66    ;  .**..**.
EB2E: 7E    ;  .******.
EB2F: 00    ;  ........

screen code $0B

EB30: 42    ;  .*....*.
EB31: 44    ;  .*...*..
EB32: 48    ;  .*..*...
EB33: 7E    ;  .******.
EB34: 66    ;  .**..**.
EB35: 66    ;  .**..**.
EB36: 66    ;  .**..**.
EB37: 00    ;  ........

screen code $0C

EB38: 40    ;  .*......
EB39: 40    ;  .*......
EB3A: 40    ;  .*......
EB3B: 60    ;  .**.....
EB3C: 60    ;  .**.....
EB3D: 60    ;  .**.....
EB3E: 7E    ;  .******.
EB3F: 00    ;  ........

screen code $0D

EB40: 43    ;  .*....**
EB41: 67    ;  .**..***
EB42: 5B    ;  .*.**.**
EB43: 43    ;  .*....**
EB44: 43    ;  .*....**
EB45: 43    ;  .*....**
EB46: 43    ;  .*....**
EB47: 00    ;  ........

screen code $0E

EB48: E2    ;  ***...*.
EB49: D2    ;  **.*..*.
EB4A: CA    ;  **..*.*.
EB4B: C6    ;  **...**.
EB4C: C2    ;  **....*.
EB4D: C2    ;  **....*.
EB4E: C2    ;  **....*.
EB4F: 00    ;  ........

screen code $0F

EB50: 7E    ;  .******.
EB51: 42    ;  .*....*.
EB52: 42    ;  .*....*.
EB53: 46    ;  .*...**.
EB54: 46    ;  .*...**.
EB55: 46    ;  .*...**.
EB56: 7E    ;  .******.
EB57: 00    ;  ........

screen code $10

EB58: 7E    ;  .******.
EB59: 42    ;  .*....*.
EB5A: 42    ;  .*....*.
EB5B: 7E    ;  .******.
EB5C: 60    ;  .**.....
EB5D: 60    ;  .**.....
EB5E: 60    ;  .**.....
EB5F: 00    ;  ........

screen code $11

EB60: 7E    ;  .******.
EB61: 42    ;  .*....*.
EB62: 42    ;  .*....*.
EB63: 62    ;  .**...*.
EB64: 6A    ;  .**.*.*.
EB65: 66    ;  .**..**.
EB66: 7E    ;  .******.
EB67: 00    ;  ........

screen code $12

EB68: 7E    ;  .******.
EB69: 42    ;  .*....*.
EB6A: 42    ;  .*....*.
EB6B: 7E    ;  .******.
EB6C: 68    ;  .**.*...
EB6D: 64    ;  .**..*..
EB6E: 62    ;  .**...*.
EB6F: 00    ;  ........

screen code $13

EB70: 7E    ;  .******.
EB71: 42    ;  .*....*.
EB72: 40    ;  .*......
EB73: 7E    ;  .******.
EB74: 02    ;  ......*.
EB75: 62    ;  .**...*.
EB76: 7E    ;  .******.
EB77: 00    ;  ........

screen code $14

EB78: 7E    ;  .******.
EB79: 18    ;  ...**...
EB7A: 18    ;  ...**...
EB7B: 18    ;  ...**...
EB7C: 18    ;  ...**...
EB7D: 18    ;  ...**...
EB7E: 18    ;  ...**...
EB7F: 00    ;  ........

screen code $15

EB80: 62    ;  .**...*.
EB81: 62    ;  .**...*.
EB82: 62    ;  .**...*.
EB83: 62    ;  .**...*.
EB84: 62    ;  .**...*.
EB85: 62    ;  .**...*.
EB86: 3C    ;  ..****..
EB87: 00    ;  ........

screen code $16

EB88: 62    ;  .**...*.
EB89: 62    ;  .**...*.
EB8A: 62    ;  .**...*.
EB8B: 62    ;  .**...*.
EB8C: 62    ;  .**...*.
EB8D: 24    ;  ..*..*..
EB8E: 18    ;  ...**...
EB8F: 00    ;  ........

screen code $17

EB90: C2    ;  **....*.
EB91: C2    ;  **....*.
EB92: C2    ;  **....*.
EB93: C2    ;  **....*.
EB94: DA    ;  **.**.*.
EB95: E6    ;  ***..**.
EB96: C2    ;  **....*.
EB97: 00    ;  ........

screen code $18

EB98: 62    ;  .**...*.
EB99: 62    ;  .**...*.
EB9A: 24    ;  ..*..*..
EB9B: 18    ;  ...**...
EB9C: 24    ;  ..*..*..
EB9D: 62    ;  .**...*.
EB9E: 62    ;  .**...*.
EB9F: 00    ;  ........

screen code $19

EBA0: 62    ;  .**...*.
EBA1: 62    ;  .**...*.
EBA2: 62    ;  .**...*.
EBA3: 34    ;  ..**.*..
EBA4: 18    ;  ...**...
EBA5: 18    ;  ...**...
EBA6: 18    ;  ...**...
EBA7: 00    ;  ........

screen code $1A

EBA8: 7F    ;  .*******
EBA9: 03    ;  ......**
EBAA: 06    ;  .....**.
EBAB: 08    ;  ....*...
EBAC: 10    ;  ...*....
EBAD: 60    ;  .**.....
EBAE: 7F    ;  .*******
EBAF: 00    ;  ........

screen code $1B

EBB0: 3C    ;  ..****..
EBB1: 30    ;  ..**....
EBB2: 30    ;  ..**....
EBB3: 30    ;  ..**....
EBB4: 30    ;  ..**....
EBB5: 30    ;  ..**....
EBB6: 3C    ;  ..****..
EBB7: 00    ;  ........

screen code $1C

EBB8: 0E    ;  ....***.
EBB9: 10    ;  ...*....
EBBA: 30    ;  ..**....
EBBB: FE    ;  *******.
EBBC: 30    ;  ..**....
EBBD: 60    ;  .**.....
EBBE: FF    ;  ********
EBBF: 00    ;  ........

screen code $1D

EBC0: 3C    ;  ..****..
EBC1: 0C    ;  ....**..
EBC2: 0C    ;  ....**..
EBC3: 0C    ;  ....**..
EBC4: 0C    ;  ....**..
EBC5: 0C    ;  ....**..
EBC6: 3C    ;  ..****..
EBC7: 00    ;  ........

screen code $1E

EBC8: 00    ;  ........
EBC9: 18    ;  ...**...
EBCA: 3C    ;  ..****..
EBCB: 7E    ;  .******.
EBCC: 18    ;  ...**...
EBCD: 18    ;  ...**...
EBCE: 18    ;  ...**...
EBCF: 18    ;  ...**...

screen code $1F

EBD0: 00    ;  ........
EBD1: 10    ;  ...*....
EBD2: 30    ;  ..**....
EBD3: 7F    ;  .*******
EBD4: 7F    ;  .*******
EBD5: 30    ;  ..**....
EBD6: 10    ;  ...*....
EBD7: 00    ;  ........

screen code $20

EBD8: 00    ;  ........
EBD9: 00    ;  ........
EBDA: 00    ;  ........
EBDB: 00    ;  ........
EBDC: 00    ;  ........
EBDD: 00    ;  ........
EBDE: 00    ;  ........
EBDF: 00    ;  ........

screen code $21

EBE0: 0E    ;  ....***.
EBE1: 0E    ;  ....***.
EBE2: 60    ;  .**.....
EBE3: 60    ;  .**.....
EBE4: 60    ;  .**.....
EBE5: 60    ;  .**.....
EBE6: 0E    ;  ....***.
EBE7: 0E    ;  ....***.

screen code $22

EBE8: 00    ;  ........
EBE9: 00    ;  ........
EBEA: 00    ;  ........
EBEB: 07    ;  .....***
EBEC: 0F    ;  ....****
EBED: 1C    ;  ...***..
EBEE: 18    ;  ...**...
EBEF: 18    ;  ...**...

screen code $23

EBF0: 00    ;  ........
EBF1: 00    ;  ........
EBF2: 00    ;  ........
EBF3: E0    ;  ***.....
EBF4: F0    ;  ****....
EBF5: 38    ;  ..***...
EBF6: 18    ;  ...**...
EBF7: 18    ;  ...**...

screen code $24

EBF8: 18    ;  ...**...
EBF9: 18    ;  ...**...
EBFA: 1C    ;  ...***..
EBFB: 0F    ;  ....****
EBFC: 07    ;  .....***
EBFD: 00    ;  ........
EBFE: 00    ;  ........
EBFF: 00    ;  ........

screen code $25

EC00: 18    ;  ...**...
EC01: 18    ;  ...**...
EC02: 38    ;  ..***...
EC03: F0    ;  ****....
EC04: E0    ;  ***.....
EC05: 00    ;  ........
EC06: 00    ;  ........
EC07: 00    ;  ........

screen code $26

EC08: 00    ;  ........
EC09: 00    ;  ........
EC0A: 00    ;  ........
EC0B: FF    ;  ********
EC0C: FF    ;  ********
EC0D: 00    ;  ........
EC0E: 00    ;  ........
EC0F: 00    ;  ........

screen code $27

EC10: 18    ;  ...**...
EC11: 18    ;  ...**...
EC12: 18    ;  ...**...
EC13: 18    ;  ...**...
EC14: 18    ;  ...**...
EC15: 18    ;  ...**...
EC16: 18    ;  ...**...
EC17: 18    ;  ...**...

screen code $28

EC18: 0C    ;  ....**..
EC19: 18    ;  ...**...
EC1A: 30    ;  ..**....
EC1B: 30    ;  ..**....
EC1C: 30    ;  ..**....
EC1D: 18    ;  ...**...
EC1E: 0C    ;  ....**..
EC1F: 00    ;  ........

screen code $29

EC20: 30    ;  ..**....
EC21: 18    ;  ...**...
EC22: 0C    ;  ....**..
EC23: 0C    ;  ....**..
EC24: 0C    ;  ....**..
EC25: 18    ;  ...**...
EC26: 30    ;  ..**....
EC27: 00    ;  ........

screen code $2A

EC28: 00    ;  ........
EC29: 66    ;  .**..**.
EC2A: 3C    ;  ..****..
EC2B: FF    ;  ********
EC2C: 3C    ;  ..****..
EC2D: 66    ;  .**..**.
EC2E: 00    ;  ........
EC2F: 00    ;  ........

screen code $2B

EC30: 00    ;  ........
EC31: 18    ;  ...**...
EC32: 18    ;  ...**...
EC33: 7E    ;  .******.
EC34: 18    ;  ...**...
EC35: 18    ;  ...**...
EC36: 00    ;  ........
EC37: 00    ;  ........

screen code $2C

EC38: 00    ;  ........
EC39: 00    ;  ........
EC3A: 00    ;  ........
EC3B: 00    ;  ........
EC3C: 00    ;  ........
EC3D: 18    ;  ...**...
EC3E: 18    ;  ...**...
EC3F: 30    ;  ..**....

screen code $2D

EC40: 00    ;  ........
EC41: 00    ;  ........
EC42: 00    ;  ........
EC43: 7E    ;  .******.
EC44: 00    ;  ........
EC45: 00    ;  ........
EC46: 00    ;  ........
EC47: 00    ;  ........

screen code $2E

EC48: 00    ;  ........
EC49: 00    ;  ........
EC4A: 00    ;  ........
EC4B: 00    ;  ........
EC4C: 00    ;  ........
EC4D: 18    ;  ...**...
EC4E: 18    ;  ...**...
EC4F: 00    ;  ........

screen code $2F

EC50: 00    ;  ........
EC51: 03    ;  ......**
EC52: 06    ;  .....**.
EC53: 0C    ;  ....**..
EC54: 18    ;  ...**...
EC55: 30    ;  ..**....
EC56: 60    ;  .**.....
EC57: 00    ;  ........

screen code $30

EC58: 7E    ;  .******.
EC59: 42    ;  .*....*.
EC5A: 42    ;  .*....*.
EC5B: 42    ;  .*....*.
EC5C: 42    ;  .*....*.
EC5D: 42    ;  .*....*.
EC5E: 7E    ;  .******.
EC5F: 00    ;  ........

screen code $31

EC60: 30    ;  ..**....
EC61: 30    ;  ..**....
EC62: 10    ;  ...*....
EC63: 10    ;  ...*....
EC64: 3C    ;  ..****..
EC65: 3C    ;  ..****..
EC66: 3C    ;  ..****..
EC67: 00    ;  ........

screen code $32

EC68: 7E    ;  .******.
EC69: 02    ;  ......*.
EC6A: 02    ;  ......*.
EC6B: 7E    ;  .******.
EC6C: 40    ;  .*......
EC6D: 40    ;  .*......
EC6E: 7E    ;  .******.
EC6F: 00    ;  ........

screen code $33

EC70: 7E    ;  .******.
EC71: 02    ;  ......*.
EC72: 02    ;  ......*.
EC73: 7E    ;  .******.
EC74: 06    ;  .....**.
EC75: 06    ;  .....**.
EC76: 7E    ;  .******.
EC77: 00    ;  ........

screen code $34

EC78: 60    ;  .**.....
EC79: 60    ;  .**.....
EC7A: 60    ;  .**.....
EC7B: 66    ;  .**..**.
EC7C: 7E    ;  .******.
EC7D: 06    ;  .....**.
EC7E: 06    ;  .....**.
EC7F: 00    ;  ........

screen code $35

EC80: 7E    ;  .******.
EC81: 40    ;  .*......
EC82: 40    ;  .*......
EC83: 7E    ;  .******.
EC84: 02    ;  ......*.
EC85: 02    ;  ......*.
EC86: 7E    ;  .******.
EC87: 00    ;  ........

screen code $36

EC88: 78    ;  .****...
EC89: 48    ;  .*..*...
EC8A: 40    ;  .*......
EC8B: 7E    ;  .******.
EC8C: 42    ;  .*....*.
EC8D: 42    ;  .*....*.
EC8E: 7E    ;  .******.
EC8F: 00    ;  ........

screen code $37

EC90: 7E    ;  .******.
EC91: 42    ;  .*....*.
EC92: 04    ;  .....*..
EC93: 08    ;  ....*...
EC94: 08    ;  ....*...
EC95: 08    ;  ....*...
EC96: 08    ;  ....*...
EC97: 00    ;  ........

screen code $38

EC98: 3C    ;  ..****..
EC99: 24    ;  ..*..*..
EC9A: 24    ;  ..*..*..
EC9B: 3C    ;  ..****..
EC9C: 66    ;  .**..**.
EC9D: 66    ;  .**..**.
EC9E: 7E    ;  .******.
EC9F: 00    ;  ........

screen code $39

ECA0: 7E    ;  .******.
ECA1: 42    ;  .*....*.
ECA2: 42    ;  .*....*.
ECA3: 7E    ;  .******.
ECA4: 06    ;  .....**.
ECA5: 06    ;  .....**.
ECA6: 06    ;  .....**.
ECA7: 00    ;  ........



Notably, the order (with the exception of the border characters) follows the usual PETSCII screen code order. However, since we’re no longer relying on any C64 ROM, the order and what screen codes actually represent what is merely convention at this point. We simply put a code in the video RAM at $0400–$07FF and whatever character matrices are found at the corresponding address in the cartridge ROM are displayed by the hardware, which is in this case configured by the cartridge code to look up the respective character matrices at $EAD8. In Ultimax mode, there is no further meaning to screen codes implied.

E.g., Omega Race implements its character matrices at $F800 in the order: BLANK 0-9 A-Z ( ) - ; ., followed by various graphics characters.

At this point, it should be also clear that this is all there is. There are no further character matrices implemented and no reverse images of the above glyphs. If we were to address any screen code beyond $39, we’d address the $AA fill area. But there’s no code in the cartridge ROM attempting this.

A Dead Test Font for All

If you followed this until here, dear reader, you’re clearly a fan of the Dead Test font. Wouldn’t it be nice to use it whenever you want? Now you can! You deserve it.
I give you (© Sir Clive Sinclair) a Dead Test Font for all!

A Dead Test font for you (C64), and a Dead Test font for you (VIC-20), and a Dead Test font for you (PET)…

For the purpose of general use, I’ve devised a “sympathetic” lower-case set to go along with the upper-case glyphs as found on the cartridge, and also an “@” symbol, as well. Other clyphs are just the same as in the respective standard character ROM. (Sadly, there isn’t really a space for the #0x21 Easter egg, AKA transit symbol, if we want to stick to the general use idea.)

And this is what it looks like:
C64, upper-case / graphics set.
C64, lower-case / upper-case set.

And for the PET (similar for the VIC-20, but with “£” instead of the backslash and including reverse character forms), available in the old PET 2001 format and for newer PETs:
PET, upper-case / graphics set.
PET, lower-case / upper-case set.

And, because I have a soft spot for those Japanese character ROMs, also in the various katakana variants (here for the PET, but also for the VIC-1001 and the C64):
PET, upper-case / katakana set.

Download them here:

dead-test-font-roms.zip (zip archive, 30.3 KB, includes 7 ROM images and read-me file).

— And that’s all folks. —

Norbert Landsteiner,
Vienna, 2026-05-24

