Hacker News Top 30 — 2026-07-26

Generated on 2026-07-26 03:25 UTC

1. JetZero

Source: https://www.jetzero.aero
Site: jetzero.aero
Submitter: lisper (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-07-26 02:55 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 35 points · 18 comments
Length: 37 words (~1 min read)
Language: en

Made up of leaders from aerospace, technology, and mobility from around the world. Half of the team is located at our Long Beach CA campus, with other teammates working remotely near our suppliers, future customers, and partners.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

2. Stolen Buttons

Source: https://anatolyzenkov.com/stolen-buttons
Site: Stolen Buttons
Author: Anatoly Zenkov
Submitted: 2026-07-20 09:23 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 620 points · 151 comments
Length: 17 words (~1 min read)
Language: en

Every website I visit, I “steal” a button from it. Check out my stash!

About Button Stealer

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

3. Systems and Delays

Source: https://martin.janiczek.cz/2026/07/24/systems-and-delays.html
Site: Martin Janiczek
Author: Martin Janiczek
Published: 2026-07-24
HN activity: 28 points · 6 comments
Length: 1.3K words (~6 min read)
Language: en-US

where delays are shown to be counterintuitive.

Leaving the house (and the country) for a week or two during the holiday season is a great time to get out of my stereotypical ways of passing free time (entirely too much YouTube, Lobste.rs, HackerNews and BlueSky) and try something else.

For my recent vacation I have packed some grid paper to make a bitmap font, and two books: the first one was Nachové pustiny: a Czech post-apocalyptic novel to get some inspiration for my “Fallout but in Czech Republic” MMO game, and the other was Thinking in Systems: a book recommended at work (and bought with my work education budget) which was collecting dust in my bookshelf for a good few months now.

I’m happy to announce I managed to get through all three of these goals: I’ve created a bitmap font (though I still have kerning and accents to go through), devoured the post-apo novel (it was okay), and got through the systems book!

Thinking in Systems introduces a framework and a visual language of sources and sinks, stocks and flows, feedback loops and systems that (more often than not) emerge bottom-up from them.

It all roughly corresponds to mathematical models and differential equations, though the book doesn’t go into detail of those and only mentions the actual formulas for its examples in an appendix.

Delays are weird

There was one really cool chapter that IMHO is the highlight of the whole book. It concerns delays.

The running example (see image above) is a car dealership manager shepherding a stock of cars on their parking lot, aiming for it to always be 10x the amount of cars sold. When the customer demand rises, she starts ordering more cars to cover the gap.

Delay-less system

In an ideal world there are no delays: she immediately sees an increased demand and the discrepancy between the current stock and the ideal one, she immediately sends an order to bring more cars in, and the cars immediatelly arrive.

Also, in this example the time granularity is days, so imagine that at the end of the day she sees 30 cars got sold, sends an order for 30 cars and they arrive the next morning.

Let’s first see the constants in our model that won’t be affected by the delays:

The customer demand starts at 20 cars each day, then ramps up to 22 cars each day, with a spike of 70 cars on one specific day.

Sales are min(customer demand, inventory), which in all examples below will equal customer demand, as we have enough cars ready, but you can imagine getting out of stock if demand gets high enough fast enough.

Our manager calculates the desired inventory as sales * 10. Might be simplistic but hey, it’s an example.

You could also imagine us later averaging over sales from past N days and basing the desired inventory off of that, and thus introducing yet another delay into the system, but I’ve omitted it from this blogpost as it doesn’t touch what I want to illustrate.

So, how does the delay-less model behave?

BTW, I have written a Monte Carlo simulator myself in Elm while reading the book—it lists the pseudocode formulas for the examples in this blogpost—but a spreadsheet would suffice, and there are other tools to deal with these differential equation models. Heck, there’s a free graphical webapp built on top of a JS library showing off the same example I do in one of its examples. I guess the book is influential.

This model has no delays, but it has an issue with overreacting to the random spikes in customer demand by buying too many cars which then take forever to sell, and more importantly it’s unrealistic: in the real world everything has a bit of a delay. The orders take time to process, the cars take time to arrive at the dealership lot, and so on. We’ll call that the delivery delay.

That seems like a bad delay, but delays don’t need to always be bad: consider that the manager might want to not overreact to those random spikes. She had ordered 550 cars because of a spike, when she normally orders only around 20 a day! Instead she might want to get to the desired inventory slowly over time by ordering only half of the discrepancy, or a third, etc. If on the next day things get back to normal, we’ll be able to ride the wave much more smoothly without overreacting. Let’s call this divisor the response delay.

System with delays

Let’s run the model with these two delays and see:

delivery delay: 5 days (from me sending the order to the cars arriving on the lot)
response delay divisor: 2 (if I see a discrepancy of 30 cars, I’ll only order 15 today.)

What? What just happened? We thought we’re doing everything right, the response delay was a good thing!

Well it is. But the combination of the two delays made our system oscillate! It never stabilizes even if the customer demand remains constant afterwards.

The manager is caught in a vile cycle of ordering too many cars, then ordering more and more the following days before the first order arrives. Once orders start arriving, she now has too many cars and ends up not ordering any more while waiting for the inventory to get back to the ideal levels. But then with more car sales the inventory dips below the ideal again and she starts the cycle again.

I’d be interested in learning what, mathematically, makes these oscillations inevitable. Some more math-heavy book on these models and differential equations will probably explain that. For now let’s just take the oscillations caused by delays for a fact.

Shorter delays: surely the fix?

Now you might think that since delays got us into this mess, we should minimize them as much as possible. Shorten the feedback loop and all. But remember, we introduced the response delay to be more resilient towards random spikes. Anyways, let’s try and see what happens:

delivery delay: 5 days (we can’t speed up this one)
response delay divisor: 1 (be as fast as we can: buy the exact amount we’re missing at end of day)

Hm. As you can see, trying to be faster made things worse: our inventory of cars now oscillates much more: cycles of shooting up from 132 to 518, while we’d like to be around 220. Not to mention having to have 1160 cars in our lot at once after the spike! This is even worse than the no-delays scenario! Is there any hope?

Longer delays: Take it easy, Dude…

Just to see what will happen: let’s simulate a more patient manager: one that spreads out the restocking over a longer period of time. Let’s make our response delay divisor larger and try 6. When we see a discrepancy of 30 cars at the end of the day, let’s just order 5 instead of 10 or 15 or 30.

delivery delay: 5 days (still out of our control)
response delay divisor: 6 (slower response! longer delay!)

Wow! The oscillations died out and stabilized!

Conclusion

This was pretty counterintuitive to me when I read it. Delays intuitively seem like something you want to minimize. But here, shortening a delay made things worse and making it longer made things more predictable and less wasteful.

In the later parts of the book Donella Meadows mentions short feedback loops; there’s no clear cut rule that you could apply blindly. Make a model of your system, try different parameters, see how it behaves.

Many managers and leaders take the lever that the researchers provide, and crank it full speed, wrong direction. You might think you know which way is the correct one, but maybe, just maybe, get insight into how your system would behave in both directions and act on data instead of on intuition.

P.S.

Feel free to play around with the toy simulator for this example. The code is at Github.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

4. Clinical failure rates over the decades: yikes

Source: https://www.science.org/content/blog-post/clinical-failure-rates-over-decades-yikes
Site: science.org
Submitter: EA-3167 (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-07-25 22:57 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 62 points · 34 comments

Scrape failed: http 403

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

5. Inflect-Micro-v2: complete voice in 9.36M parameters

Source: https://huggingface.co/owensong/Inflect-Micro-v2
Site: huggingface.co
Submitter: nateb2022 (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-07-26 00:36 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 31 points · 3 comments
Length: 1.9K words (~9 min read)

Inflect-Micro-v2

Complete local text-to-waveform speech synthesis under 10M parameters.
Fixed-voice English TTS with deterministic seeds, long-text handling, and CPU or CUDA inference.

A note from Owen

I built and funded Inflect v2 independently. If this release finds a real audience, I would like to continue the project with a broader v3, which might include things like more langauges, voices, and stability improvements. If the model is useful to you, leaving a like on Hugging Face genuinely helps more people discover it.

9,356,513 deployable parameters · 37.53 MB FP32 · 24 kHz mono output

Inflect v2 uses one public API across two sizes: Micro prioritizes quality below 10M parameters; Nano prioritizes footprint below 4M.
Explore this model card

Listen

These are held-out text generations, not reconstructions of training audio. Each transcript is shown exactly as passed to the public frontend.

Test Exact transcript Generated audio
Conversational It wasn't until later that I realized what had actually happened.
Punctuation First, close the window; second, turn off the lamp; finally, lock the door.
Numbers The package weighs twelve point six kilograms and arrived on July twenty-first.
Names and places Gwendolyn photographed the eucalyptus trees outside Ljubljana.
Technical The system runs on three core components that all have to stay in sync.

Evaluation

No single metric captures TTS quality. Inflect v2 reports human preference, predicted naturalness, multi-ASR intelligibility, complete footprint, and runtime separately rather than compressing them into one unverifiable score.

Community preference ↑ UTMOS22 ↑ Two-ASR semantic WER ↓ Complete FP32 weights ↓ 4-thread CPU throughput ↑
66.2% 4.395 3.99% 37.53 MB 6.28× real-time

The headline row always refers to Inflect-Micro-v2. Detailed competitor results and protocol boundaries are kept visible below.

Comparison set. Results include KittenTTS Nano, Piper Low, and Supertonic 3, established compact or local TTS baselines with larger deployable weight footprints than both Inflect releases. Weight sizes are compared at package level, and no single metric is treated as proof of overall superiority.

1. Human blind preference

Inflect-Micro-v2 recorded a 66.2% preference rate (21 wins · 10 losses · 3 ties) in the final anonymous community study. Systems were hidden, left/right order was randomized, and ties count as half a win. This is descriptive community evidence, not formal MOS.

2. Predicted naturalness versus footprint

The UTMOS22 run used 500 identical unseen prompts per voice. KittenTTS and Piper are equal-weight two-voice means; their observed voice ranges appear as whiskers. Supertonic 3-step is reported below the plotted range rather than flattening every other system.

Inflect-Micro-v2: 4.395 UTMOS22, 95% bootstrap CI 4.381–4.408. UTMOS22 is a learned predictor, not human MOS.

3. Intelligibility on unseen text

The headline score is the equal-weight mean of Qwen3-ASR and Nemotron 3.5 corpus WER for every system. Whisper is excluded consistently from the headline because it produced insertion-heavy hallucinations on a subset of otherwise intelligible Supertonic 8-step clips. It is not deleted: the complete three-ASR evidence remains below.
Open the complete three-ASR audit

System / voice Qwen3-ASR ↓ Nemotron 3.5 ↓ Whisper large-v3 ↓
Inflect-Micro-v2 2.52% 5.45% 2.73%
Inflect-Nano-v2 2.79% 5.63% 2.65%
KittenTTS Nano · Bruno 2.15% 3.96% 2.17%
KittenTTS Nano · Hugo 2.39% 3.80% 2.11%
Piper Low · Danny 2.62% 5.60% 2.55%
Piper Low · Ryan 2.81% 5.51% 2.87%
Supertonic 3 · M2 · 3-step 3.03% 6.04% 3.22%
Supertonic 3 · M2 · 8-step 2.05% 3.56% 8.08%

For Inflect-Micro-v2, the individual results are 2.52% Qwen3-ASR, 5.45% Nemotron 3.5, and 2.73% Whisper large-v3. The former three-model mean, 3.57%, is retained only as a descriptive audit value and is not used as the headline score.
Open evaluator robustness and error-category diagnostics

These views are diagnostics, not additional leaderboards. They show where the recognizers disagree and which prompt categories still produce recoverable transcription errors.

4. CPU runtime

Both Inflect releases synthesize comfortably faster than real time on CPU. The managed reference run used a Hugging Face CPU Upgrade instance (8 vCPU, 32 GB RAM) with four framework threads, end-to-end text-to-waveform timing, and 100 fixed Modern400 prompts. Three complete passes were recorded; the first cache-building pass was excluded and the table pools passes two and three.

Release Steady-state RTF ↓ Audio / wall time ↑
Inflect-Micro-v2 0.1593 6.28×
Inflect-Nano-v2 0.0933 10.72×

These are package-level results from the public PyTorch runtime, not a claim that Inflect is the fastest compact TTS system. Hardware, frontend behavior, framework, compilation, and thread policy all affect small-model measurements.
Open directional compact-system speed context

The same managed CPU and four-thread policy were used for a shorter comparator pass: the identical 50-prompt prefix, repeated twice. KittenTTS and Piper are equal-work pooled across their two tested voices.

System Audio / wall time ↑
Piper Low 31.37×
KittenTTS Nano 13.33×
Inflect-Nano-v2 10.72×
Supertonic 3 · 3-step 10.15×
Inflect-Micro-v2 6.28×
Supertonic 3 · 8-step 4.37×

Because Inflect uses the larger 100-prompt steady-state run while comparator rows use the shorter 50-prompt confirmation pass, this table is deployment context rather than a perfectly matched speed leaderboard. Several comparators also use optimized ONNX runtimes, while the published Inflect benchmark above uses the canonical PyTorch runtime. The separately released Inflect ONNX path has not been substituted into those benchmark numbers.

5. Complete weight footprint

Voice variants sharing the same weights are merged. Inflect totals include the integrated waveform decoder.
Open the frozen evaluation protocol

Modern400 uses 400 identical unseen English prompts per system: 200 fixed modern/stress prompts plus 200 deterministic FLEURS en_us test prompts.
Exact-text exclusion was checked against 87,362 training transcripts.
All ASR inputs are resampled to 16 kHz and scored with the same disclosed English normalizer.
UTMOS22 uses tarepan/SpeechMOS v1.2.0 on a separate 500-prompt generation set.
Headline intervals use 10,000 bootstrap samples.
The Modern400 corpus SHA-256 is b7504ce2dce44a2da82770a6a5dfd2a034fe17e2113980f8a69663ade417a34c.
Prompts, hypotheses, compressed row-level reports, and summaries ship under evaluation/final/.
Runtime is evaluated separately because framework, thread policy, compilation, and host load can dominate small-model comparisons.

Choose the right Inflect

Inflect-Nano-v2 Inflect-Micro-v2
Complete parameters 3,966,721 9,356,513
FP32 weights 15.97 MB 37.53 MB
Positioning Smallest practical footprint Strongest Inflect v2 quality
24 kHz waveform decoder Included Included
Python API and frontend Same Same

Inflect-Micro-v2 is the quality-focused member of the family. Both models use the same public API and complete text-to-waveform packaging.

Run locally

Install

python -m pip install --upgrade huggingface_hub
hf download owensong/Inflect-Micro-v2 --local-dir Inflect-Micro-v2
cd Inflect-Micro-v2
python -m pip install -r requirements.txt


This uses the Hub's version-aware downloader and retrieves the complete repository. A Git clone also works, but hf download is the recommended path for ordinary model installation.

Python

from inference import InflectTTS

tts = InflectTTS(".", device="cpu")
tts.save(
    "A small voice can still have something meaningful to say.",
    "sample.wav",
    speed=1.0,
    variation=0.667,
    seed=7,
)


Download through the Hub

import sys
from huggingface_hub import snapshot_download

model_dir = snapshot_download("owensong/Inflect-Micro-v2")
sys.path.insert(0, model_dir)

from inference import InflectTTS

tts = InflectTTS(model_dir, device="cpu")
sample_rate, waveform = tts.synthesize("The complete model runs locally.")


The result is a 24 kHz mono float32 waveform. Long input is split at punctuation-aware boundaries, synthesized chunk by chunk, and joined with controlled pauses.

ONNX Runtime

The official verified FP32 export is published separately as Inflect-Micro-v2-ONNX. It supports dynamic lengths, CPU/CUDA/DirectML provider selection, deterministic seeds, and the same long-text wrapper without importing PyTorch:

git clone https://huggingface.co/owensong/Inflect-Micro-v2-ONNX
cd Inflect-Micro-v2-ONNX
python -m pip install -r onnx/requirements.txt
python onnx/inference_onnx.py \
  --text "The complete model now runs through ONNX Runtime." \
  --output sample-onnx.wav \
  --provider cpu \
  --seed 7


The neural model is split into duration.onnx and decode.onnx; together they contain the complete learned text-to-waveform path. The English eSpeak-ng frontend remains CPU-side code. See the ONNX repository for graph contracts, provenance, parity measurements, browser deployment, and re-export instructions.

Release profile

Local runtime Long-text handling
CPU and CUDA inference through the same Python API and CLI. Punctuation-aware segmentation with controlled pauses and edge fades.
Repeatable output Auditable evaluation
Fixed seeds reproduce the same latent sample on the same runtime stack. Frozen prompts, raw ASR hypotheses, intervals, hashes, and per-system reports are included.
Architecture and parameter budget

Inflect v2 is a parameter-efficient VITS-family end-to-end text-to-waveform generator with an English phoneme frontend, monotonic alignment, stochastic latent synthesis, residual coupling flow, and an integrated alias-reduced neural waveform decoder.

Component Inflect-Micro-v2
Latent channels 192
Text hidden channels 96
Encoder layers / heads 3 / 2
Feed-forward channels 768
Flow coupling blocks 4
Initial decoder channels 320
Upsample rates 8, 8, 2, 2
Training segment 16,384 samples
Output 24 kHz mono waveform

The release describes the deployable architecture. Private corpus-construction and optimization details are not part of this open-weight package.
Controls, determinism, and long text

Control Default Public range Meaning
speed 1.0 0.5–2.0 Lower is slower; higher is faster.
variation 0.667 0.0–1.0 Lower is steadier; higher samples more latent variation.
seed 0 integer Repeats the same stochastic sample on the same runtime stack.

Long passages are punctuation-aware chunks, not one unlimited autoregressive pass. Chunk boundaries receive short pauses and edge fades. See docs/API.md for waveform contracts and concurrency notes.
Data, voice, and adaptation status

The release contains one fixed synthetic English voice. The package does not redistribute a real-speaker recording corpus, does not claim the voice as the identity of a real person, and requires no reference audio or external model at inference.

This release is inference-first. New-voice and new-language adaptation are not currently validated or supported. A new voice would replace the fixed speaker rather than add a selectable speaker; language adaptation also requires rebuilding normalization, phonemes, symbols, embeddings, and training data. See docs/DATA_AND_VOICE.md and docs/FINETUNING.md.

Package map

Path Purpose
model.pth Inference-only generator checkpoint
config.json Architecture and audio configuration; also the Hub download-count query file
inference.py Public Python API and CLI
inflect_vits_frontend.py English normalization, phonemization, and punctuation frontend
runtime/ Self-contained model implementation
Inflect-Micro-v2-ONNX Separate official FP32 ONNX graphs, torch-free runner, parity report, checksums, and exporter
samples/ Held-out example generations
evaluation/final/ Frozen benchmark prompts, reports, and protocol artifacts
docs/ API, deployment, evaluation, adaptation, and export documentation
release_manifest.json File sizes and SHA-256 hashes

Limitations

English only, with one fixed male voice. This is not zero-shot voice cloning.
Unfamiliar phrasing can become flatter, less expressive, or less stable.
Numbers, abbreviations, homographs, and uncommon names remain frontend- and context-sensitive.
Long passages use punctuation-aware chunking; transitions can differ from a native long-form model pass.
Stochastic variation can alter timing and pronunciation. Fix the seed for comparisons.
UTMOS22 and ASR scores do not replace controlled human MOS or MUSHRA-style evaluation.
Not validated for medical, legal, emergency, or accessibility-critical communication.

Responsible use

Do not use the included voice to impersonate a real person, deceive listeners, or create fraudulent content. Disclose synthetic speech where the context could otherwise mislead. Users are responsible for applicable laws and the Apache-2.0 license.

License, integrity, and attribution

Original Inflect code and weights are released under Apache-2.0. Bundled third-party components retain their own notices in THIRD_PARTY_NOTICES.md. release_manifest.json records packaged file sizes and SHA-256 hashes.

Private training scope and contact

Inflect v2 is an open-weight release. Deployable weights, inference code, frontend code, evaluation prompts, and release reports are public. The training corpus-generation pipeline, private filtering infrastructure, and full optimization recipe are not part of the public package.

Owen Song may share additional technical context privately for credible research, collaboration, reproducibility, or deployment inquiries when the request has a clear purpose and does not conflict with licensing or data-provenance constraints.

Discord: b111ue — fastest for informal technical questions
Community server: discord.gg/CVJYedvzvp
Email: owen.aw.song@gmail.com — preferred for professional inquiries

Citation

@software{song2026inflectmicrov2,
  author = {Owen Song},
  title = {Inflect-Micro-v2: Complete Local Text-to-Waveform TTS Under 10M Parameters},
  year = {2026},
  url = {https://huggingface.co/owensong/Inflect-Micro-v2}
}


Designed and developed independently by Owen Song · open weights · Apache-2.0 · complete local text-to-waveform inference

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

6. Cloudflare's new AI traffic options for customers

Source: https://blog.cloudflare.com/content-independence-day-ai-options/
Site: The Cloudflare Blog
Submitter: alphabetatango (Hacker News)
Published: 2026-07-01
HN activity: 54 points · 31 comments
Length: 2.7K words (~12 min read)
Language: en-us

One year ago, we declared the first Content Independence Day, and we gave website owners the means to take back control of their content. The deal between crawlers and website owners that had held up for 30 years — we crawl you, and you get referrals — was no longer true. AI was taking everything and sending back nothing, presenting an existential threat to website owners. And so we launched a one-click "Block AI Bots" option, along with a Pay-Per-Crawl marketplace.

A lot has changed in a year. Last July, conversations around “AI bots” centered around blocking AI training without compensation, pointing to the win–lose deal where content was used for model training with no value driven back to the website owner. But a desire for more nuance has emerged: Content owners still want to be able to protect their content, and they should be compensated for the original content that they work hard to create, curate, and share. We also know that locking down content isn’t a one-size-fits-all solution; website owners want more options than resorting to “block all automation, every time.”

If you run a small site, the problem isn’t just that someone could train models on your content — it's that nobody can find you in the first place. So you have to make a Faustian bargain: either show up in search and let AI train on you, or risk losing discoverability. This unfairly advantages incumbent search providers if they use the same bots for both search and training; and this unfair advantage incentivizes new players to be evasive as they try to close the competitive gap.

Now, AI can be anything

Today, AI can be in anything. Google search has changed from being sorted by AI to being a full answer engine that answers your question directly on the results page. And Google is not unique in this position — this is the direction in which “search” is moving.

We could debate the cutoff for what qualifies as “AI” today, just to find that the standard changes tomorrow. So, instead of defining a bot primarily as “AI” or not, our updated approach to classification will ask deeper questions about bot or agent behavior: What are they doing on my site? What are they storing? And how will they reshare my content?

A pragmatic taxonomy

To address these questions, we need a more nuanced view — a pragmatic taxonomy that aligns with the AI use cases our customers care about. So we are opening the discussion beyond AI training alone and focusing on three AI use cases that we want all customers to be able to manage:

Search: any behavior that collects or indexes your content, so it can answer questions about it later. The key is that Search is proactively building a database of your site to later respond to queries with. Site owners should expect to get referral traffic or other equitable compensation as a result.
Agent: automated behavior that is acting, usually in real time, on a person's behalf, to get something done right now. This includes chat fetch bots (e.g., ChatGPT-User) and browser-use agents (e.g., Gemini or Claude driving Chrome). The key is that it visits your web application in order to complete a job, and often there's a human waiting on the other end.
Training: a crawler taking your content to train or fine-tune a model. The key is that your data is permanently absorbed into the underlying architecture of the AI to improve its capabilities.

Many popular crawlers on the web fall into one of the classifications above; some fall into multiple. We classify plenty of other behaviors beyond the three above — including ads verification, feed fetching, and agentic transactions (more on this below). But we believe it should be simple for all website owners to manage access for these three AI-centered use cases. We believe that bot operators should separate their crawlers because that creates more transparency for website owners: allowing them to better understand why a given crawler is visiting them, as well as to better manage the access they extend to that crawler. If a company runs automation that builds Search indexes, acts as an Agent, and collects data to Train their models, then we strongly encourage that company to separate the automation into three separate crawlers.

We want a classification system that is scalable and representative of the world of automated traffic as it evolves. Tracking a bot’s purposes is nothing new, but our new taxonomy involves a few updates that better represent the state of bot traffic today. Most notably, we want to recognize that bots that have multiple purposes should be tracked with all purposes, not just one of them.

New options to manage AI traffic

We want to provide more options for managing different kinds of AI traffic, to all website owners on the Cloudflare network.

The managed preset to “Block AI bots” that we’ve announced in the past included single-purpose bots that crawled data for model training, as shown below:

Screenshot of the existing setting to manage AI bot traffic on July 1, 2025.

But not all AI use is the same, and we want our customers to have the controls they need. So, we’re launching the ability to manage AI traffic based on three major use cases: Search, Agent, and Training crawlers. With these new options, our customers can more finely tune how they manage AI bot traffic — including customers on our Free tier.

Screenshot of the new options to manage AI bot traffic on July 1, 2026.

Setting new defaults

On September 15, 2026, we’ll be setting new defaults for each of these three classifications. For all new domains onboarding to Cloudflare, the categories of Training and Agent will be blocked by default on the pages that display ads, while Search will remain allowed by default.

An ad is a signal that a website owner meant for a person to land there and see it — something monetizable that fuels the business. So, on those pages, we treat human attention as the end goal, and keep away the bots that may prevent this attention (i.e., Training and Agent bots). On the other hand, Search is the behavior that most naturally funnels back visitors, and we believe it’s in the interest of most site owners to allow this.

Another change that will apply on September 15 is that multi-purpose crawlers (specifically those that combine Search with Training) will be allowed/blocked according to all of their behaviors, in line with our call for transparency for website owners. Since the defaults will be enforced by the most restrictive applicable rules, multi-purpose crawlers such as Googlebot, Applebot, and BingBot will be blocked by customers who have selected to block Training (either through the new options to manage AI traffic, or through the legacy Block AI bots service).

Of course, customer choice is paramount: if a website owner wants to opt out of these new default configurations, they can easily mark this in their Security settings any time leading up to September 15, which will confirm that they want no changes on Training crawlers that also crawl for Search purposes. We’ll also continue to notify customers of the upcoming change to defaults as we approach September 15 to ensure that customers who want to choose settings different from the defaults have the opportunity to do so.

BotBase: a new visibility plane for Enterprise customers

We’re also excited to launch a major visibility update as a new feature of Enterprise Bot Management. As Cloudflare’s directory of tracked bots has grown, so has the desire to manage these bots in sensible groupings and to understand more detail about a particular bot.

Introducing BotBase. BotBase is our new database tracking all known bots, including Verified bots and agents. This database provides a comprehensive, searchable view of our entire directory of bots, directly on the Cloudflare dashboard. We’re tackling visibility first, but, later this year, we’ll expand BotBase to provide a direct control center for known automated content on your website.

With this new view, Enterprise Bot Management customers can see the full catalogue of all Verified bots/agents and where they are classified in this updated taxonomy — a view we’ve never shown dynamically on the Cloudflare dashboard before. Customers who want to precisely target a specific bot can also easily filter for all traffic from this bot, plus copy the detection ID to use in Security rules. All of this is now live within a dedicated page, which can be accessed through the Bot Management configuration card.

As we built BotBase, we wanted to account for all of the pieces of information that would allow us to build scalable, powerful insights from bot to bot. One of these pieces is a cornerstone for our updated taxonomy, which is based on what a bot may do on your site — its behavior. We separate these classifications as shared below, and each bot is classified with one or more of these behaviors.

Bot classification

Behaviors and uses

Search

Crawling to scan your site to help it appear in search engine results

Agent

User-directed agents visiting a page on behalf of a human

Training

Crawling to train or fine-tune models

Transact

Checkout actions on behalf of users

Data Collection

Includes price scraping, competitive intelligence gathering, and third-party analytics

Security Testing

Includes vulnerability scanning and penetration testing

SEO

SEO crawling, site auditing, accessibility checks

Ads Verification

Ad placement verification, ad fraud detection

Social / Link Preview

Link previews for social platforms and messaging apps

Feed Fetching

Includes RSS readers, podcast aggregators, and news feed bots

Monitoring & Operations

Includes uptime monitoring, webhooks, and health checks

Bold italicized rows indicate the new configurable options that are available to all customers.

How does a crawler use my content?

Another piece of information we’ve heard is important to our customers is a bot’s content use — what a bot may keep and reshare after it has crawled your content. To address this, we are building capabilities for Bot Management customers to select and block based on the “content use.” This setting can be set to one of three levels, from least to most permissive:

immediate — interact, but store and reuse nothing
reference (default) — index, excerpt, and link back
full — summarize and reproduce

These values can be combined with bot classifications to express nuanced rules, such as “allow all bots that are used for Search, SEO, and Ads Verification, but only up to the reference use level.” This allows website owners to make decisions in sensible groupings rather than manage individual bot-by-bot rules.

To further support this, starting today, we're testing a new signal, use, that extends Content Signals and lives in your robots.txt. This extends the three fields of the first version of Content Signals with a fourth, optional field that expresses the same preference as above:

use=immediate
use=reference
use=full

As with all other items listed in the robots.txt file, the values of content use signal a website owner’s preference, rather than issuing blocks directly. We’re now adding support for this extension: all customers who have already enabled managed robots.txt — which prepends the preference to robots.txt that crawling for search is okay, but that crawling for training is not — will now have the additional preference of use=reference added to their robots.txt.

# Cloudflare Managed content with original Content Signals

User-agent: *
Content-Signal: search=yes,ai-train=no
Allow: /

The contents of Cloudflare managed robots.txt with the original Content Signals values.

# Cloudflare Managed content with the new content-use signal

User-agent: *
Content-Signal: search=yes,ai-train=no,use=reference
Allow: /

The contents of Cloudflare managed robots.txt with the added parameter.

We’re also starting to track content uses for every bot in BotBase, and when we discover a bot abusing these signals, it will lose the “Verified” status, resulting in it no longer being allowed. Today, bots that reproduce in full cannot have the Verified status.

What does it mean for a bot to be Verified?

Speaking of “Verified,” the definition of Verified is being updated to reflect the upcoming changes to default allow and block baselines. Previously, all Verified bots were allowed by default, which was reflected in our basic Bot Fight Mode offering to block unwanted automatic traffic and in our rule templates for Enterprise Bot Management customers.

Starting today, we’re adjusting this to add nuance: non-verified bots are still default blocked, but we are no longer viewing Verified as “default allowed.” Now, the Verified label makes a bot allowable with its relevant category, meaning the allowed category (e.g., allowing Search) will determine what is allowed to access a website.

To balance this change, we’re opening up the process of becoming a Verified bot, and making it more transparent, too. To "Verify" a bot, a bot operator needs to show two things: that you represent yourself honestly, and you don't abuse the access that honesty earns. And to make this easier on bot operators, we’re currently building management tools for bot operators to better ensure they are accurately represented by Cloudflare’s classification system (to be announced in the near future).

A preview screenshot of the upcoming platform built directly for bot operators who are part of or want to be a part of BotBase, the next generation of the Cloudflare Bots Directory.

Experimenting with transitive trust

One more piece: The bot (or agent) at your door increasingly isn't run by the company that built it. A platform like Cloudflare’s Developer Platform runs automations for thousands of different operators at once, ranging from enterprises to a developer you've never heard of. You might trust Stripe, but you don't necessarily trust everyone who wired Stripe's tools into a weekend project.

We call the case of (site owner → bot owning company → end user) a matter of transitive trust, and we're proposing to utilize the existing Forwarded header as defined in RFC 7239 that rides along with the request and allows “proxy components to disclose information lost in the proxying process.”

This is similar to what X-Forwarded-For does for IP addresses, or X-Forwarded-Host does to preserve the original Host header. So when a website owner says, "Allow this operator," that preference will hold, whether the operator comes to you directly or through three layers of intermediaries that are trusted. More details can be found in our documentation, with a brief example to show the format below.

Forwarded: for="openai"

Adding the extension with content-use discussed above, the header addition would look something like the below, specifying how the operator says they will use the content they access:

Forwarded: for="openai";use="reference"

This also lines up the incentive model we want to foster. Losing trusted status across the more than 20% of web domains that sit behind Cloudflare is a deterrent with teeth. Trust becomes something you can carry with you, and something you can lose.

However, as bot traffic blends with human traffic, it’s possible that this system of transitive trust doesn’t carry beyond the users who can afford to be identifiable. The measures we are proposing today help to convey trust, but they won’t fit the entire web for all time. Small sources of traffic need privacy, and companies that want to preserve their own privacy commitments should be able to explore fair building blocks for the future of an agentic Internet, such as private rate limiting.

Set your terms today

These are small changes that move in the same direction: site owners get more control over who uses their content, and how. We believe the new defaults we discussed today and will soon implement are ones that encourage transparency and are more reflective of where the world is going.

Of course, the ebbs and flows of the web will continue shifting under us, and we'll keep adjusting with it. But the direction won't change, because it's the one Cloudflare started with: a web ecosystem built around trust. Where the people who make things can decide how they're used — and one where being honest about what you do earns you more access, not less.

These new options to manage AI traffic are live now, and can be configured by all existing customers in their zone Settings. Not on Cloudflare yet? Start for free to set the traffic controls that you want today.

Happy Content Independence Day.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

7. Show HN: I mapped every US golf course – 16k+ courses, free, no signup

Source: https://golfcoursebrowser.com/
Site: golfcoursebrowser.com
Submitter: rickmf (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-07-26 02:22 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 12 points · 1 comments
Length: 17 words (~1 min read)
Language: en

Loading weather…

Nearby courses

Location data © OpenStreetMap contributors. Holes & amenities are estimated from map data.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

8. Git rebase -I is not that scary

Source: https://cachebag.sh/journal/interactive-rebasing/
Site: cachebag.sh
Submitter: vinhnx (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-07-26 00:37 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 28 points · 24 comments
Length: 1.0K words (~5 min read)
Language: en

one of the most shocking things i've encountered in my early career as a junior dev is the fear surrounding git rebase -i.

even amongst some of my co-workers, who are in many ways, magnitudes smarter than i am, it seems to be a pattern in a lot of devs to be afraid of this command.

what it actually does

when you run:

git rebase -i HEAD~4

git does something delightfully mundane: it opens a text file. if you are working out of the terminal and haven't fiddled around with your git settings, git config --global core.editor "_YOUR-EDITOR_" is a good way to allay your fears of conquering vim.

pick a1b2c3d Add user model
pick e4f5g6h Fix typo in user model
pick i7j8k9l Add login endpoint
pick m0n1o2p WIP debugging login

# Commands:
# p, pick  = use commit
# r, reword  = use commit, but edit the commit message
# s, squash  = use commit, but meld into previous commit
# f, fixup  = like "squash" but discard this commit's message
# d, drop  = remove commit

a worthy thing to note here for new rebasers is that this is a plan, not an action. nothing has technically happened yet, aside from the fact a rebase has begun. if you change your mind, you just run git rebase --abort and either restart or give up (ideally the former).

each line is an instruction, in which a replaying of the commit you target is commenced. you may mix and match these instructions to your liking.

r a1b2c3d Add user model
pick e4f5g6h Fix typo in user model
pick i7j8k9l Add login endpoint
d m0n1o2p WIP debugging login

# Commands:
# p, pick  = use commit
# r, reword  = use commit, but edit the commit message
# s, squash  = use commit, but meld into previous commit
# f, fixup  = like "squash" but discard this commit's message
# d, drop  = remove commit

what happened here:

1. in this example, git is going to 'pause' on the first commit, allowing you to reword its message.

2. d or a drop deletes the WIP debugging commit entirely. this same result can be achieved by simply deleting the line entirely.

the middle two commits were untouched, despite us mutating the surrounding commits. the end result is 3 total commits instead of 4.

honestly, that's it. it's not a big fucking deal. if you can internalize what that example does, interactive rebasing becomes a tool that will make your life easier, not harder.

there's a common thing among people as well that love to undermine the purpose of interactive rebasing. without getting into those arguments, i will just openly say: in my opinion, if you don't care about a clean branch history (a tiny fraction of the improvement rebasing provides) than i am more inclined to be skeptical of how serious you are about your software.

"but what if i mess it up?"

it is very hard to actually lose work here, for three reasons.

you can bail out at any time. as aforementioned with git rebase --abort

your branch snaps back to exactly where it was before you started..

rebase doesn't destroy commits — it makes new ones. this is the key mental model. rebase doesn't edit your old commits; it creates new ones and just moves your branch pointer to them. the old commits still exist in git's object database, unreferenced but intact, for some amount of time before garbage collections comes in.

the reflog remembers everything. this was especially important for me to understand when i wiped one of my co-workers branches history in my first internship thinking they wanted to drop previous commits they had made. git keeps a journal of everywhere your branch has pointed:

git reflog

find the entry from before the rebase and restore it:

git reset --hard HEAD@{4}

the entire rebase is undone. this safety net is always there, which means the worst realistic outcome of a botched rebase is a few minutes of you perusing through the reflog.

and if even the reflog feels too daunting (though if you've made it this far into my post, i would hope you are competent enough to handle it), there's of course, the low-tech insurance policy:

git branch backup-before-rebase

now the pre-rebase state has a name. if anything goes wrong, git reset --hard backup-before-rebase and you're home safe.

conflicts

sometimes a replayed commit conflicts with an earlier change (usually when reordering, or when rebasing onto an updated main). git stops and literally prints the instructions: resolve the conflict like you would a merge conflict, git add the files, then git rebase --continue.

i think that this is probably what annoys people the most. but conflicts are not a new concept to git. in fact i would argue that in the context of interactive rebasing, conflicts are actually easier to resolve than in a merge. this is because you are only dealing with one commit at a time, and not the entire branch.

obligatory warning

as with literally anything in software, you should take great care and effort to understand what you are doing, especially with something destructive like rebasing. yes, work can be recovered but that does not give you an excuse to be sloppy.

a nice general rule of thumb i follow is allowing myself to rebase my own feature branches freely, before or during review. pushing the result to your own remote branch with git push --force-with-lease is normal and fine (--force-with-lease refuses to push if someone else has pushed in the meantime, always prefer it over plain --force).

the takeaway

i personally think that any developer worth their salt should at the least be able to walk through a very simple interactive rebase. this post is not really about when or why you should use it (though i am of the belief that it should be used liberally) it's mostly to demystify the process and encourage you to try it out. especially if you are a junior/beginner dev.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

9. An ESP32 based plane radar for my desk

Source: https://blog.ktz.me/esp32-plane-radar/
Site: ktz.
Author: Alex Kretzschmar
Published: 2026-07-25
HN activity: 11 points · 2 comments
Length: 486 words (~3 min read)
Language: en

This project made for a perfect lazy Saturday unwind, after a busy week giving a talk at Devrelcon in NYC. Makerworld had this thing as one of their featured models about a week or two ago, and the parts came in while I was away.

GitHub repository ESP32-Plane-Radar Open-source ESP32 firmware for a 1.28″ round display that shows live ADS-B aircraft around your location as a sonar-style plane radar. by ironicbadger · C++ · MIT

Plane radar is a neat little project that turns an ESP32-C3 and a 1.28-inch round display into a live aircraft radar. It pulls nearby ADS-B traffic, plots each aircraft by distance and bearing, and shows the details directly on the screen.

It was an easy build, although it did require a little soldering. I always enjoy doing that as it reminds me of my days building racing drones. Thin, silicone based wires made quick work of the cabling. And after about 15 minutes, we were ready to go.

It is insanely easy to flash firmwares to a fresh esp32 these days using the browser-based ESPHome web flashing tool. Under 30s and you’re done.

A quick note about the 3d model

The original model was featured on Makerworld, because it looks great. Reality though was, in practice, it’s not actually that great.

MakerWorld 5.4Klikes 3.3Kdownloads 15.1Ksaves 2.4Kmakes Original 3D model ESP32 Plane Radar Live ADS-B on a Round Display by matixovi · Published May 31, 2026

Unfortunately the tolerances are just too tight to be usable with the batch of boards I got. So I’m likely going to model my own replacement at some point, but for now I ended up printing this model instead.

MakerWorld 154likes 194downloads 470saves 102makes Original 3D model ESP32-S3 1.28" Waveshare Plane Radar by ThePrintableWatch · Published Jun 10, 2026

Customising the firmware

I’ve spent today improving my fork of ESP32 Plane Radar project, with the help of pure vibes.

The biggest improvement is proper flight context. Where the data is available, aircraft now show their origin and destination instead of just their tail number, with the callsign used as a fallback. Aircraft types are also more descriptive, something like B737-800 rather than simply B737. I added local weather, temperature, humidity, time and date as well.

The web interface can now modify coordinates after initial setup. Display options can now be changed without resetting the Wi-Fi configuration, and there are controls for units, runways, weather, temperature format and 12/24-hour time. Text is 10% larger by default, with a persistent 80–130% slider for adjusting it.

Finally, the firmware now supports authenticated OTA updates, so future builds can be installed through the browser instead of connecting the board over USB.

I’ve compiled, flashed and tested everything on the actual device, and the latest work is committed to the main branch. Next up will probably be porting it to a larger display and designing a tidy 3D-printed enclosure for it.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

10. GM Backs Sodium Ion Batteries for U.S. Grid Storage

Source: https://spectrum.ieee.org/sodium-ion-battery-peak-energy
Site: IEEE Spectrum
Author: Lawrence Ulrich
Published: 2026-07-22
HN activity: 145 points · 56 comments
Length: 1.5K words (~7 min read)
Language: en

Despite setbacks in sodium-ion battery development in the U.S., the startup Peak Energy says it can be the one to finally achieve the ambitious application of using the tech to store energy for the grid.

When U.S. start-ups Natron Energy and Bedrock Materials shut down sodium-ion battery operations last year, they joined an ignominious list of more than dozen failed Western battery companies.

CATL, based in China and the world’s largest battery company, then dropped a bombshell in April, announcing it would supply 60 gigawatt-hours of sodium-ion cells to the grid storage provider HyperStrong. The largest sodium-ion battery order in history suggested China was on its way, as with lithium-iron phosphate in previous years, to dominating yet another promising chemistry.

The Colorado-based Peak Energy insists it can succeed where companies like Natron failed. Company executives say its sodium-ion tech can compete directly with low-cost lithium-iron phosphate (LFP) batteries, which currently dominate grid storage. Unlike Natron, which ran out of money and investors’ patience, Peak Energy has a giant in its corner: General Motors. Like Tesla and other automakers, GM is moving aggressively into grid storage to keep massive battery factories humming in the wake of slumping EV demand.

Peak Energy has formed a partnership with the automaker to ultimately deploy sodium-ion batteries at grid scale. In July, the company announced it will build a US $71 million, 17,000 square-meter factory near Sacramento, with capacity to produce 4 GWh of sodium-ion batteries annually, enough to power 4 million homes.

Sodium-Ion vs Lithium-Iron Phosphate Batteries

As with other sodium-based designs, Peak Energy’s cells can’t yet match the energy density of LFP batteries. Company executives from Peak Energy and GM, which has partnered with Peak to codevelop and manufacture the batteries, freely admit they can’t currently compete with current LFP prices on a per-cell basis.

Yet Peak Energy says its passively cooled storage system will still cost operators 20 percent less over its lifetime compared with LFP storage. Cameron Dales, Peak Energy’s cofounder and chief commercial officer, says the company’s GS1.1 system will store energy for 20 years, over roughly 20,000 cycles, and still retain 80 percent of its capacity. For LFP, a basic durability benchmark pegs them at 70 percent capacity after 8,000 cycles.

Peak Energy’s case is helped by a booming market for energy storage, to back up AI data centers and to store excess solar and wind energy. Volatile lithium prices have major players looking for a steady alternative.

Incumbent LFP batteries, Dales says, were initially designed for EVs, where cell costs and energy density are critical for driving range and affordability. But utilities and storage operators are focused on entirely different metrics. They want batteries that last the longest, at the lowest overall cost, to maximize returns and justify massive capital investments.

The company’s technical edge, Dales says, is that its stable cells that can operate safely at temperatures roughly double the typical operating temperatures of LFP, which performs best at or near room temperature.

“You need to keep an LFP cell at 25 °C, give or take, or it will rapidly degrade,” Dales says.

The generous temperature tolerance of Peak Energy’s cells allows a passive cooling system with no pricey, trouble-prone fluid cooling loops or moving parts such as fans or pumps. That makes the modular system well-suited for data centers or grid support in desolate areas, where operators are finding abundant cheap land, high potential for solar energy, and a low risk of natural disasters.

“You don’t have to power a refrigerator in the desert for 20 years to keep the system operating properly,” Dales says.

The GS1.1 system stacks slender prismatic cells into modules roughly the size of a king-size mattress. A 36-module system stores 3.1 megawatt-hours. Large-scale projects might combine dozens or hundreds of units, generating enough juice to power a small city.

Proponents note that sodium is the sixth-most abundant element on earth, roughly 1,000 times as abundant as lithium. And unlike lithium, which must be sourced from far-flung regions fraught with environmental or human-rights issues, the world’s largest, purest deposits of trona are found in the Green River Basin in Wyoming. Trona, which is composed of sodium carbonate, sodium bicarbonate, and water, supplies the United States with 90 percent of its soda ash, which is the basis for battery-grade lithium carbonate salt. However, analysts note that while the raw material may be plentiful, its processing is dominated by China.

“The supply chain tends to get overlooked, but it’s just a massive issue,” says Varnika Agarwal, a battery research analyst at Benchmark Mineral Intelligence.

Agarwal says sodium-ion tech holds promise. But a lot has to go right for sodium ion to carve out a viable niche in the U.S. Benchmarks project that less than 1 percent of newly deployed storage in the United States will be sodium ion this year, less than 4 percent by 2030, and 5 percent globally.

For now, she notes, Peak Energy is buying its commercial cells via contracts with Chinese suppliers, which dominate both processing of its raw materials—however cheap-and-abundant they may be—and cell production. The U.S. is basically just getting started, with Peak Energy’s California factory slated to come online in 2027.

NFPP Cathodes in Sodium-Ion Batteries

Natron was banking on long-shot “Prussian Blue” electrodes, a form of blue pigment that acts as a sponge to soak up and release sodium ions. Peak’s batteries, however, rely on sodium iron pyrophosphate (NFPP) cathodes, which are chemically and structurally similar to lithium-iron phosphate in an LFP battery, known for superior safety and long cycle life.

NFPP is fast becoming an industry standard. CATL has also settled on NFPP for its core chemistry. This helps make Peak Energy’s cells largely “drop in,” able to be manufactured at existing battery plants such as GM’s—a huge advantage for market viability.

Kurt Kelty, Tesla’s former battery guru and a globally recognized battery expert, is now vice president of batteries and sustainability at GM. Kelty says GM is backing Peak Energy for several reasons, including his familiarity with and respect for its own former Tesla execs.

Peak Energy executives [from left] Landon Mossburg, Kurt Kelty, and Cameron Dales show off one of the company’s prismatic cell batteries.Lucas Breuer/Peak Energy

GM has been testing Peak Energy’s cells, in 170 and 190 ampere-hour formats, at its Wallace Battery Cell Innovation Center in suburban Detroit, in the same labs where GM is developing its proprietary lithium-manganese-rich battery chemistry. Kelty says the battery life of competing cells, from a full range of global producers, “falls off a cliff” during high-temperature testing. But Peak Energy’s batteries are withstanding extreme testing at up to 55 °C, with notably little effect on their lifespans.

“The cell is kicking butt over everything,” Kelty says. “We can get 20 years of lifetime without a cooling system, and that’s the key.”

The batteries are showing a round-trip efficiency of 96 percent, a significant 2 to 3 percent better than LFP. (“Round trip” refers to the amount of energy a battery discharges, relative to the amount used to charge it).

Eliminating active cooling, Kelty adds, allows a near-silent system that could be used in public buildings. In addition, it ditches the plumbing that’s a potential trouble spot for leaks and maintenance.

“It also reduces parasitic power losses, because you’re not using power to cool the system,” Kelty says.

Peak and GM executives believe sodium-ion cells themselves will reach price parity with LFP around 2028, based in part on discussions with Chinese cathode suppliers. Sodium ion, they say, is just entering its steep slope of cost reductions, where LFP’s savings have largely been realized over 20 years.

Peak Energy’s Sodium-Ion Battery Projects

In March, Peak Energy announced it will join with RWE Americas for another pilot system near Milwaukee. That would become the first-ever use of sodium-ion backup on the Midcontinent Independent System Operator, the regional grid operator for 15 central states and Canada’s Manitoba province.

Peak Energy also plans to begin supplying up to 4.75 GWh of batteries to Jupiter Power, an independent storage developer, through 2030. The deal, worth up to $500 million, includes an initial 720 MWh of storage, including in Texas, the nation’s largest single announced deployment of the batteries to date.

Ask Dales about winners and losers in battery chemistries, and he’ll tell you it’s the wrong question. In a world of planes, trains, phones, drones, and every imaginable device, it makes no sense that one “super battery” would rule them all.

“Sodium ion is just another sister technology to lithium,” he says. “But instead of going higher energy density, it’s going lower energy density, and you’re paying for that with better stability and safety at a lower cost.”

This story was updated on 23 July, 2026 to correct the timeline for Peak’s California facility. It is scheduled to come online in 2027, not 2028 as originally stated.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

11. SIMD for Collision

Source: https://box2d.org/posts/2026/07/simd-for-collision/
Site: box2d.org
Submitter: birdculture (Hacker News)
Published: 2026-07-18
HN activity: 69 points · 20 comments
Length: 993 words (~5 min read)
Language: en

In a previous post SIMD Matters I discussed the big wins I got from graph coloring to make the contact solver faster. That same approach exists in Box3D. I like to call this approach “wide SIMD”. The idea is to process multiple work units at the same time. In the contact solver this means solving four contact points at the same time.

This is different from “narrow SIMD” where a 3-vector (xyz) is put into a SIMD register and then standard vector math is expressed as SIMD intrinsics. Narrow SIMD can be useful, but the gains are not as obvious.

In 3D there is an opportunity for using wide SIMD that doesn’t exist in 2D. Consider the convex pile benchmark ported from PEEL. This benchmark drops 5120 convex hulls, each with 32 points.

Box3D treats boxes as hulls and many of the benchmarks use boxes. The performance with boxes has been good and typically most of the cost is not in the narrow phase. But the 32 point hull is a different beast. Let’s call it “boulder”. The table below shows the hull details for a box compared to the boulder.

Hull Vertices Faces Edges
Box 8 6 12
Boulder 32 59 89

Box3D uses the Separating Axis Test for collision detection. This is abbreviated as SAT. Using SAT I can find the best features to use for pushing the shapes apart and precisely how far apart they need to be pushed to remove overlap. Furthermore, I use these results to compute the contact normal and the contact points.

Other physics engines may use the distance algorithm GJK instead with an overlap fallback such as the Expanding Polytope Algorithm, also known as EPA.

I’m a big fan of SAT for convex hull collision because it doesn’t require a collision margin. Shapes can rest directly on each other. The GJK and EPA combo usually tries to keep shapes slightly separated to stay in the GJK region, which is faster. This can lead to visual gaps. Also, EPA can be numerically brittle and often physics engines will need a fallback if EPA fails: a fallback for the fallback. EPA is essentially an algorithm for computing a convex hull, and the input data can be flat slivers. That is a challenging scenario for convex hull computation. Hence the need for a second fallback.

Unfortunately, SAT in 3D has quadratic complexity. With two hulls A and B, the collision algorithm must test the faces of hull A against the vertices of hull B, the faces of hull B against the vertices of hull A, and the edges of hull A against the edges of hull B. In the worst case, every combination must be evaluated.

Combination Face-Vertex Vertex-Face Edge-Edge
Box-Box 6 6 144
Boulder-Boulder 59 59 7921

The number of edge-edge combinations grows quadratically. There are some tricks to speed up the edge tests using the Gauss Map. See Improvements to the Separating Axis Test for more details. Regardless, the edge-edge test can easily dominate the entire simulation.

So what does this edge-edge code look like? At a basic level it looks like this:

for (Edge edgeA : hullA.edges)
{
    for (Edge edgeB : hullB.edges)
    {
        TestCrossProduct(edgeA, edgeB);
    }
}


If there are just 12 edges in each hull, doing SIMD on this is not a big win because SIMD requires some setup work. For SIMD to work well the data needs to be in structure of arrays format (SoA).

With 89 edges in each hull the story changes drastically. There are 7921 calls to TestCrossProduct. With wide SIMD I can test one edge of hullA against four edges of hullB simultaneously. It looks sort of like this:

for (Edge edgeA : hullA.edges)
{
    for (EdgeWide edgeWideB : hullB.edgesWide)
    {
        TestCrossProductWide(edgeA, edgeWideB);
    }
}


There are a lot of hidden details in the snippet and you can look at the Box3D code if you are curious. But I’m here to answer the question: should we care about SIMD for collision detection? Well, I have results! These are the results for the convex pile benchmark with the total milliseconds for a 500 step run. I tested 1 to 8 threads on an AMD 7950x with the CPU pegged at 4.42GHz. The results are the best of 4 runs.

Threads Scalar SSE2 AVX2-Lite
1 40706 17337 15762
2 20799 8857 8131
3 13789 5946 5471
4 10324 4509 4084
5 8359 3675 3361
6 6958 3106 2843
7 6006 2697 2477
8 5292 2410 2277

SSE2 is over twice as fast as scalar! Keep in mind these timings are for the entire simulation, not just the edge-edge test. The scalar column also indicates that the contact solver runs in scalar mode. So this is the full picture of the simulation.

Box3D only implements SSE2 intrinsics. In Box2D I have AVX2 intrinsics as well, but there were a surprising number of users without AVX2 capable CPUs. Nevertheless, just enabling the AVX2 architecture in Box3D gives a nice gain, as indicated in the AVX2-Lite column. Free performance gains are great to see. In the future I may try a real AVX2 implementation testing 8 edges at a time.

This benchmark represents a 32-point hull with 89 edges. Surely SAT will be overrun as the point count grows further. Well, fortunately Box3D has a hard 128 edge limit. This limit already existed and has to do with keeping the hull storage compact (8-bit indices and two half-edges per edge). Somewhat surprisingly, converting complex hulls to meshes can solve the quadratic growth problem, but it makes the shape less suitable for a dynamic body.

You may wonder if the SIMD edge tests moved the needle on box-box. Sadly it has almost no effect. This optimization seems to only benefit complex hulls. Such hulls can come up in several scenarios, such as destruction. So it is a worthy addition to Box3D.

Finally, here is a video comparison and a side-by-side of the frame timings.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

12. The new rules of context engineering for Claude 5 generation models

Source: https://claude.com/blog/the-new-rules-of-context-engineering-for-claude-5-generation-models
Site: Claude
Submitter: mellosouls (Hacker News)
Published: 2026-07-24
HN activity: 191 points · 131 comments
Length: 1.2K words (~6 min read)
Language: en-US

Then and now

There were a number of previous context engineering best practices that had become myths. Including:.

Then: Give Claude rules

Now: Let Claude use judgement

When we first rolled out Claude Code, we needed to be sure that Claude avoided worst case scenarios, such as deleting files. This meant we would give particularly strong guidance that might not always be true, For example, in the system prompt we used to say:

In code: default to writing no comments. Never write multi-paragraph docstrings or multi-line comment blocks — one short line max. Don't create planning, decision, or analysis documents unless the user asks for them — work from conversation context, not intermediate files.

But for a certain subset of prompts, this guidance would be wrong. In the case of documentation, the user may have their own preferences, or specific parts of very complex code might need multi-line comment blocks.

Still, without these guardrails for older models, the comments Claude wrote would be incorrect in many cases and we had to accept this tradeoff. But newer models have better judgement and can handle these decisions well without explicit rules.

In the new system prompt we say: Write code that reads like the surrounding code: match its comment density, naming, and idiom.

Then: Give Claude examples

Now: Design interfaces

The number one rule for tool usage was to give Claude examples on how to use them. With our newest models, we’ve found that giving examples actually constrains them to a certain exploration space.

Instead of using examples, think more about the design of your tools, scripts and files- what parameters does Claude have and how can they be more expressive?

For example, in the Todo tool example, just listing status as an enumeration between pending, in_progress, and completed, hints to Claude about how to use it. The instruction on keeping one item in_progress helps define our requested behavior.

Then: Put it all upfront

Now: Use progressive disclosure

Because Claude Code was focused on coding, our system prompt included detailed information on how to do code review and verification. These were not always needed, but when they were, it was crucial information.

Since then, Claude Code has gotten very competent at using progressive disclosure- loading the right context at the right times. For example, we moved verification and code review into their own skills that Claude Code could selectively call.

But progressive disclosure is not just for skills, we also use it for tools. Some of our tools are ‘deferred loading,’ which means the agent must search for their full definitions using ToolSearch before using them. This allows us to have more tools (such as our Task tools) that don’t take up context until they’re needed.

The same can be applied to your own CLAUDE.md and Skill.md files. A common myth is that you want to make these a central repository for every known practice that you might run into, because Claude would not find it otherwise. Instead, consider having a tree of files that can be loaded at the right time.

Then: Repeat yourself

Now: Simple tool descriptions

Earlier Claude models could sometimes need repeated instructions or be more likely to listen to instructions at the end of their context window than at the start. This meant our system prompt would sometimes have references to tools in the main system prompt as well as instructions in the tool description.

We found we could delete these repeat examples and put instructions on how to use tools in the tool descriptions rather than the system prompt.

Then: Memory in CLAUDE.md files

Now: Auto-memory

We used to encourage users to save things to Claude’s memory, by using the # hotkey to write to their CLAUDE.md automatically. Instead, Claude now automatically saves memories that are relevant to the work and to you.

Then: Simple specs

Now: Rich references

In plan mode, Claude Code has heavily relied on markdown files with plans. Storing these files as plans helped Claude refer to them when needed. Another similar best practice was to store specs in the codebase for Claude to refer to while working across longer projects.

But we’ve found that Claude can handle increasingly more complicated references. Instead of simple markdown files, Claude can reference HTML artifacts created by our new artifacts feature.

You may also give Claude references in the form of code. A spec may also be a detailed test suite, or a function in a different codebase that Claude might port.

Rubrics are another form of references. Rubrics allow Claude to try and verify your taste in a particular field (e.g. what does a good API design look like) by using dynamic workflows and spinning up verifier agents with those rubrics.

Applying this to your context

Pulling this all together, what does this look like when you assemble your context?

System Prompt

A system prompt is heavily tied to the product context. It tells Claude what product it’s operating in and what it’s doing. For Claude Code, you will likely never modify this, but if you are building your own agent harness, this is where you should spend a lot of time.

CLAUDE.md

Keep your CLAUDE.md lightweight and briefly describe what your repo is for, but spend most of the tokens on gotchas inside of the codebase. For example, you may organize your code to keep types in one monolithic file and nowhere else. Avoid stating ‘the obvious’ things Claude should know by looking at your file system or your repo.

Use progressive disclosure heavily, for example if you have several unique instructions on how to verify your work, create a verification skill and reference it from your CLAUDE.md.

Skills

Think of skills as lightweight guides to let Claude find information when needed. Avoid making them overconstrained, except in highly important areas.

For long skills, try and use progressive disclosure as much as possible- divide it into many files and split them out.

It’s best when skills encode particular opinions, knowledge, or best practices that are particular to you, your team, or product.

References

You can @ mention files to include them as references. References allow Claude to refer to in-depth information about the current plan.

This might be in specs files, mockups, or even entire codebases. Generally you should prefer files that are in code as it provides clear, high-fidelity instructions to Claude in a language it knows very well. For example, a HTML mockup of a design will generally produce better results than a description of the design or a screenshot.

Try simplifying

Across your system prompt, skills, and CLAUDE.md files, you may need to simplify just like we did. We rolled out a new command called `claude doctor,` which will help you do this automatically as well. For more details on prompting more advanced models specifically, check out our Fable field guide.

This article was written by Thariq Shihipar, member of technical staff, Anthropic.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

13. Running a 28.9M parameter LLM on an $8 microcontroller

Source: https://github.com/slvDev/esp32-ai
Site: GitHub
Submitter: boveyking (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-07-25 18:59 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 97 points · 20 comments
Length: 661 words (~3 min read)
Language: en

Running a 28.9M parameter LLM on an $8 microcontroller

Open to Work · 𝕏 slvDev · LinkedIn

This is a 28.9 million parameter language model that generates text on an ESP32-S3, a microcontroller that costs about $8. It runs on the chip itself, with nothing sent to a server, and it writes each word to a small screen wired to the chip at roughly 9 tokens per second. The last language model people ran on a chip like this had 260 thousand parameters, so this one holds about a hundred times more. It fits because most of the model lives in flash instead of RAM, using an idea from Google's Gemma models called Per-Layer Embeddings.

The numbers

Parameters 28.9M stored (25M of them in a flash lookup table)
Chip ESP32-S3, about $8, with 512KB SRAM, 8MB PSRAM and 16MB flash
Speed about 9.5 tok/s end to end (9.7 tok/s of pure compute)
Connectivity none, everything runs on the device
Model size 14.9MB at 4-bit

Why it is hard, and how it fits anyway

A microcontroller has very little fast memory. The ESP32-S3 gives you 512KB of SRAM. Normally the whole model has to be reachable from there, which keeps you stuck with tiny models, and that is why the previous model on a chip like this had only 260 thousand parameters.

The way around it is to stop putting the model in fast memory at all. Most of a language model's parameters sit in an embedding table, which the model reads from rather than computes on. So you can leave that 25 million row table in slow flash and pull only the few rows each token needs, about 450 bytes, while the small part that does the actual work stays in fast memory. The large model then costs almost nothing to run, because you never load most of it. It just sits in flash and gets sampled a little at a time.

That idea is Google's Per-Layer Embeddings, from Gemma 3n and Gemma 4. Here it runs on the memory layout of a microcontroller instead of a phone or a GPU. As far as I can tell, nobody had tried it on a chip this small.

  SRAM  (fast, tiny)   the "thinking" core, used on every token
  PSRAM (medium)       the output head and working memory
  FLASH (huge, slow)   the 25M-param table, about 6 rows read per token (~450 B)


What it does, and what it does not

The model was trained on TinyStories, so it writes short, simple stories and mostly keeps them coherent. It will not answer questions, follow instructions, write code, or know facts. That limit comes from the small part of the model that does the reasoning, and the memory trick does not change it. What is interesting here is the architecture, fitting a large model onto a tiny chip, rather than what a 28.9 million parameter model can say.

Running it yourself

The firmware, the wiring, and the flashing steps live in firmware/esp32_llm/README.md. The training, ablation, and quantization code is in src/ and experiments/. The full method, the ablations, and the on-chip measurements are written up in RESULTS.md.

Credit

TinyStories is the dataset this trains on: short synthetic stories simple enough that a small model can still learn to write coherently (Ronen Eldan and Yuanzhi Li, Microsoft Research, arXiv:2305.07759). The other half is Per-Layer Embeddings, Google's design from the Gemma models, which is what lets a big model fit on a small chip.

Andrej Karpathy's llama2.c is why a lot of people, me included, believe you can train a tiny language model and run it in plain C at all. This grew out of that.

How this actually went

I left the messy history in the repo on purpose. That includes a bug I found in my own parameter accounting, which had inflated an early number, and the corrected result that followed once I fixed it. The commit history and RESULTS.md show where the numbers moved and why.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

14. What if they are all wrong? (2020)

Source: https://igorpak.wordpress.com/2020/12/10/what-if-they-are-all-wrong/
Site: Igor Pak's blog
Author: igorpak
Published: 2020-12-10
HN activity: 6 points · 0 comments
Length: 4.8K words (~21 min read)
Language: en

Conjectures are a staple of mathematics. They are everywhere, permeating every area, subarea and subsubarea. They are diverse enough to avoid a single general adjective. They come in al shapes and sizes. Some of them are famous, classical, general, important, inspirational, far-reaching, audacious, exiting or popular, while others are speculative, narrow, technical, imprecise, far-fetched, misleading or recreational. That’s a lot of beliefs about unproven claims, yet we persist in dispensing them, inadvertently revealing our experience, intuition and biases.

The conjectures also vary in attitude. Like a finish line ribbon they all appear equally vulnerable to an outsider, but in fact differ widely from race to race. Some are eminently reachable, the only question being who will get there first (think 100 meter dash). Others are barely on the horizon, requiring both great effort, variety of tools, and an extended time commitment (think ironman triathlon). The most celebrated third type are like those Sci-Fi space expeditions in requiring hundreds of years multigenerational commitments, often losing contact with civilization it left behind. And we can’t forget the romantic fourth type — like the North Star, no one actually wants to reach them, as they are largely used for navigation, to find a direction in unchartered waters.

Now, conjectures famously provide a foundation of the scientific method, but that’s not at all how we actually think of them in mathematics. I argued back in this pointed blog post that citations are the most crucial for the day to day math development, so one should take utmost care in making references. While this claim is largely uncontroversial and serves as a raison d’être for most GoogleScholar profiles, conjectures provide a convenient idealistic way out. Thus, it’s much more noble and virtuous to say “I dedicated my life to the study of the XYZ Conjecture” (even if they never publish anything), than “I am working hard writing so many papers to gain respect of my peers, get a promotion, and provide for my family“. Right. Obviously…

But given this apparent (true or perceived) importance of conjectures, are you sure you are using them right? What if some/many of these conjectures are actually wrong, what then? Should you be flying that starship if there is no there there? An idealist would argue something like “it’s a journey, not a destination“, but I strongly disagree. Getting closer to the truth is actually kind of important, both as a public policy and on an individual level. It is thus pretty important to get it right where we are going.

What are conjectures in mathematics?

That’s a stupid question, right? Conjectures are mathematical claims whose validity we are trying to ascertain. Is that all? Well, yes, if you don’t care if anyone will actually work on the conjecture. In other words, something about the conjecture needs to interesting and inspiring.

What makes a conjecture interesting?

This is a hard question to answer because it is as much psychological as it is mathematical. A typical answer would be “oh, because it’s old/famous/beautiful/etc.” Uhm, ok, but let’s try to be a little more formal.

One typically argues “oh, that’s because this conjecture would imply [a list of interesting claims and known results]”. Well, ok, but this is self-referential. We already know all those “known results”, so no need to prove them again. And these “claims” are simply other conjectures, so this is really an argument of the type “this conjecture would imply that conjecture”, so not universally convincing. One can argue: “look, this conjecture has so many interesting consequences”. But this is both subjective and unintuitive. Shouldn’t having so many interesting conjectural consequences suggest that perhaps the conjecture is too strong and likely false? And if the conjecture is likely to be false, shouldn’t this make it uninteresting?

Also, wouldn’t it be interesting if you disprove a conjecture everyone believes to be true? In some sense, wouldn’t it be even more interesting if until now everyone one was simply wrong?

None of this are new ideas, of course. For example, faced with the need to justify the “great” BC conjecture, or rather 123 pages of survey on the subject (which is quite interesting and doesn’t really need to be justified), the authors suddenly turned reflective. Mindful of self-referential approach which they quickly discard, they chose a different tactic:

We believe that the interest of a conjecture lies in the feeling of unity of mathematics that it entails. [M.P. Gomez Aparicio, P. Julg and A. Valette, “The Baum-Connes conjecture“, 2019]

Huh? Shouldn’t math be about absolute truths, not feelings? Also, in my previous blog post, I mentioned Noga Alon‘s quote that Mathematics is already “one unit“. If it is, why does it need a new “feeling of unity“? Or is that like one of those new age ideas which stop being true if you don’t reinforce them at every occasion?

If you are confused at this point, welcome to the club! There is no objective way to argue what makes certain conjectures interesting. It’s all in our imagination. Nikolay Konstantinov once told me that “mathematics is a boring subject because every statement is equivalent to saying that some set is empty.” He meant to be provocative rather than uninspiring. But the problem he is underlying is quite serious.

What makes us believe a conjecture is true?

We already established that in order to argue that a conjecture is interesting we need to argue it’s also true, or at least we want to believe it to be true to have all those consequences. Note, however, that we argue that a conjecture is true in exactly the same way we argue it’s interesting: by showing that it holds is some special cases, and that it would imply other conjectures which are believed to be true because they are also checked in various special cases. So in essence, this gives “true = interesting” in most cases. Right?

This is where it gets complicated. Say, you are working on the “abc conjecture” which may or may not be open. You claim that it has many consequences, which makes it both likely true and interesting. One of them is the negative solution to the Erdős–Ulam problem about existence of a dense set in the plane with rational pairwise distances. But a positive solution to the E-U problem implies the Harborth’s conjecture (aka the “integral Fáry problem“) that every graph can be drawn in the plane with rational edge lengths. So, counterintuitively, if you follow the logic above shouldn’t you be working on a positive solution to Erdős–Ulam since it would both imply one conjecture and give a counterexample to another? For the record, I wouldn’t do that, just making a polemical point.

I am really hoping you see where I am going. Since there is no objective way to tell if a conjecture is true or not, and what exactly is so interesting about it, shouldn’t we discard our biases and also work towards disproving the conjecture just as hard as trying to prove it?

What do people say?

It’s worth starting with a general (if slightly poetic) modern description:

In mathematics, [..] great conjectures [are] sharply formulated statements that are most likely true but for which no conclusive proof has yet been found. These conjectures have deep roots and wide ramifications. The search for their solution guides a large part of mathematics. Eternal fame awaits those who conquer them first. Remarkably, mathematics has elevated the formulation of a conjecture into high art. [..] A well-chosen but unproven statement can make its author world-famous, sometimes even more so than the person providing the ultimate proof. [Robbert Dijkgraaf, The Subtle Art of the Mathematical Conjecture, 2019]

Karl Popper thought that conjectures are foundational to science, even if somewhat idealized the efforts to disprove them:

[Great scientists] are men of bold ideas, but highly critical of their own ideas: they try to find whether their ideas are right by trying first to find whether they are not perhaps wrong. They work with bold conjectures and severe attempts at refuting their own conjectures. [Karl Popper, Heroic Science, 1974]

Here is how he reconciled somewhat the apparent contradiction:

On the pre-scientific level we hate the very idea that we may be mistaken. So we cling dogmatically to our conjectures, as long as possible. On the scientific level, we systematically search for our mistakes. [Karl Popper, quoted by Bryan Magee, 1971]

Paul Erdős was, of course, a champion of conjectures and open problems. He joked that the purpose of life is “proof and conjecture” and this theme is repeatedly echoed when people write about him. It is hard to overestimate his output, which included hundreds of talks titled “My favorite problems“. He wrote over 180 papers with collections of conjectures and open problems (nicely assembled by Zbl. Math.)

Peter Sarnak has a somewhat opposite point of view, as he believes one should be extremely cautious about stating a conjecture so people don’t waste time working on it. He said once, only half-jokingly:

Since we reward people for making a right conjecture, maybe we should punish those who make a wrong conjecture. Say, cut off their fingers. [Peter Sarnak, UCLA, c. 2012]

This is not an exact quote — I am paraphrasing from memory. Needless to say, I disagree. I don’t know how many fingers he wished Erdős should lose, since some of his conjectures were definitely disproved: one, two, three, four, five, and six. This is not me gloating, the opposite in fact. When you are stating hundreds of conjectures in the span of almost 50 years, having only a handful to be disproved is an amazing batting average. It would, however, make me happy if Sarnak’s conjecture is disproved someday.

Finally, there is a bit of a controversy whether conjectures are worth as much as theorems. This is aptly summarized in this quote about yet another champion of conjectures:

Louis J. Mordell [in his book review] questioned Hardy‘s assessment that Ramanujan was a man whose native talent was equal to that of Euler or Jacobi. Mordell [..] claims that one should judge a mathematician by what he has actually done, by which Mordell seems to mean, the theorems he has proved. Mordell’s assessment seems quite wrong to me. I think that a felicitous but unproved conjecture may be of much more consequence for mathematics than the proof of many a respectable theorem. [Atle Selberg, “Reflections Around the Ramanujan Centenary“, 1988]

So, what’s the problem?

Well, the way I see it, the efforts made towards proving vs. disproving conjectures is greatly out of balance. Despite all the high-minded Popper’s claims about “severe attempts at refuting their own conjectures“, I don’t think there is much truth to that in modern math sciences. This does not mean that disproofs of famous conjectures aren’t celebrated. Sometimes they are, see below. But it’s clear to me that the proofs are celebrated more frequently, and to a much greater degree. I have only anecdotal evidence to support my claim, but bear with me.

Take prizes. Famously, Clay Math Institute gives $1 million for a solution of any of these major open problems. But look closely at the rules. According to the item 5b, except for the P vs. NP problem and the Navier–Stokes Equation problem, it gives nothing ($0) for a disproof of these problems. Why, oh why?? Let’s look into CMI’s “primary objectives and purposes“:

To recognize extraordinary achievements and advances in mathematical research.

So it sounds like CMI does not think that disproving the Riemann Hypothesis needs to be rewarded because this wouldn’t “advance mathematical research”. Surely, you are joking? Whatever happened to “the opposite of a profound truth may well be another profound truth“? Why does the CMI wants to put its thumb on the scale and support only one side? Do they not want to find out the solution whatever it is? Shouldn’t they be eager to dispense with the “wrong conjecture” so as to save numerous researches from “advances to nowhere“?

I am sure you can see that my blood is boiling, but let’s proceed to the P vs. NP problem. What if it’s independent of ZFC? Clearly, CMI wouldn’t pay for proving that. Why not? It’s not like this kind of thing never happened before (see obligatory link to CH). Some people believe that (or at least they did in 2012), and some people like Scott Aaronson take this seriously enough. Wouldn’t this be a great result worthy of an award as much as the proof that P=NP, or at least a nonconstructive proof that P=NP?

If your head is not spinning hard enough, here is another amusing quote:

Of course, it’s possible that P vs. NP is unprovable, but that that fact itself will forever elude proof: indeed, maybe the question of the independence of P vs. NP is itself independent of set theory, and so on ad infinitum! But one can at least say that, if P vs. NP (or for that matter, the Riemann hypothesis, Goldbach’s conjecture, etc.) were proven independent of ZF, it would be an unprecedented development. [Scott Aaronson, P vs. NP, 2016].

Speaking of Goldbach’s Conjecture, the most talked about and the most intuitively correct statement in Number Theory that I know. In a publicity stunt, for two years there was a $1 million prize by a publishing house for the proof of the conjecture. Why just for the proof? I never heard of anyone not believing the conjecture. If I was the insurance underwriter for the prize (I bet they had one), I would allow them to use “for the proof or disproof” for a mere extra $100 in premium. For another $50 I would let them use “or independent of ZF” — it’s a free money, so why not? It’s such a pernicious idea of rewarding only one kind of research outcome!

Curiously, even for Goldbach’s Conjecture, there is a mild divergence of POVs on what the future holds. For example, Popper writes (twice in the same book!) that:

[On whether Goldbach’s Conjecture is ‘demonstrable’] We don’t know: perhaps we may never know, and perhaps we can never know. [Karl Popper, Conjectures and Refutations, 1963]

Ugh. Perhaps. I suppose anything can happen… For example, our civilizations can “perhaps” die out in the next 200 years. But is that likely? Shouldn’t the gloomy past be a warning, not a prediction of the future? The only thing more outrageously pessimistic is this theological gem of a quote:

Not even God knows the number of permutations of 1000 avoiding the 1324 pattern. [Doron Zeilberger, quoted here, 2005]

Thanks, Doron! What a way to encourage everyone! Since we know from numerical estimates that this number is ≈ 3.7 × 101017 (see this paper and this follow up), Zeilberger is suggesting that large pattern avoidance numbers are impossibly hard to compute precisely, already in the range of only about 1018 digits. I really hope he is proved wrong in his lifetime.

But I digress. What I mean to emphasize, is that there are many ways a problem can be resolved. Yet some outcomes are considered more valuable than others. Shouldn’t the research achievements be rewarded, not the desired outcome? Here is yet another colorful opinion on this:

Given a conjecture, the best thing is to prove it. The second best thing is to disprove it. The third best thing is to prove that it is not possible to disprove it, since it will tell you not to waste your time trying to disprove it. That’s what Gödel did for the Continuum Hypothesis. [Saharon Shelah, Rutgers Univ. Colloqium, 2001]

Why do I care?

For one thing, disproving conjectures is part of what I do. Sometimes people are a little shy to unambiguously state them as formal conjectures, so they phrase them as questions or open problems, but then clarify that they believe the answer is positive. This is a distinction without a difference, or at least I don’t see any (maybe they are afraid of Sarnak’s wrath?) Regardless, proving their beliefs wrong is still what I do.

For example, here is my old bog post on my disproof of the Noonan-Zeiberger Conjecture (joint with Scott Garrabrant). And in this recent paper (joint with Danny Nguyen), we disprove in one big swoosh both Barvinok’s Problem, Kannan’s Problem, and Woods Conjecture. Just this year I disproved three conjectures:

The Kirillov–Klyachko Conjecture (2004) that the reduced Kronecker coefficients satisfy the saturation property (this paper, joint with Greta Panova).
The Brandolini et al. Conjecture (2019) that concrete lattice polytopes can multitile the space (this paper, joint with Alexey Garber).
Kenyon’s Problem (c. 2005) that every integral curve in R3 is a boundary of a PL surface comprised of unit triangles (this paper, joint with Alexey Glazyrin).

On top of that, just two months ago in this paper (joint with Han Lyu), we showed that the remarkable independence heuristic by I. J. Good for the number of contingency tables, fails badly even for nearly all uniform marginals. This is not exactly disproof of a conjecture, but it’s close, since the heuristic was introduced back in 1950 and continues to work well in practice.

In addition, I am currently working on disproving two more old conjectures which will remain unnamed until the time we actually resolve them (which might never happen, of course). In summary, I am deeply vested in disproving conjectures. The reasons why are somewhat complicated (see some of them below). But whatever my reasons, I demand and naively fully expect that my disproofs be treated on par with proofs, regardless whether this expectation bears any relation to reality.

My favorite disproofs and counterexamples:

There are many. Here are just a few, some famous and some not-so-famous, in historical order:

Fermat‘s conjecture (letter to Pascal, 1640) on primality of Fermat numbers, disproved by Euler (1747)
Tait’s conjecture (1884) on hamiltonicity of graphs of simple 3-polytopes, disproved by W.T. Tutte (1946)
General Burnside Problem (1902) on finiteness of periodic groups, resolved negatively by E.S. Golod (1964)
Keller’s conjecture (1930) on tilings with unit hypercubes, disproved by Jeff Lagarias and Peter Shor (1992)
Borsuk’s Conjecture (1932) on partitions of convex sets into parts of smaller diameter, disproved by Jeff Kahn and Gil Kalai (1993)
Hirsch Conjecture (1957) on the diameter of graphs of convex polytopes, disproved by Paco Santos (2010)
Woods’s conjecture (1972) on the covering radius of certain lattices, disproved by Oded Regev, Uri Shapira and Barak Weiss (2017)
Connes embedding problem (1976), resolved negatively by Zhengfeng Ji, Anand Natarajan, Thomas Vidick, John Wright and Henry Yuen (2020)

In all these cases, the disproofs and counterexamples didn’t stop the research. On the contrary, they gave a push to further (sometimes numerous) developments in the area.

Why should you disprove conjectures?

There are three reasons, of different nature and importance.

First, disproving conjectures is opportunistic. As mentioned above, people seem to try proving much harder than they try disproving. This creates niches of opportunity for an open-minded mathematician.

Second, disproving conjectures is beautiful. Let me explain. Conjectures tend to be rigid, as in “objects of the type pqr satisfy property abc.” People like me believe in the idea of “universality“. Some might call it “completeness” or even “Murphy’s law“, but the general principle is always the same. Namely: it is not sufficient that one wishes that all pqr satisfy abc to actually believe in the implication; rather, there has to be a strong reason why abc should hold. Barring that, pqr can possibly be almost anything, so in particular non-abc. While some would argue that non-abc objects are “ugly” or at least “not as nice” as abc, the idea of universality means that your objects can be of every color of the rainbow — nice color, ugly color, startling color, quiet color, etc. That kind of palette has its own sense of beauty, but it’s an acquired taste I suppose.

Third, disproving conjectures is constructive. It depends on the nature of the conjecture, of course, but one is often faced with necessity to construct a counterexample. Think of this as an engineering problem of building some pqr which at the same time is not abc. Such construction, if at all possible, might be difficult, time consuming and computer assisted. But so what? What would you rather do: build a mile-high skyscraper (none exist yet) or prove that this is impossible? Curiously, in CS Theory both algorithms and (many) complexity results are constructive (you need gadgets). Even the GCT is partially constructive, although explaining that would take us awhile.

What should the institutions do?

If you are an institution which awards prizes, stop with the legal nonsense: “We award […] only for a publication of a proof in a top journal”. You need to set up a scientific committee anyway, since otherwise it’s hard to tell sometimes if someone deserves a prize. With mathematicians you can expect anything anyway. Some would post two arXiv preprints, give a few lectures and then stop answering emails. Others would publish only in a journal where they are Editor-in-Chief. It’s stranger than fiction, really.

What you should do is say in the official rules: “We have [this much money] and an independent scientific committee which will award any progress on [this problem] partially or in full as they see fit.” Then a disproof or an independence result will receive just as much as the proof (what’s done is done, what else are you going to do with the money?) This would also allow some flexibility for partial solutions. Say, somebody proves Goldbach’s Conjecture for integers > exp(exp(10100000)), way way beyond computational powers for the remaining integers to be checked. I would give this person at least 50% of the prize money, leaving the rest for future developments of possibly many people improving on the bound. However, under the old prize rules such person gets bupkes for their breakthrough.

What should the journals do?

In short, become more open to results of computational and experimental nature. If this sounds familiar, that’s because it’s a summary of Zeilberger’s Opinions, viewed charitably. He is correct on this. This includes publishing results of the type “Based on computational evidence we believe in the following UVW conjecture” or “We develop a new algorithm which confirms the UVW conjecture for n<13″. These are still contributions to mathematics, and the journals should learn to recognize them as such.

To put in context of our theme, it is clear that a lot more effort has been placed on proofs than on finding counterexamples. However, in many areas of mathematics there are no small counterexamples, so a heavy computational effort is crucial for any hope of finding one. Such work is not be as glamorous as traditional papers. But really, when it comes to standards, if a journal is willing to publish the study of something like the “null graphs“, the ship has sailed for you…

Let me give you a concrete example where a computational effort is indispensable. The curious Lovász conjecture states that every finite connected vertex-transitive graph contains a Hamiltonian path. This conjecture got to be false. It hits every red flag — there is really no reason why pqr = “vertex transitive” should imply abc = “Hamiltonian”. The best lower bound for the length of the longest (self-avoiding) path is only about square root of the number of vertices. In fact, even the original wording by Lovász shows he didn’t believe the conjecture is true (also, I asked him and he confirmed).

Unfortunately, proving that some potential counterexample is not Hamiltonian is computationally difficult. I once had an idea of one (a nice cubic Cayley graph on “only” 3600 vertices), but Bill Cook quickly found a Hamiltonian cycle dashing my hopes (it was kind of him to look into this problem). Maybe someday, when the TSP solvers are fast enough on much larger graphs, it will be time to return to this problem and thoroughly test it on large Cayley graphs. But say, despite long odds, I succeed and find a counterexample. Would a top journal publish such a paper?

Editor’s dilemma

There are three real criteria for evaluation a solution of an open problem by the journal:

Is this an old, famous, or well-studied problem?
Are the tools interesting or innovative enough to be helpful in future studies?
Are the implications of the solution to other problems important enough?

Now let’s make a hypothetical experiment. Let’s say a paper is submitted to a top math journal which solves a famous open problem in Combinatorics. Further, let’s say somebody already proved it is equivalent to a major problem in TCS. This checks criteria 1 and 3. Until not long ago it would be rejected regardless, so let’s assume this is happening relatively recently.

Now imagine two parallel worlds, where in the first world the conjecture is proved on 2 pages using beautiful but elementary linear algebra, and in the second world the conjecture is disproved on a 2 page long summary of a detailed computational search. So in neither world we have much to satisfy criterion 2. Now, a quiz: in which world the paper will be published?

If you recognized that the first world is a story of Hao Huang‘s elegant proof of the induced subgraphs of hypercubes conjecture, which implies the sensitivity conjecture. The Annals published it, I am happy to learn, in a welcome break with the past. But unless we are talking about some 200 year old famous conjecture, I can’t imagine the Annals accepting a short computational paper in the second world. Indeed, it took a bit of a scandal to accept even the 400 year old Kepler’s conjecture which was proved in a remarkable computational work.

Now think about this. Is any of that fair? Shouldn’t we do better as a community on this issue?

What do other people do?

Over the years I asked a number of people about the uncertainty created by the conjectures and what do they do about it. The answers surprised me. Here I am paraphrasing them:

Some were dumbfounded: “What do you mean this conjecture could be false? It has to be true, otherwise nothing I am doing make much sense.”

Others were simplistic: “It’s an important conjecture. Famous people said it’s true. It’s my job to prove it.”

Third were defensive: “Do you really think this conjecture could be wrong? Why don’t you try to disprove it then? We’ll see who is right.”

Fourth were biblical: “I tend to work 6 days a week towards the proof and one day towards the disproof.”

Fifth were practical: “I work on the proof until I hit a wall. I use the idea of this obstacle to try constructing potential counterexamples. When I find an approach to discard such counterexamples, I try to generalize the approach to continue working on the proof. Continue until either side wins.”

If the last two seem sensible to you to, that’s because they are. However, I bet fourth are just grandstanding — no way they actually do that. The fifth sound great when this is possible, but that’s exceedingly rare, in my opinion. We live in a technical age when proving new results often requires great deal of effort and technology. You likely have tools and intuition to work in only one direction. Why would you want to waste time working in another?

What should you do?

First, remember to make conjectures. Every time you write a paper, tell a story of what you proved. Then tell a story of what you wanted to prove but couldn’t. State it in the form of a conjecture. Don’t be afraid to be wrong, or be right but oversharing your ideas. It’s a downside, sure. But the upside is that your conjecture might prove very useful to others, especially young researchers. In might advance the area, or help you find a collaborator to resolve it.

Second, learn to check your conjectures computationally in many small cases. It’s important to give supporting evidence so that others take your conjectures seriously.

Third, learn to make experiments, explore the area computationally. That’s how you make new conjectures.

Fourth, understand yourself. Your skill, your tools. Your abilities like problem solving, absorbing information from the literature, or making bridges to other fields. Faced with a conjecture, use this knowledge to understand whether at least in principle you might be able to prove or disprove a conjecture.

Fifth, actively look for collaborators. Those who have skills, tools, or abilities you are missing. More importantly, they might have a different POV on the validity of the conjecture and how one might want to attack it. Argue with them and learn from them.

Sixth, be brave and optimistic! Whether you decide to prove, disprove a conjecture, or simply state a new conjecture, go for it! Ignore the judgements by the likes of Sarnak and Zeilberger. Trust me — they don’t really mean it.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

15. Open-weight AI is having its Kubernetes moment

Source: https://tobi.knaup.me/2026-07-25-open-weight-ai-is-having-its-kubernetes-moment/
Site: Tobi Knaup
Author: Tobi Knaup
Published: 2026-07-25
HN activity: 327 points · 263 comments
Length: 1.3K words (~6 min read)
Language: en

Open-weight models are becoming the foundation for the next AI ecosystem. The US should compete in it, not wall itself off.

I have seen a version of this story before.

In 2013 I co-founded Mesosphere, an open source cloud-native software company. We built on Apache Mesos, which my co-founder Ben Hindman had helped create at UC Berkeley. We later built DC/OS (Data Center Operating System) around Mesos, released it as open source, and commercialized it through an enterprise distribution with support and proprietary features.

After several years of massive growth, Kubernetes disrupted us. It was newer, fully open source, and it quickly galvanized the cloud-native community. Many of the world’s best distributed-systems and infrastructure engineers bet their careers on it, and even some of our most loyal community members changed horses.

Once that happened, innovation moved to Kubernetes. Whatever the platform was missing, someone started building: networking, storage, observability, deployment tools, policy engines. A large number of startups were created, and legacy vendors joined in as well. Almost every component required to run Kubernetes in production became available as open source. Cloud providers and companies including Mesosphere/D2iQ, Rancher, Red Hat and Nutanix then built businesses around integration, enterprise features, support and operations.

Kubernetes did not win simply because its repository was public. It became a neutral substrate that engineers, cloud providers and enterprise vendors could all extend to fit their customers’ needs. Common interfaces and vendor-neutral governance gave everyone confidence that they could build on it.

The lesson I took away wasn’t that open source always wins. It was that once an open platform that people can customize becomes the industry’s center of gravity, no single vendor can match the combined rate of innovation around it.

I think AI is approaching the same point.

Open weights turn a model into a platform

First, a terminology note. Most models we casually call “open source” are more accurately described as open-weight. You can download and modify the trained parameters, but the training data and complete training process usually aren’t available. That falls short of the Open Source Initiative’s definition of open source AI. The distinction matters. It doesn’t, however, prevent an ecosystem from forming around the artifact people can run and modify.

The Kubernetes analogy isn’t perfect. Kubernetes contributors could inspect and change the actual source, and improvements could flow back into a shared upstream project. Model fine-tunes usually don’t work that way. Frontier weights may be downloadable but still require expensive hardware, and there is no AI equivalent of the CNCF providing neutral governance and common interfaces. Those are real differences. The common mechanism is that a sufficiently capable, portable substrate can attract complementary innovation far beyond what its original creator could build alone.

The first reason to use open-weight models was self-hosting. Companies wanted control over their data. They wanted to run models in their own cloud or data center. And as usage and inference costs grow, they increasingly want control over cost as well.

That demand produced a healthy open source serving stack: vLLM, SGLang, llama.cpp, Ollama, MLX and others.

But self-hosting is only the beginning. Open weights turn the model itself into something developers can adapt and redistribute. Hugging Face now hosts more than two million public models. Around popular families such as Qwen and Gemma, developers produce:

quantized and converted weights for different silicon architectures and scale;
fine-tunes and LoRA adapters for coding, medicine, law, math and agentic workflows;
model merges that combine different fine-tunes;
adaptations for runtimes such as TensorRT-LLM, vLLM, MLX and others.

Until recently, it was easy to dismiss this activity at the frontier. Open models were useful, but the base models weren’t good enough for the hardest coding and agentic tasks. That gap is narrowing quickly. Z.ai has released GLM-5.2 with public weights under an MIT license. Its own evaluation reports 62.1% on SWE-bench Pro versus 58.6% for GPT-5.5, although results vary across benchmarks and agent harnesses.

Moonshot says Kimi K3 approaches the closed frontier on long-horizon coding and has promised to publish its weights on July 27. Artificial Analysis supports the performance claim, scoring it alongside Opus 4.8 and GPT-5.5 in its independent evaluation.

Once the base model is good enough, the ecosystem can compound. I expect new projects around agent runtimes, coding harnesses, sandboxes, evaluations, observability and specialized fine-tunes. Together they can become a production-grade stack: an open-weight model running on open source software, customizable for a team’s workload, hardware and economics.

Will that stack beat every closed model on every benchmark? Probably not. But I would not bet on any single vendor out-innovating the combined open ecosystem over time. Frontier technology is a talent war, and open ecosystems give talented people everywhere a reason to build on the same foundation.

Banning Chinese models would be an own goal

This brings us to the current debate in Washington. After the release of Kimi K3 and other capable Chinese models, the Trump administration is reportedly considering restrictions on Chinese open-weight models. The exact form of a potential ban remains unclear.

A broad ban on American researchers and companies using Chinese open-weight models would do something else entirely. It would cut the US off from an ecosystem that is already attracting many of the world’s best AI researchers and engineers, including a large number of Chinese researchers. The rest of the world would keep building. American developers would be the ones locked out.

We’ve seen this dynamic with Qwen already. Hugging Face reports that Chinese models accounted for 41% of model downloads over the past year. If the best open-weight foundation models increasingly come from China, innovation will accumulate around them in the same way it accumulated around Kubernetes.

How the US should compete

The US should compete in that ecosystem, not retreat from it.

Release frontier-grade American models

American labs need to release frontier-grade open-weight models under licenses that startups can actually build on. There has been progress. NVIDIA’s Nemotron models are commercially usable under NVIDIA’s own permissive license. Thinking Machines released Inkling under Apache 2.0, as did OpenAI with gpt-oss and Google with Gemma 4. But OpenAI’s and Google’s strongest models remain closed, as do those from most American frontier labs.

Use procurement to create an open market

The government should use procurement to create demand for portable, interoperable systems rather than permanent dependence on one API vendor. The Department of Defense has done this before. Platform One provides open source tools and enterprise products that different military programs can build on. The same playbook can accelerate innovation around open-weight models.

Build the rest of the stack

American companies need to build the rest of the stack. Startups can customize and extend the models, embed them into products, and provide the serving, tooling, support and operational layers. Our leading silicon companies will keep improving the hardware. Hyperscalers and neoclouds can serve the models and their ecosystems.

Set standards instead of banning models

Safety is the strongest argument for restrictions, but a blanket ban is too blunt and would sacrifice access to the entire ecosystem. A better approach is independent testing and standards for frontier models. The analogy isn’t exact: Kubernetes conformance tests compatibility, not safety. But the governance model is useful. Demis Hassabis has proposed a US-led independent standards body along those lines.

America should not respond to open Chinese models by building a wall around its own developers. We should run the models ourselves, tear them apart, benchmark them, improve on them and build better American alternatives. Then we should make the American stack the easiest one in the world to adopt.

The United States has spent decades attracting the world’s best technical talent and giving it room to build. Turning that advantage into a walled garden while the rest of the world standardizes on a more open stack would be a spectacular own goal. We would be giving up our role as the AI leader by choice.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

16. Producing ammonia and fertiliser using wind power in Morris, Minnesota

Source: https://ammoniaenergy.org/articles/flexible-renewable-ammonia-demonstrator-now-operational-in-minnesota/
Site: Ammonia Energy Association
Author: Jacinta Bakker
Published: 2026-07-21
HN activity: 104 points · 69 comments
Length: 558 words (~3 min read)
Language: en-US

By on July 20, 2026

Producing ammonia & fertiliser using wind power in Morris, Minnesota

Click to learn more. Online renewable ammonia demonstrator, powered by wind turbines in Morris, Minnesota, USA. Source: University of Minnesota.

A pioneering facility has come online for its first season of low-carbon ammonia production in Minnesota, USA. The plant is being turned on gradually, with a target of one ton per day of low-carbon ammonia production for local fertiliser offtake. Wind energy powers the electrolysers that supply hydrogen to a Haber Bosch plant. To manage the fluctuating renewable energy supply, the rate of ammonia production can be adjusted using new modeling and control systems.

The plant is located at University of Minnesota’s (UMN) West Central Research and Outreach Center in Morris, rural Minnesota. It is a collaboration between UMN, Research Triangle Institutes International (RTI International) as well as Casale. The project aims to address high fertiliser prices and supply chain instability, while creating revenue streams within the state. This facility is an upscale of 2013’s successful pilot plant, and can be expanded further to a network of commercial, renewable ammonia generation hubs owned by farmer cooperatives. The ammonia produced can be stored in nurse tanks and/or coupled with carbon dioxide by-products from ethanol production to produce urea, the most common form of fertiliser used in Minnesota.

It seemed like an elegant concept when we were first looking at it that you could take a wind turbine, and that’s producing energy from wind above a cornfield, or small grain field, and then produce a nutrient that you can use right underneath the wind farms in rural Minnesota… There are no ammonia or nitrogen fertilizer production facilities in the state other than our small systems here. If you can produce a moderately priced nitrogen fertilizer that’s consistent, year in and year out, then farmers can budget for it, and they can market crops to that point in time.

Michael Reese, Green Ammonia Research Lead, University of Minnesota Twin Cities press release, 26 Jun 2026

Essentially, the wind or the sun is our feedstock. We typically design a chemical plant to run at steady state and produce at a constant rate, assuming that we have a constant supply of our feedstock. That’s not the case with green chemicals or green ammonia specifically. In order to somehow absorb the fluctuations in wind availability, you need to have a significant storage of hydrogen to be able to absorb these fluctuations, which is very costly. On the other hand, if you allow the plant to operate dynamically, you minimize the demand for storing hydrogen or storing power and hence, you can have a much tighter design, a much, much more economical design. It’s about the economic development of the state… One can see a model of co-ops that will come together and hopefully develop these plants with support and loans and credits from the state.

Prodromos Daoutidis, Professor of Chemical Engineering, University of Minnesota Twin Cities press release, 26 Jun 2026

In AEA’s December 2025 episode of Project Features, project partners explained the Morris facility in detail among other ammonia energy R&D pioneering demonstration plants and start-up companies originating from the UMN. The recording and presentations can be found here.

Explore the journey of the demonstrator plant, plus other ammonia energy start ups originating from the University of Minnesota.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

17. LLM Usage in Debian: Three Proposals

Source: https://www.debian.org/vote/2026/vote_002
Site: debian.org
Submitter: zdw (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-07-25 19:44 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 96 points · 87 comments
Length: 2.4K words (~11 min read)
Language: en

Time Line
Proposal A Proposer
Proposal A Seconds
Proposal A
Proposal B Proposer
Proposal B Seconds
Proposal B
Proposal C Proposer
Proposal C Seconds
Proposal C
Proposal D Proposer
Proposal D Seconds
Proposal D

Time Line

Discussion Period: 2026-07-24

Proposal A Proposer

Matthias Geiger [werdahias@debian.org] [text of proposal]

Proposal A Seconds

Johannes Schauer Marin Rodrigues [josch@debian.org] [mail]
Antoine Le Gonidec [vv221@debian.org] [mail]
Simon Richter [sjr@debian.org] [mail]
David Bremner [bremner@debian.org] [mail]
Pierre-Elliott Bécue [peb@debian.org] [mail]
Ian Jackson [iwj@debian.org] [mail]
Amin Bandali [bandali@debian.org] [mail]
Thorsten Glaser [tg@debian.org] [mail]

Proposal A

Choice 1

Preamble

This proposal aims to expressly forbid any contributions to Debian written with the use or assistance of large language models (LLMs) or other generative AI tools.

The scope of this GR is (non-exhaustive):

Debian source packages
Official Debian project software, such as lintian
Debian web resources
Documentation and translations added by Debian contributors
Official communication from Debian

It does not include:

Upstream projects using LLMs for development
AI-related software
Upstream patches/security fixes etc.

Rationale

Debian has a well-earned reputation for stability. This stability is crucial to Debian's position in the free software ecosystem. It is our belief that widespread LLM usage comes from the "move fast, and break things" attitude that, while common in many parts of this industry, is contrary to what makes Debian Debian, and is inappropriate for Debian contributors.

In practical terms, LLM usage raises the following concerns:

1. Copyright

LLM output has very unclear legal status: it may be possible to copyright on its own merits, or not; it may be affected by all of the licenses and copyrights in the training data, or not. Debian Policy and the DFSG require absolute clarity for licensing and copyright[1][2]. Software and other contributions written conventionally by humans with unclear copyright or license status are not allowed in Debian; LLM output should not have a special exception to this.

2. Quality

LLM output has many well-known problems with accuracy.[3][4][5] A LLM can never "know" if its output is correct since it merely produces syntactically likely combinations of the training data. In some environments this is good enough. In Debian, it is not. For instance, in packaging, each Debian source package is unique. Since packaging syntax and best practices have changed over time, a LLM-produced package will have a mixture of contents spanning the age of the archive, with watch files that do not work, overrides out of context, imaginary copyright, and will generally be unfit for upload. A seasoned Debian contributor with packaging expertise may find some limited usefulness here, but a new contributor cannot, and would not know how to fix it. These same quality and accuracy concerns apply clearly to all of the areas listed in the scope of this proposal above. If Debian were a closed organization comprising only domain experts who never leave, this might not be an issue; however,

3. Community

Debian is a project that is more than just code: it is a community built on shared interests in free software and solving technical problems. Debian intentionally grows this community through many means, and new contributors are always encouraged to join. Allowing LLM contributions breaks this. New contributors submitting LLM output for review places an unnecessary strain on the reviewer, which can lead to burnout. Furthermore, LLM-dependent new contributors do not actually learn and understand the details of Debian packaging or processes, so they cannot come to replace a former burned out DD.

4. Ethics

LLM companies directly hurt the free software community as whole by scraping the whole web for training data without any regard for license, copyright, or even established conventions such as robots.txt.[6] This has had a major negative impact on Debian's public web resources, effectively a large scale and perpetual Denial of Service attack on sites that many users rely on. As a consequence parts of our infrastructure were not reachable at all, and JS-based checks had to be enabled. Many other projects were similarly affected. Furthermore, LLM training consumes a staggering amount of resources[7], and the user verification systems that we have been forced to implement as protection waste resources as well. This is blatant disregard for the internet as a public resource, wastes system administrator time, and although individual LLM sessions do not directly use massive resources or DoS the public web, the fact that they can be used at all is a direct result of these unethical behaviours by the LLM companies.

Debian has a Social Contract. [8] Our priorities are our users and free software. Debian is Stable. [9] Users and organizations choose Debian because it is reliable and secure.

Debian is not here to generate as much code as possible requiring manual review by a shrinking number of human volunteers, or to package every piece of software, or to rush new features, but these are what LLMs are used for.

In conclusion, allowing LLM contributions is contrary to the social contract and the common cause of creating a free operating system with a focus on quality and stability.

Proposal

In the interest of not eroding Debian's reputation or further damaging the community, LLM-assisted contributions should be prohibited from inclusion in Debian.

Though our position is that LLM contributions are contrary to documents already ratified by Debian, in order to remove all doubt, we propose the following addition to the Social Contract:

6. Works Created through the use of Large Language Models (LLMs)

We will not
allow direct contributions to Debian written with the use or assistance of large
language models (LLMs) or other generative AI tools. Direct contributions are
defined as packaging, native Debian software like lintian, documentation and
translations written by Debian contributors, and official Debian web resources,
etc. Other categories such as upstream projects written with LLM assistance may
be included at a later date. This ensures that Debian remains a stable, trusted,
and reliable operating system, and protects the interests of the Debian
volunteers who make it possible.


Possible Issues

Other projects exploring similar decisions have elicited a common reply: "How will you enforce a ban on LLM contributions?" While enforcement could be a challenge, this is a statement of intent by the Debian community, and we trust this community to adhere to it in good faith.

Citations

[1] https://www.debian.org/doc/debian-policy/ch-archive.html#copyright-considerations
[2] https://www.debian.org/social_contract#guidelines
[3] https://web.archive.org/web/20240614004123/https://news.northeastern.edu/2023/11/10/ai-chatbot-hallucinations/
[4] https://web.archive.org/web/20250328154700/https://transformer-circuits.pub/2025/attribution-graphs/biology.html#dives-cot
[5] https://www.marketwatch.com/story/openais-sam-altman-tells-salesforces-marc-benioff-that-ai-hallucinations-are-more-feature-than-bug-1c035c52
[6] https://lwn.net/Articles/1008897/
[7] https://tech-insider.org/ai-data-center-power-crisis-2026/
[8] https://www.debian.org/social_contract
[9] https://www.debian.org/doc/manuals/debian-reference/pr01.en.html#_what_is_debian

Disclaimers

Citations are for background information only and do not reflect an endorsement of specific websites.
Some ideas and wording were derived from the sources below.

Sources

GNOME discussion: https://discourse.gnome.org/t/loupe-no-longer-allows-generative-ai-contributions/27327
(CC0) Gentoo AI policy: https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Project:Council/AI_policy
Codeberg AI policy: https://codeberg.org/Codeberg/org/pulls/1253#issuecomment-19820434

This document was written by Matthias Geiger and Jesse Rhodes with input from Sledge and josch, organically and without language model assistance.

Proposal B Proposer

Lucas Nussbaum [lucas@debian.org] [text of proposal] [text of amendment] [text of amendment]

Proposal B Seconds

Andrey Rahmatullin [wrar@debian.org] [mail]
Christian Kastner [ckk@debian.org] [mail]
Anton Gladky [gladk@debian.org] [mail]
Stefano Zacchiroli [zack@debian.org] [mail]
Simon Quigley [tsimonq2@debian.org] [mail]
Soren Stoutner [soren@debian.org] [mail]
Julian Andres Klode [jak@debian.org] [mail]
Andreas Tille [tille@debian.org] [mail]
Philipp Kern pkern@debian.org] [mail]

Proposal B

Choice 2

Allow AI-Assisted Contributions

Using its power under Constitution section 4.1 (5), the project issues the following statement describing its current position on AI-assisted contributions. This statement describes the position of the project at the time it is adopted. That position may evolve as time passes without the need to resort to future general resolutions. The GR process remains available if the project needs a decision and cannot come to a consensus.

The Debian project recognizes that AI-assisted contributions raise many concerns, e.g. about the technical quality and maintainability of such contributions, and their legal status. AI itself also raises additional concerns, about its impact on society at large, on the IT industry and on Free Software; about its environmental impact; and the aggressive or non-compliant practices of AI scrapers.

Nevertheless, many Debian contributors find AI tools helpful when contributing to Debian, and ultimately for improving Debian.

Given both the benefits and risks of AI assistance, and the controversial discussions within the community, the Debian project finds it necessary to clarify its position on AI-assisted contributions and establish clear guidelines.

The Debian project allows AI-assisted contributions (partially or fully generated by an LLM), provided the following conditions are met:

Tooling Legal Compatibility: Contributors should ensure that the terms and conditions of the generative AI tool do not impose contractual restrictions that conflict with the distribution, modification, or use of the output in the context of Debian.
Licensing and Attribution: If any pre-existing copyrighted materials (including pre-existing code licensed as free software) authored or owned by third parties are included in the AI tool’s output, prior to contributing such output to the project, the contributor should verify they have the right to submit it under the relevant open source license.
Accountability: Contributors assume full responsibility for their contributions, including vouching for the technical merit, security, license compliance, and utility of their submissions. The contributor remains solely accountable for the entirety of these contributions. Contributors should fully understand the proposed changes and be prepared to justify them.
Disclosure: When a significant portion of a contribution is generated or substantially assisted by a tool, contributors should disclose the use of the tool, making it clearly visible to the intended audience. This covers all forms of contribution, including code, mailing list posts, and bug discussions. The form of the disclosure is left to the contributor; one convenient option for commits is a Git trailer such as Generated-By: or Assisted-By:.
Prior Discussion of Bulk or Automated Changes: Similarly to the mass-bug filing process (Developers Reference section 7.1.1), contributors should discuss their intention before submitting bulk or autonomously generated contributions. Any such automated process should be overseen by a human who remains accountable for its behavior and output.
Confidentiality and Privacy: Contributors must not use generative AI tools that transmit data to untrusted providers with non-public or sensitive project information (such as embargoed security reports or private communication), as this may lead to the unintended disclosure of confidential data.

Proposal C Proposer

Ian Jackson [iwj@debian.org] [text of proposal]

Proposal C Seconds

Matthias Geiger [werdahias@debian.org] [mail]
Andrea Pappacoda [tachi@debian.org] [mail]
Simon Richter [sjr@debian.org] [mail]
Antoine Le Gonidec [vv221@debian.org] [mail]
Amin Bandali [bandali@debian.org] [mail]
Bill Blough [bblough@debian.org] [mail]
Enrico Zini [enrico@debian.org] [mail]
Sean Whitton [spwhitton@debian.org] [mail]

Proposal C

Choice 3

Summary: Reject LLMs (generative "AI") as far as practical

BACKGROUND

LLMs have many serious problems, including: undermining the mechanisms of free software community building; environmental damage; exploitation of authors; disruption to open web hosting by aggressive scraping; generation and promulgation of bullshit; polluting the information commons; hazards to users' mental health; economic bubbles; distortion of the computer hardware market; fraud; ownership by horrible people and companies; and so on. Ethical and safe use of this technology is almost impossible.

Ideally, LLM output should not form any part of software that we rely on, nor should LLM output ever take the place of human-written prose.

Unfortunately some of the wider software world, including many of our upstreams, take a different view. Therefore a complete ban on LLM output as part of Debian is currently impractical.

REQUESTS

1. We request that all contributors to Debian avoid the use of LLMs in their Debian work.

2. We request that all decisionmakers within Debian discourage LLM use as much as practical. Practicality is a judgement call and we recognise that it will involve uncomfortable compromises.

3. We request that everyone, even outside Debian, should refrain from using this technology. In particular, the Free Software and Open Source communities should reject LLMs. We recognise that not everyone will heed this call.

REQUIREMENTS (SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF CONDUCT)

4. Within Debian, messages to humans (including for example bug reports, mailing list messages, discussions on Salsa, and blog posts on Planet Debian) must be drafted solely by humans without LLM assistance.

5. Any use of LLMs for Debian work must be disclosed.

6. Individual projects and maintainers may ban LLM contributions completely. Such bans (including by upstream projects) must be respected.

7. Violations of these requirements should be treated as violations of the Code of Conduct and should result in swift but proportionate disciplinary action.

8. Any contributor who feels they cannot write in English without assistance, may write in their native language, and expect readers to use translation tools of their choice. In that case a human-written English summary would be very welcome but is not required. In any case we promise not to shame anyone for any linguistic mistakes.

Proposal D Proposer

Pierre-Elliott Bécue [peb@debian.org] [text of proposal]

Proposal D Seconds

Russ Allbery [rra@debian.org] [mail]
Johannes Schauer Marin Rodrigues [josch@debian.org] [mail]
Jonathan Carter [jcc@debian.org] [mail]
Gunnar Wolf [gwolf@debian.org] [mail]
Tiago Bortoletto Vaz [tiago@debian.org] [mail]
Jeremy Sowden [azazel@debian.org] [mail]

Proposal D

Choice 4

Accept AI contributions for Debian specific work

Debian as a project does not endorse or recommend the use of generative AI assistants for software development, as it raises multiple concerns about ethics, legality, copyright, etc.

Nevertheless, Debian acknowledges that these practices are already in use and here to stay. Rather than banning their use, which seems counter-productive and unenforceable, the project chooses to place responsibility on contributors and therefore defines the following guidelines.

These apply exclusively to code and work done specifically for the Debian project (Debian websites, applications, resources, packages, etc.). They do not apply to any upstream work. In what follows, "work" refers to the contributions done specifically for the Debian project.

All code and work assisted by a generative AI agent or tool must comply with the DFSG.
The submitter is solely responsible for the submitted work and:

they sufficiently evaluated and properly understand the work they intend to submit, and are able to explain and defend it;
they put any potential Signed-off-by tag and GPG signatures on the contributions they send to the Debian infrastructure (package, commit, mail, …) themselves;
any content uploaded that would end up in production on Debian infrastructure (main git branch, package upload) has been submitted by them explicitely.
Work assisted by a generative AI agent or tool should be marked as such in the adapted place (commit message, changelog, …). Some lightweight generative tools, such as tab-completion in Copilot, may be used without the contributor realising they rely on generative AI models; we therefore trust submitters to assess when this rule applies. When in doubt, add such marking;
No cloud-based AI shall be used when the data transmitted could either be sensitive to the project (personal data, information under embargo, …) or not public (debian-private discussions, …).

Debian Project Secretary

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

18. Rethinking Legal Education in the AI Era

Source: https://www.law.uchicago.edu/news/ai-strategy-statement
Site: University of Chicago Law School
Author: July 9, 2026
Published: 2026-07-06
HN activity: 16 points · 0 comments
Length: 3.1K words (~14 min read)
Language: en

Overview

Artificial Intelligence is already impacting higher education and the legal profession, and the pace of change appears only to be accelerating. It is thus critical for us to use this moment to carefully reflect on how legal education should adapt. This memo describes the approach we are taking to legal education in the AI era.

The University of Chicago Law School has long been committed to providing our students with the most rigorous legal education possible. This commitment manifests itself through our faculty’s dedication to teaching, our culture of challenging ideas through Socratic questioning and debate, and our grading policies that motivate students to engage with the material and that convey informative assessments of student performance to prospective employers. With AI disrupting higher education, our commitment to rigorous legal education also must mean openness to even rapid adaptation.

A willingness to rethink our practices is consistent with our law school’s long history of innovation. We were the first law school to conceive of legal education as a graduate-level program and award the Juris Doctor degree. We also made pioneering contributions to interdisciplinary legal education that incorporates insights from the humanities, social sciences, and other academic disciplines, and to the creation of legal aid clinics that brought students into real-world cases.

We began the process of reflecting on how we should adjust our teaching in response to AI shortly after OpenAI publicly released ChatGPT at the end of 2022. Our law school formed an AI committee in early 2023 and began releasing policies and guidance on the use of AI. Since then, we have added an AI module into our first-year legal research and writing program, introduced several upper-level courses on AI and the law, founded an AI Lab to teach our students how to develop AI tools to help improve access to justice, and negotiated licenses with leading AI companies so that our students, faculty, and staff have access to the resources used by practicing lawyers.

Over the last year, we embarked on a more ambitious effort to reflect on how we should adapt our curriculum and policies in response to AI. This effort included extensive consultation with our community, including alumni, leaders of law firms, business leaders, legal technology executives, and law firm associates, as well as internal stakeholders at the Law School, including our faculty, staff, and students. We also surveyed the emerging academic and professional literature on how AI is changing legal practice and student learning, and how law schools can and should respond. And we have had steadfast support from our University of Chicago leadership, who have championed a skeptical, ethical, and ambitious approach to AI.

The feedback we have received throughout this process has been consistent: We need to ensure that our students actually learn to think critically, strategically, and independently without relying on AI; but we also must face the reality that AI tools are already widely available to our students, and our graduates will be expected to be prepared to use them in legal practice.

Our Strategic Vision

Based on what we learned from our consultations this year and our experience over the past three years, we have developed a strategic vision of how we should adapt legal education to the AI era. That vision has three themes:

1. Developing AI-resilient pedagogy and assessment;

2. Elevating the “essential human” skills that distinguish excellent lawyers; and

3. Teaching the responsible, effective, and ethical use of AI.

First, rather than attempting to ban AI or to ignore its risks to learning, our pedagogy and assessment should be designed to ensure our students learn how to think critically and solve legal problems with sound professional judgment. We thus need to ensure that our students do not rely on AI-provided shortcuts that help them produce easy answers but stunt intellectual growth. This requires rethinking the technology we allow in our classrooms, the tasks we assign our students, and the way we assess our students’ performance.

This requires developing AI-resilient pedagogy, by which we mean modes of classroom interaction and performance evaluation that reward students’ effortful and sustained engagement with the material, and discourage the offloading of work to AI tools. AI-resilient pedagogy does not mean trying to prevent all student use of AI. We do not want to deter uses of AI that can increase students’ effort and engagement, such as asking AI to clarify background concepts while reading before class or asking AI to generate practice problems while studying.

Second, AI may transform the legal profession, but many aspects of legal practice are likely to remain the domain of humans, not merely because humans are good at them, but because clients, employers, judges, and society will want humans to perform them. Among others, these aspects of legal practice are likely to include oral advocacy, strategic judgment, critical thinking, and developing and maintaining relationships with clients and stakeholders. To be sure, there are ways in which AI can assist humans with these tasks. But legal education should renew its focus on training students for the aspects of legal practice for which humans are likely to remain essential.

Third, AI is already a pervasive part of legal practice and will become more so. It is simply unrealistic to think that students and lawyers will not use AI. But legal technology is changing rapidly, and there is no guarantee that the specific AI tools or techniques that are ascendant today will be useful when current students enter practice. Thus, AI skills training requires more than producing students who can use the tools that are currently part of legal practice. Law schools must give students the analytical skills and theoretical toolkit to adapt as technologies change. This is how we will ensure that our students learn how to use AI responsibly, effectively, and ethically.

We believe that these three components of our strategic vision are consistent with the Law School’s longstanding commitment to rigorous legal training and with emerging scholarship on the role of AI in education. They are also consistent with the University of Chicago’s broader goal of ensuring that we teach our students to think with, without, and about AI.

Putting the Vision into Practice

The Law School is implementing this vision through policies that apply to the major elements of the law school curriculum: required 1L core courses, 1L legal research and writing, elective courses, upper-level writing requirements, and clinical education. We outline these policies below.

Required 1L Core Courses. The 1L year is a crucial, formative period for law students. It lays the foundation for the development of critical thinking, legal writing skills, and strategic judgment throughout law school and in professional life. During the 1L year, the value of effortful struggle, even with concepts that are second nature to experienced lawyers, is paramount. Student expertise at judging the quality of AI output is at its nadir. The need for faculty to work together to create a consistent, AI-resilient approach to pedagogy is especially acute in this setting. For this reason, the Law School is adopting rules that set consistent norms for AI-resilient teaching and assessment across all 1L sections in all 1L core courses (Civil Procedure, Torts, Elements of the Law, Contracts, Property, Criminal Law, Constitutional Law, Statutory Interpretation, and Transactional Lawyering).

We will be piloting a coordinated approach to classroom and examination policies for the core 1L curriculum during the 2026–2027 academic year. Across all 1L sections, we will prohibit the use of electronic devices such as laptops, tablets, and phones in the classroom. There will be some limited exceptions to this policy. For instance, professors can designate classroom “scribes” who can use electronic devices to take notes for the class, professors can authorize electronic device use for specific tech-enabled activities (such as interactive in-class polling), and we will ensure that disabilities are accommodated in conformity with applicable law, as appropriate for the program of study. Additionally, examinations will be in-class without access to the internet, electronic files, or apps. And most of all, we will continue our longstanding tradition of emphasizing the Socratic Method as part of these courses. This coordinated approach reflects our experience, and an emerging scholarly consensus, that active, in-person engagement is conducive to learning. Reliance on devices to take notes or assist with answering questions tends to inhibit reflection and reasoning.

1L Legal Research and Writing. We are taking a different approach to 1L Legal Research and Writing (LRW). Many (if not most) students will spend their 1L summers in professional environments where they will be expected to use AI tools for research and writing tasks. Thus, the LRW curriculum must also include instruction in the responsible, effective, and ethical use of AI. At the same time, even AI skills training must itself be AI-resilient. By the end of their 1L year, our students should have the ability to review, assess, and improve the output of AI tools. Developing these skills requires human interaction as much as it requires AI tools. Hands-on work with AI tools in classroom settings and individualized feedback on writing must be components of instruction on the use of AI in legal research and writing.

We will thus be piloting a new structure to the LRW curriculum during the 2026–2027 academic year. Our approach will treat writing without AI as the foundation and will layer writing with AI onto it. Throughout the year, students will write without AI, while also using AI for research, revision, iterating on drafts, and preparation for oral argument. Students and their instructors will review together both their writing and their use of AI. In this way, students will develop their own writing skills independent of generative AI tools while also developing their ability to supervise AI and critique its output.

Elective Courses. As students progress from their foundational training in required 1L classes to elective courses, the need for coordination across sections abates, and the benefits of heterogeneity increase. Thus, in the upper-level curriculum and the elective courses that 1Ls take in the Spring, the goal of our AI policies shifts to providing guidance and fostering experimentation. For these courses, the use of the Socratic Method, no-device policies, and in-class, no-access exams will remain, but as default rules rather than required policies.1

In all elective courses, we will encourage instructors to experiment with pedagogy. Some methods of teaching and evaluation have enhanced value as AI-resilient methods. These include modes of formative assessment such as midterms, group projects, oral presentations, and peer-to-peer feedback. At the same time, AI itself creates opportunities for new forms of teaching and assessment. Our faculty have already begun experimenting with tools such as custom chatbots that serve as study aids, AI-generated practice problems, and the like. None of these particular modes of teaching and evaluation is required, but we will support experimentation with modes such as these.

Finally, as students advance in their legal training, the need for classes that explore responsible, effective, and ethical use of AI grows. To this end, we have already added a number of courses that explicitly focus on the use of AI (and even the creation of AI tools for legal work). These courses are all offered as electives, so that students can select how many AI-focused classes, and which of these classes, they wish to take. We plan to continue to grow our upper-level offerings on AI.

Upper-Level Writing Requirements. Writing is crucial to lawyering. Not only do most lawyers do a considerable amount of writing, but the practice of writing cultivates the practice of deep, sustained, and critical thought. Yet the primary modes of writing in the upper-level curriculum—research papers and reaction papers—are under stress in a world in which AI can produce plausible and substantial academic papers without the kind of human input that paper-writing is intended to involve.

This is a particularly difficult challenge. Some responses, such as requiring writing to take place in supervised, in-class settings, address the need to cultivate practice while ensuring original human effort. Yet such requirements lose an important aspect of the exercise of writing, which is sustained and independent effort across hours, days, and weeks to create a significant piece of work. This is a valuable formative exercise for thinkers and lawyers, and we cannot wholly abandon it in favor of writing methods that are easier to administer in AI-resilient ways.

Thus, we are developing an approach that introduces elements of AI-resilient design while sustaining the project of training students to undertake ambitious and independent writing projects. The rule-based element is a change to our “SRP” (substantial research paper) requirements, which will take effect beginning with this year’s class of rising 2Ls. Writing an SRP is a requirement for completion of a JD degree, and the criteria for an SRP already include (roughly) substantial length, independent research, original ideas, incorporation of feedback from faculty, and iteration across drafts. These requirements incorporate elements of serious academic and legal writing. We will be adding one additional requirement, which is that all students will be required to engage in an oral discussion of their SRP with their supervising professor, in an in-person setting. This discussion will occur after a complete draft (or final version) of the paper has been submitted to the professor. The discussion could take place one-on-one, or as a class presentation in the style of an academic workshop. Either way, the oral exchange will involve the student answering questions that probe the reasoning of the paper and the implications of its arguments.

The motivation for this new requirement is twofold. First, this requirement makes the SRP more AI-resilient by providing a test of a student’s thinking about what they have written in a setting where they cannot lean on technology. It does so without sacrificing any of the unsupervised, independent effort that must be a part of serious, sustained writing.

Second, this requirement imparts valuable skill-building for both legal practice and academic life that is justified on its own merits, without regard to AI. We are training students for a profession where they will be called upon to explain and defend their ideas in person and in real time, whether in the courtroom, during negotiations, when counseling clients, or when working in collaboration with other lawyers. Indeed, one of the hallmarks of intellectual life at the University of Chicago Law School is our robust workshop culture, in which faculty regularly present their own research paper drafts and address questions, suggestions, and criticisms from colleagues. An oral discussion component to the SRP is a way to formalize a piece of that workshop culture for all students.

Experimentation is the other element of our approach to upper-level writing assignments. For all upper-level writing, we encourage faculty to experiment with different modes of structuring writing assignments in AI-resilient ways. Some examples could include:

• In-class student workshops of their papers;
• Writing reaction papers or portions of longer papers in supervised, in-class settings;
• Group presentations or panel discussions by students with related reaction paper topics;
• Students, individually or in groups, leading portions of class discussion relevant to their reaction paper topics; and
• One-on-one discussion of a research paper with the professor outside of class.

Many other possibilities exist, of course, and the point of experimentation is to find the options that best ensure our students learn writing and critical thinking skills.

Clinical Education. The role that clinical education plays in preparing students for practice will be even more important in the AI era. Client needs and expectations will create pressure for graduates to be able to immediately use AI responsibly, effectively, and ethically. As a practical matter, this means that for many graduates, law school clinics are the best opportunity to receive close and careful supervision of their use of AI tools.

Further, clinical work often goes to the heart of what is essentially human about lawyering: advocating to judges, juries, and policy makers; understanding and being present to clients; strategizing about both the doctrinal and the practical aspects of a case; and developing rapport with counterparties and adversaries. These are all skills that our students learn from our clinical faculty. Thus, clinics are a crucial site for learning with, without, and about AI.

To these ends, we have been obtaining access to AI tools for our clinics. These include general-purpose legal AI tools and tools that are specifically designed for transactional work, immigration work, and litigation discovery. We are also in the process of procuring additional tools. Further, the clinics are each developing their own policies, tailored to their practice areas, for appropriate use of AI and to safeguard against AI-created errors in court filings and other work product. As these tools and policies are implemented, the goal is to ensure that all students in clinics are working both with AI and without AI for real clients in real practice settings.

Final Thoughts

Beyond these changes to our curriculum, three additional principles will inform our thinking.

First, we will strive to ensure that our AI policies are transparent, explicit, and explained. To that end, each instructor must state their AI policy explicitly in the course syllabus and describe the policy in class. And, as we confront new circumstances that require changes to our policies, we will communicate those clearly to our students.

Second, we will try to stay up to date on new AI tools and the best practices for how to use them. We have already been working with alumni and other employers to understand how legal practice is incorporating AI, and we have been partnering with technology firms to secure access for our students, faculty, and staff to the AI tools that leading firms are using. We have also been having regular conversations among our faculty to share information about the use of AI. We are committed to continuing to do what we can to stay current in this time of rapid change.

Finally, we will regularly reconsider these policies with ongoing input from our faculty, students, and alumni. We recognize that no statement of an AI strategy or vision can be final. Technology is changing too fast. Thus, all the changes we are currently making will be subject to review, reconsideration, and revision as we learn more and as both technology and the practice of law evolve.

1We will continue to offer courses that are cross-listed with other units, and students will still be allowed to enroll in courses offered by other units. Depending on the rules of the other units, these courses may have different policies than the electives offered solely within the Law School. We will work with instructors and other units to navigate any conflicts that may arise in the policies of different units.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

19. Show HN: I made some transistor animations

Source: https://brandonli.net/semisim/animations
Site: brandonli.net
Submitter: stunningllama (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-07-24 18:37 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 140 points · 15 comments
Length: 141 words (~1 min read)

Transistor animations made with semiconductor simulator.

In the following animations, blue and red dots represent electrons and holes, respectively. White flashes indicate recombination events. In this first set of animations, the velocity of charge carriers is equal to the combined diffusion and drift currents divided by the total charge. Diffusion is not shown here.

NPN BJT

n-ch MOSFET

n-ch JFET

In the next set of animations, the carriers undergo diffusion and drift. This is the most accurate way of depicting charge carrier motion, but is also more visually confusing.

NPN BJT (w/ diffusion)

n-ch MOSFET (w/ diffusion)

n-ch JFET (w/ diffusion)

The final set of animations shows the currents and voltages at each terminal.

NPN BJT (w/ probes)

n-ch MOSFET (w/ probes)

n-ch JFET (w/ probes)

The animations on this page made by Brandon Li are licensed under CC BY 4.0.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

20. GDID Windows – Cut the tracker that follows you even under VPN

Source: https://korben.info/en/gdid-windows-cut-tracker-vpn.html
Site: Korben's website
Author: Korben
Published: 2026-07-08
HN activity: 116 points · 82 comments
Length: 1.2K words (~6 min read)
Language: en-US

As I mentioned earlier, in April 2026, the FBI caught an alleged Scattered Spider member. The guy was hiding his traffic behind a VPN, with IPs across three different countries. And guess what? It wasn't a wrong move that gave him away - it was an identifier that your Windows carries 24/7 and that Microsoft hands over to authorities when asked: the GDID. I've already talked about it in this article , and after writing it, I started wondering whether we could get rid of it.

So I spun up a small Windows 11 Pro VM and dug in with the help of my favorite LLM - here's what I found. What works, and especially what doesn't work at all, you'll see.

First, you need to understand what the GDID actually is. It's not your motherboard's serial number, it's not a hash tied to your hardware. No - it's a 64-bit PUID, meaning an identifier that Microsoft's servers attach to your account the moment you open a Windows session. It's written in plain text in your registry, your machine registers it in a directory on Microsoft's side, and a service quietly sends it back up when needed. And if you change your IP with a VPN, it doesn't care. The GDID doesn't budge one bit.

Look your own tracker in the face

Let's start by seeing it with our own eyes. Open a PowerShell and paste this:

$lid=(Get-ItemProperty 'HKCU:SOFTWAREMicrosoftIdentityCRLExtendedProperties').LID
"g:$([Convert]::ToUInt64($lid,16))"


On my VM, it spat out g:6755487812206045. That's the one Microsoft can tie to everything I do. (In theory, mind you, because this is the code associated with my VM, so I don't care - which is why I'm showing it to you.)

You just read the label that's been stuck on your back.

Delete it? Forget it

Basic reflex: delete the key from the registry at HKCU:SOFTWAREMicrosoftIdentityCRLExtendedProperties and boom, no more tracker. That's what I tried first… I wiped the value, restarted the service that handles it, and nothing. Done? Nope. I opened the Microsoft Store for two seconds, and the GDID came back. Not a new one either - THE SAME ONE!!

That's the crazy part. Your GDID isn't stored on your disk - it's stored at Microsoft, firmly attached to your account like a barnacle on a rock. Your PC just re-downloads it again and again. Sure, if you reinstall everything, Windows gives you a new number, fine, but the old one and everything linked to it stays nice and warm on their servers. The past, you never get that back…

Disabling telemetry changes nothing either

Another piece of advice you see everywhere is to disable Windows telemetry. On my VM, the classic telemetry service was already stopped. And yet my GDID was right there, perfectly readable, and the services that send it back up were running at full speed. The tracker doesn't go through the telemetry you think you're cutting. It goes elsewhere - through the Connected Devices Platform and Delivery Optimization services.

You can click every privacy toggle in the settings, it doesn't give a damn.

Turning off the tap for real

Since we can't erase it, we're going to do the only thing within our power: stop it from getting out. And without logging out of the Microsoft account, so the PC stays usable.

For that, we have 2 levers. The first is to disable the services that register and report your machine's info. The second is to send Microsoft's servers into the void simply via the hosts file - so even if the snooping services are running, they can't reach anyone. And most importantly, we don't touch login.live.com, otherwise goodbye Microsoft account login.

There is one small catch, as you might expect… The service that reports the GDID, DoSvc, refuses to be disabled the normal way. Even as admin, Windows throws an "Access denied" at you. The workaround is to disable it directly in the registry, where the admin does have write access where the service manager blocks you.

Now, rather than dumping a ton of lines of code for you to copy-paste, I've bundled everything into clean, tested scripts, with a command to revert everything back to how it was.

The project is here: no-gdid on GitHub . First run the read-only audit to see where you stand, then the blocking scripts in preview mode, and only then with the option that actually applies changes. Test it in a VM with a snapshot before doing this on your real machine, because we are disabling system services after all. And if you just want to cut the network for a specific process without all this fuss, good old ProcNetBlocker already handles part of the job.

Alright, let's go!

Open a PowerShell as administrator, and the first time, do it in a VM with a snapshot so you can test things and get familiar with the commands. Step 1, clone the project:

winget install --id Git.Git
git clone https://github.com/Korben00/no-gdid
cd no-gdid


First, take a look at your own situation. This audit is read-only - it changes nothing, it just shows you your GDID and which services in the chain are running:

powershell -ExecutionPolicy Bypass -File .auditGet-GDID-Audit.ps1


Then see what the mitigation would change, without applying anything. Without the -Apply option, both scripts run in preview mode and simply list what they would do:

powershell -ExecutionPolicy Bypass -File .mitigateDisable-GDID-Services.ps1
powershell -ExecutionPolicy Bypass -File .mitigateBlock-GDID-Endpoints.ps1


If you're happy with that, let's cut it for real. This time we add -Apply: the services that register and report the device are disabled, and the corresponding Microsoft servers are sent into the void via the hosts file. Your Microsoft account stays connected:

powershell -ExecutionPolicy Bypass -File .mitigateDisable-GDID-Services.ps1 -Apply
powershell -ExecutionPolicy Bypass -File .mitigateBlock-GDID-Endpoints.ps1 -Apply


And to revert everything back to how it was, a single command:

powershell -ExecutionPolicy Bypass -File .mitigateRevert-GDID.ps1


Once applied, everything will go quiet… the registration services will be stopped, their servers unreachable, and your Microsoft account will stay connected. The GDID will obviously still be readable on disk, but it won't be reported back to Microsoft anymore.

The uncomfortable truth

I'm not going to run a tutorial that sells you a dream. These steps reduce what Microsoft will be able to correlate going forward, but they don't erase your GDID - which has been sitting on their servers since your very first login - and they don't make you anonymous. Also, switching to a local account as I've seen suggested elsewhere removes the path we just blocked, but there's no proof yet that an anonymous identifier doesn't take over behind the scenes.

The only truly solid option for sensitive activity is more drastic: don't do that activity on Windows. A live Linux system, for example, gives you full control over what leaves your machine. Everything else is just damage limitation, nothing more.

There you go - defending your privacy starts with knowing what's been stuck on your back, and now you know. No thanks, Microsoft.

Source: The Register and the reverse engineering by SmtimesIWndr .

This article was originally written in French and automatically translated. Read the original.

This article may contain AI-generated images. I take great care with every article, but if you spot a slip-up, let me know!

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

21. Turn And Face The Strange

Source: https://fly.io/blog/kurt-scott-money-sprites/
Site: Fly
Submitter: subarctic (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-07-25 20:43 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 154 points · 115 comments
Length: 2.4K words (~11 min read)
Language: en-US

Image by Annie Ruygt

We’re Fly.io, a public cloud platform that is both our favorite way to put an app on the Internet and our favorite way to safely let a frontier agent coding harness cook. This is a post about our company, the future, and Sprites, which are computers for agents that you can check out right now.

This is a complicated post. So I need you to promise me something: if you read past this introduction, you’ll read the whole rest of the way through. It’s an honor thing.

A couple months back, Theo Browne ran a video rating the “best place to host a new application in 2026”. Theo tends to say nice things about us. He did this time too. But then he concluded by saying that of all the providers he pays attention to, we were the one he was least confident would be around by the end of the year.

Well, fuck.

Theo startled us, because we’re in the middle of a run of strong quarters that have included the best financial months in the company’s history. But that take has been rattling around in my brain. It whacked me right on a raw nerve, about what we’re doing and where we’re going as a company.

Honestly, I should’ve seen this coming. Fly.io has been motoring along this year, but I’ve coasted a bit, letting the company smolder in an unresolved identity crisis.

I’m going to overshare some more in a second, but I won’t leave you hanging. So: we’ve raised a bunch more money. We’re launching a new iteration of Sprites, and focusing the company on them and the problem they solve. And I’m tagging in Scott Johnston as CEO.

Product-Market Fit

I started Fly.io with two clear principles that probably don’t matter anymore.

The first is that Internet applications work best when they’re fast, and that happens when they’re deployed close to users. I learned this over many years of working at Ars Technica, and started Fly.io in part to scratch an itch. It was our mantra over the first several years of the company.

The second is that cloud infrastructure is too complicated. Developers need platforms with the flexibility of AWS and the ergonomics of Heroku. When we started Fly.io, you couldn’t get both things at the same time, and now you can, here and elsewhere.

You read this and say, “no shit, of course these things are important.” But I’m here to tell you they’re less important than you think, for an obvious reason — the only reason anybody talks about anymore. AI has transmogrified software development. The dingo has truly eaten our baby.

† For the past 18 months, every time I’ve said these words, they’ve gotten even truer.

I don’t think it’s fully sunk in yet[†]. We’re still trying to integrate coding agents into our profession like they’re sufficiently smart compilers. But AI isn’t like the difference between shipping C code and shipping Ruby. It’s much bigger.

Everybody forgets that before Dan Bricklin invented the spreadsheet, every “Excel document” in the world was a computer program, built by a computer programmer. In just a matter of years, every business professional became a programmer, using the world’s most important programming language, spreadsheet formulas. AI is like that, but bigger. Almost anybody will probably be able to build almost any kind of computer program.

Now consider conventional public cloud infrastructure. We take fixed-function applications built to rigorous standards on fussy CI/CD rails and ship them to audiences of millions of people. But a computer program with an audience of millions will soon be like a spreadsheet with an audience of a million readers. They exist! But they’re not the norm.

Betting on an opinionated public cloud design from 2020 is the same as betting against personalized, adaptive software. I don’t think that’s a good bet. And even if I did, I wouldn’t want to make it. I want a world where my friends and family can make computers do exactly what they want, without waiting for me to build everything for them.

What Agents Want

That brings us to our second founding principle, which is that serious cloud infrastructure is too hard for developers to use well. And: still true! But this even more obviously doesn’t matter anymore.

† It is in fact possible that it’s now worse to have a carefully curated human developer experience with opinionated defaults. Agents work best when things are explicit.

To a first approximation, nobody reads documentation anymore. They’re not picking up new CLIs and figuring out how to use them by trial and error, either[†]. That’s what agents are for. An agent can one-shot a Fly.io deployment: just build a site locally and say “now get this working on Fly.io”, and it’ll work great. But an agent can also one-shot an AWS deployment. What are we doing here? What’s going on?

I wrote about this last year, in a post about how our fastest-growing customers were all robots. Then I stopped retconning what we’d already built and got to work figuring out what the robot customers actually want. Here’s what I came up with.

Thing 1: Coding agents expect to run on developer workstations.

Thing 2: Even in a sandbox that you trust, running an agent on your physical dev laptop is annoying, because your laptop stops running when you close the lid. Raise your hand if you’ve walked up or down a flight of stairs with your MacBook open this year. Is your hand down? I’d guess your home doesn’t have stairs. And so people all end up running their agent sandboxes in the cloud.

Thing 3: Public clouds are an irritating place to run agents. We divide servers into “pets” or “cattle”, but for agents, even a herd cow is too much commitment. You want, I don’t know, a semi-disposable cow, a cow that comes into existence exactly when you want it to and sticks around for exactly as long as you want and doesn’t cost very much — and this is why analogies are hard to write.

Earlier this year, our team made what I believe is a breakthrough in systems engineering and perhaps all of computer science: we launched the semi-disposable cow. We call them Sprites.

Sprites take an odd shape that comes from shrink-wrapping them around what I think the robots are looking for. You can create hundreds or thousands of them quickly, but all of them have 100GB durable disk drives. Like everything in the cloud, they have metered utility billing, but the meter doesn’t run when they’re not doing anything, and they’re smart about figuring out when they’re idle. And you can host an app on them and share it with your coworkers, over the Internet.

This grab-bag of features adds up to a proposition about agents. The industry obsesses over sandboxes. But robots don’t want sandboxes. They want computers. That’s what our semi-disposable cow is: a computer for an agent.

You Can Go Make A Sprite Right Now

It’ll take, like, a minute ✨ Go!→

Computers For Agents

I’m happy with how the Sprites launch played out. But honestly, Sprites were a skunkworks project. We didn’t even host them on the main Fly.io website! A weird move. I’m not rationalizing it. We were in an identity crisis. But the clouds have parted, and Computers for Agents are, going forward, the focus of our company.

† (to get a flavor of how true that is: a git blame of the whole codebase shows my name more than any other)

Fly Machines and our Platform As A Service features aren’t going anywhere. But Sprites was the product of a tiny skeleton crew inside of Fly.io[†], and now it isn’t.

Ordinarily we’d spend thousands of words on deep-dive technical content about how we built any new product we launched. We’ll do that for Sprites too. But I’m pretty deep into this post already and I have other stuff to share. So for now, I’m going to keep it brief.

In addition to behind-the-scenes work we’ve done on scaling and orchestration, nu-Sprites introduces two big subsystems that get us to a place I’d finally consider “feature-complete” for what we’re trying to do.

The first is the Sprite Block Device (SBD). The original Sprites storage stack was a goblin contraption I personally derived from JuiceFS and wired into our system using Ben Johnson’s Litestream. You should be glad to hear that Ben and Tim Newsham tore that whole stack down to the studs and rebuilt it. It’s faster, more reliable, and still does instant checkpoint-and-restore.

More importantly, SBD enables drive forking: you can create a template Sprite, and then efficiently clone millions of times.

The other big new thing in Sprites is Connectors. Connectors build on work we did to secure our core platform: they let Sprites make authenticated requests to other systems, without giving agents anything useful to exfiltrate. Connectors have fun security properties, but are also much more pleasant to use than manually managing accounts and API keys.

These are our most requested features. They’re the reason so many agent companies are still using Fly Machines many months after we launched a product specifically for them. So I’m confident enough to bet: unless some new space alien technology arrives that does something even weirder to computer science than what Transformer models have done, Sprites are the right fit for our future customers, and a very large portion of our existing ones. Which brings us to:

Fancy Sprite Beta

You want a weird beta Sprite that can clone itself? I can get you a toe. ✨ Sign up for the beta →

I Quit

This has been a little while coming, but for the stage Fly.io is at, I think it’s extracted most of the good stuff out of me being CEO. So I’m going to stop doing that.

For the first several years of a startup, you’re running a science project, an experiment-driven search for product-market fit. As anybody who’s worked here can attest, we tried dozens of things, from unmanaged Postgres (never do this) to global CDNs to user-mode WireGuard. Deeper into the company fabric, we built a bottom-up engineering org, avoided product roadmaps, and recruited an all-remote team with members in over a dozen countries.

Some experiments paid off, and others were learning opportunities. Running them has been my whole life over the last 8 years. But Fly.io doesn’t need these kinds of science projects anymore.

For the past many months, stretching way back into 2025, I’ve been talking to Scott Johnston about what Fly.io would look like if he was calling the plays. Scott was the CEO of Docker, and led that through a really challenging time that began with Docker’s own enterprise-vs.-developer identity crisis and ended with them blowing the doors off the business. As a shareholder of Fly.io, for this stage in Fly.io’s lifecycle, I liked his playbook better than mine. As the CEO of Fly.io, I liked the prospect of him doing all this work more than I liked the prospect of me doing it. We took a lot of time to work this out, and ultimately the board and I convinced him to take the job.

This is the paragraph in these kinds of posts where I’m supposed to tell you why Scott is a perfect fit for Fly.io and recount all his past adventures. And he is, and they were majestic. But you already know what I’m going to say here, which makes it boring, and Scott can introduce himself just fine when he wants to. He’s not shy.

Meanwhile, I’m going to do what all the smart spent founder CEOs do, and move to an advisor role parachuting randomly into product design discussions (the fun part of my job) while using my board seat to annoy Scott as he executes what (for me) was the unfun part of my job better than I could have.

One of the things I’m sure Scott will break down is the fundraise we just did. That’s another thing Theo Browne called out in his video (I’m not mad, do I sound mad?) — that we hadn’t announced a raise in several years. The answer to that is: we raised a fuckload of money and didn’t need more. We’ve been operating on the threshold of never needing more, if we stuck to our original plans, and if AI didn’t cause the ground to open up and swallow us all whole. But obviously, that’s no longer the game plan.

Ch-ch-changes

Look, I know how this is going to go over. I could write this post without pissing anybody off, but I don’t know how to do that and still have it be worth reading.

We’re making a very specific and probably polarizing bet on the future of the industry: that agents, within a few years, are going to determine how almost all software is built and shipped. That software is going to become much more personal, with smaller audiences, and much more flexible and slippery.

I’m excited about all of this. I’m a little taken aback that I get to work in this field during a shift like this. But I’d have to be oblivious not to see how uncomfortable that shift makes other professionals in the field.

By the middle of the year, we could have gone one of two ways:

On the first path: keep investing our energy in exactly what we’ve been scaling out and refining, a platform for fixed-function full-stack applications designed by humans.
On the second path: dial in and nail a product that fits an agent-driven near future of software.

Five of the most dangerous words in startups are “¿Por qué no los dos?”. We do one thing or the other. We don’t limp in on both. And if we fail, we fail with our full asses. Though, I guess only most of mine going forward.

It’s a hell of a thing, steering a team, a company, a base of customers at this stage in Fly.io’s life. We’d been putting off a big decision about priorities for several months. Theo, you picked up on that. Good note! I could have decided quicker, and more clearly; instead, I shipped Sprites. Sprites answer the question that’s been facing us. I’m glad I spent the time building them, and I’m glad we’ve recruited Scott to turn them into our core business.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

22. Memory Safety Absolutists

Source: https://itsallaboutthebit.com/memory-safety-absolutists/
Site: It's all about the bit
Author: Piotr Sarnacki
Published: 2026-07-28
HN activity: 64 points · 85 comments
Length: 1.3K words (~6 min read)
Language: en

Written by Piotr Sarnacki
on July 28, 2026

When seeing the title of this post, I bet in some people's minds, the first thought was "Rust devs!". This connection is not unfounded. Rust devs tend to be passionate about memory safety. Some of it, I'm sure, may have been caused by a classic language wars attitude: my language is better than yours, and here is why. I'm hoping, though, that most of the Rust devs, who say they care about memory safety, genuinely care about making software safer, and not just criticizing languages that compete with Rust.

The article, surprisingly, is not about Rust devs.

Until recently, most of the memory safety related discourse had a relatively simple basis, at least when considering non-GC, systems programming languages, like C, C++, Zig, and Rust. Rust aims to disallow compiling programs that may introduce memory safety issues (at a cost of sometimes disallowing a program that would have been safe), with an escape hatch in the form of unsafe that allows, among other things, dereferencing raw pointers. C and others leave ensuring memory safety to the programmer. The amount of help from the language differs, for example there is RAII and smart pointers in C++, or defer in Zig, but for the most part nothing stops you from violating memory access.

The situation today is a bit different with a new way to make C, C++, and in the future maybe also Zig, code memory safe: Fil-C. C and C++ code compiled with Fil-C will panic on invalid memory access, like out of bounds access, or use after free. It achieves it by combining GC and InvisiCaps - a way to track memory accessible by a pointer. Zig's author recently announced a new compilation mode for Zig inspired by Fil-C. Fil-C is a very interesting project and I sincerely hope it will succeed and at least some popular C and C++ projects will provide Fil-C compiled releases.

In an ideal world both Rust programmers and C/C++/Zig programmers that care about memory safety would be happy that there are more ways to minimize memory safety vulnerabilities, but alas, we're not living in an ideal world and I can't shake the feeling a lot of the criticism towards Rust recently is disingenuous. If you read Fil-C's author opinions on Twitter, it's blatantly obvious that he dislikes Rust and I've seen him claiming Rust is a memory unsafe language because of ability to bypass some of the Rust guarantees when using unsafe. Andrew Kelley, Zig's author, seems to have a similar stance demonstrated in the fil compilation mode issue title: "introduce an actually memory safe (unlike Rust) compilation mode inspired by Fil-C". Meaning: Rust is unsafe and only Fil-C or Zig's "fil" compilation mode will deal with memory safety related vulnerabilities.

In discussions related to Rust and Fil-C, I've often seen a claim similar to: "if Rust folks really cared about memory safety, they would promote Fil-C and ditch Rust as Fil-C is safer, otherwise they just care about their new shiny language, and not memory safety". That includes Fil-C's author himself. I'm not sure about Andrew Kelley, but the issue title I mentioned earlier feels awfully close. These kinds of arguments are, in my opinion, ignoring reality, and feel like fanaticism and cult-like behaviour that often Rust devs are accused of.

If Fil-C was a drop in replacement with absolutely zero trade-offs, I would maybe partially agree with the sentiment, but it has trade-offs: it's ABI incompatible with non-Fil-C compiled programs, it may be a few times slower in some cases, and it introduces GC. None of these things is a deal breaker for some programs. A lot of programs you use daily could be a few times slower than they are, and you wouldn't even notice. A lot of them also don't link anything dynamically, so the ABI compatibility doesn't matter. But not every software program is a simple utility. There are lots of popular projects, where GC and ABI incompatibility are an issue and there is no way they would ever start using Fil-C like technology, or at least not in a current form. Crucially, the kind of programs that can't use Fil-C are often a good fit for Rust.

But Rust is unsafe, isn't it? It has unsafe after all! If you want to be that strict, or in other words, if you are a memory safety absolutist, that may well be true for you. I, and I hope most people, am more pragmatic than that. There is not a whole lot of data on how secure Rust really is in practice, but to my knowledge there hasn't been a lot of exploitable memory safety vulnerabilities in Rust software, and there are big projects with some data, like 5M+ LOC in Android:

With roughly 5 million lines of Rust in the Android platform and one potential memory safety vulnerability found (and fixed pre-release), our estimated vulnerability density for Rust is 0.2 vuln per 1 million lines (MLOC).

Our historical data for C and C++ shows a density of closer to 1,000 memory safety vulnerabilities per MLOC. Our Rust code is currently tracking at a density orders of magnitude lower: a more than 1000x reduction.

I'm sure these numbers would differ for other projects, but I think by now it is well established that, in practice, Rust minimizes the risk of introducing memory safety issues.

If you could choose a technology that prevents 99.9% of issues in 100% of programs or 100% of issues in 90% of programs, which one would you choose? I have no idea what are the real numbers, but you get the point. Thankfully, we don't have to choose one or the other, contrary to what some people would claim. I would hope that projects written in C/C++/Zig, that can accept the trade-offs, will be available as Fil-C compiled binaries, and software that can't, will be written in languages that either completely or mostly remove the risk of introducing memory safety vulnerabilities.

And I also think it is totally fine to use Rust even if you could use a GC language like Go or Fil-C. Memory safety absolutists would tell you that's not acceptable, although some of them seem to apply memory safety absolutism only when it comes to Rust, and not C, C++, or Zig, go figure. The thing is, programs that can be also written in GC powered languages, often don't need unsafe at all, and programs that need unsafe often couldn't have been using GC. In my experience, people that don't approach solving problem with total fanaticism, tend to consider trade-offs. For many of them, a very small risk of ever running into a severe memory safety issue, is outweighed by other language guarantees (like data races prevention), and other language features. What's more, remember the 1000 memory safety related vulnerabilities per MLOC? With Fil-C they become crashes. It's still better than introducing a security vulnerability issue, but that's quite a lot of crashes to fix. If we're in a realm of fearing relatively uncommon problems, it might be good to state that there were security vulnerabilities in the past that were enabled by an attacker being able to crash a program.

I will end this post saying that if someone cares so much about memory safety that even Rust's 0.2 vulnerabilities per 1M lines of code is not acceptable, I would sure hope they will be criticizing people, who compile YOLO C/C++ and non-fil Zig, as much, if not more, as Rust developers. After all, if you genuinely care about memory safety so strongly that even Rust is not safe enough for you, you wouldn't want to allow people to use even less safe alternatives, would you?

If you like this post please consider following me on Twitter.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

23. Show HN: Brolly, a plain-text weather forecast site

Source: https://brolly.sh/forecast/RWFP2qW8
Site: brolly.sh
Submitter: jsax (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-07-25 17:34 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 140 points · 45 comments
Length: 408 words (~2 min read)
Language: en

brolly.sh

plain text weather forecast

☂

change location

=============================================

Now

overcast

temperature 17.7C (feels 17.7C)

wind 8 (16) mph / uv 0.0 / aqi 14

Today

overcast

temperature 16C - 20C

wind avg 12 mph (gusts 25 mph)

precipitation 0.1mm

=============================================

This Week

Day        Conditions    Temp    Wind  Precip
Yesterday  overcast      15-22   11/23 0
*Today     overcast      16-20   12/25 0.1
Mon 27/07  p.cloudy      13-21   9/19  0
Tue 28/07  overcast      19-25   10/18 0
Wed 29/07  overcast      17-29   6/11  0
Thu 30/07  p.cloudy      16-26   7/12  0
Fri 31/07  p.cloudy      14-23   9/17  0
Sat 01/08  drizzle       11-22   6/14  1.1

< Yesterday Today Mon 27/07 >

---------------------------------------------

Conditions

Time  Conditions         Temp    Wind MPH
» show earlier hours (00:00-03:00)
04:00 overcast           18(18)  8/16 <- now
05:00 overcast           18(18)  9/18
06:00 partly cloudy      18(17)  12/24
07:00 overcast           18(16)  14/27
08:00 overcast           18(16)  13/27
09:00 overcast           18(16)  14/29
10:00 overcast           19(16)  14/28
11:00 overcast           19(16)  14/29
12:00 overcast           19(16)  15/29
13:00 overcast           20(17)  15/30
14:00 overcast           20(17)  15/31
15:00 overcast           20(16)  17/34
16:00 partly cloudy      19(16)  18/37
17:00 overcast           20(16)  15/31
18:00 partly cloudy      19(15)  16/32
19:00 overcast           19(15)  14/28
20:00 overcast           18(15)  13/25
21:00 overcast           17(15)  12/24
22:00 overcast           17(15)  11/22
23:00 overcast           16(14)  10/21

< Yesterday Today Mon 27/07 >

---------------------------------------------

Precipitation

» show earlier hours (00:00-03:00)
04:00                      0mm 78% <- now
05:00                      0mm 68%
06:00                      0mm 44%
07:00                      0mm 24%
08:00                      0mm 15%
09:00                      0mm 11%
10:00                      0mm 10%
11:00                      0mm 14%
12:00                      0mm 21%
13:00                      0mm 27%
14:00                      0mm 31%
15:00                      0mm 35%
16:00                      0mm 35%
17:00                      0mm 30%
18:00                      0mm 21%
19:00                      0mm 14%
20:00                      0mm 10%
21:00                      0mm 8%
22:00                      0mm 6%
23:00                      0mm 4%
      +----+----+----+----+
      0    0    0    0    0

now 0mm (78%)

peak 0mm (78%) @ 04:00-23:00

< Yesterday Today Mon 27/07 >

---------------------------------------------

UV

8|                        
6|                        
4|           ######       
2|         ##########     
0+------------------------
  0     6    12    18
      ^ now

now 0 (low)

peak 4.9 (moderate) @ 14:00

key  0-2 low       3-5 moderate
     6-8 high      9-10 very high

< Yesterday Today Mon 27/07 >

---------------------------------------------

Air Quality

40|                        
30|                        
20|####   ### #############
10|########################
 0+------------------------
   0     6    12    18
       ^ now

now 14 (good)

peak 21 (fair) @ 13:00-14:00

< Yesterday Today Mon 27/07 >

---------------------------------------------

Pollen

Grass   .........-------------*-
Mugwort .......*................
        0     6    12    18
            ^ now
. low  - medium  = high  # v.high  * peak

now grass 0.5 (low)

now mugwort 3.9 (low)

peak grass 14.5 @ 22:00

peak mugwort 6.2 @ 07:00

=============================================

weather data last fetched at: 04:21

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

24. Zero roadkill as Amazon canopy bridges secure 15,000 crossings

Source: https://news.mongabay.com/2026/07/zero-roadkill-as-amazon-canopy-bridges-secure-15000-crossings/
Site: Mongabay Environmental News
Author: Alexandre de Santi
Published: 2026-07-21
HN activity: 309 points · 94 comments
Length: 1.8K words (~8 min read)
Language: en-US

Project Reconecta installed eight rope bridges in a municipality in Brazil, and a 15-month study used camera traps to document thousands of arboreal wildlife adapting to new aerial crossings.
Safe road passages enable seed dispersal and gene diversity, reversing the “domino effect” of biodiversity loss that begins when highways split habitats.
Reconecta’s creator, biologist Fernanda Abra, a National Geographic Explorer and winner of the Whitley Award, is now expanding these low-cost conservation tools to other Brazilian biomes and neighboring Suriname.
Brazil’s federal transport department has officially designated the rope bridge design as the recommended national standard for highways to curb the millions of wildlife deaths recorded on roads annually.

Around 7 a.m., with dense fog blanketing the landscape, biologist Gabriel Falquetto had already come across several road-killed animals along ES-164 highway in Brazil’s Espírito Santo state. He was on his way to Kaetés Private Natural Heritage Reserve (RPPN), in the Atlantic Forest, where he monitors wildlife and roadkill in the region.

Suddenly, he spotted the lifeless body of a primate on the pavement. It was a buffy-headed marmoset (Callithrix flaviceps), a species listed as critically endangered on the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) Red List. An estimated 2,500 individuals remain in the wild, making it one of the world’s most threatened primates.

“It was extremely painful and discouraging,” Falquetto told Mongabay. “We travel through this region every day monitoring wildlife, and we celebrate every encounter with groups of buffy-headed marmosets in the forest.”

“Finding an individual in those conditions brings a feeling of sadness and helplessness. Beyond the loss of that animal, the incident reminds us of the impacts our activities have on biodiversity.”

About 2,900 kilometers (1,800 miles) away, on the road that leads to Alta Floresta, a small Amazon town in the far north of Mato Grosso state, cases like the buffy-headed marmoset’s roadkill have not been recorded since 2024. That year, eight canopy bridges were installed, connecting fragmented forest patches. Camera trap footage revealed that, over 15 months, the aerial wildlife crossings enabled 15,000 safe crossings by arboreal animals — and not a single roadkill.
Installation of the first canopy bridges in Alta Floresta, in 2024. Image courtesy of Programa Alta Floresta Não Atropela.

The bridges are part of a program involving Projeto Reconecta and the municipal government, along with local organizations and business owners who are eager to conserve the unique biodiversity of their town and promote ecotourism, but were alarmed by the growing number of wildlife-vehicle collisions.

Biologist Fernanda Abra, an associate researcher at the Smithsonian National Zoo and Conservation Biology Institute in the U.S., and the founder of Reconecta, recalled that just hours before installing the first bridges in Alta Floresta, she found two Schneider’s marmosets (Mico schneideri) dead. The species is endemic to the Brazilian Amazon and is threatened with extinction.

“A canopy bridge serves two purposes,” Abra said. “The first is to improve connectivity for wildlife, allowing animals to move from one side to the other in these fragmented forest areas. As a result, we also reduce roadkill.”

All bridges have two camera traps, one facing the crossing to record which animals are using it and another facing the forest to observe which animals arrive there but decide not to use it.

Among the primate species recorded using the bridges during the first months of the program were the black-faced black spider monkey (Ateles chamek), the Purus red howler monkey (Alouatta puruensis), the northern night monkey (Aotus infulatus), the tufted capuchin (Sapajus apella), Schneider’s marmoset and the Alta Floresta titi monkey (Plecturocebus grovesi).

Described only in 2019 and soon after classified as critically endangered, the Alta Floresta titi monkey has become the symbol of the initiative, which is now entering a new phase thanks to its positive results.

“In August, we will install eight more bridges in the city’s urban area,” Abra said. “The only difference is that the electric utility will first need to lower the power lines and insulate them so that if animals jump from the bridge onto the wires, they won’t be electrocuted.”
A schneider’s marmosets (Mico schneideri), a threatened species from the Amazon, crossing one of the bridges in Alta Floresta. Image courtesy of Maelle Lima de Freitas.

Bridge use increases over time

The project underway in Alta Floresta is not Reconecta’s first. In 2021, working alongside the Waimiri-Atroari Indigenous people, the team installed 32 canopy bridges over BR-174, the highway that crosses both their territory and the Amazon between the Brazilian states of Amazonas and Roraima.

The Waimiri-Atroari helped Abra identify the best locations for the artificial bridges. Over the past five years, cameras mounted on the bridge poles have documented about 1,250 primate crossings, including the golden-handed tamarin (Saguinus midas), a species that is not strictly arboreal and often descends to the ground in search of food, making it particularly vulnerable to roadkill.

“The outcomes of the BR-174 project have been incredible. We were able to test different bridge designs to find out which ones the animals prefer,” Abra said.

After years of working along Brazilian highways, the biologist had always sought a solution that was simple, low-cost and durable. The current bridge features a multilayer design that accommodates primates with different modes of locomotion — from species that rely on their prehensile tails to move through the canopy to brachiating species such as spider monkeys, which swing using their arms, both of which are common in the Amazon, as well as species that simply walk across the network of crossed ropes. It is worth noting that other small terrestrial mammals, including opossums, sloths and mouse opossums, have also been recorded using the bridges.

Abra said it is important to keep in mind that this is a long-term project, and results are not always immediate. BR-174 was built in the 1970s, and animals take time to adapt to a new crossing alternative. Reconecta’s monitoring has shown that use of the structures increases over time.

“Very often, our sense of urgency in conservation doesn’t take into account the timing of the impact,” she said.

In Alta Floresta, tufted capuchins took seven months before using one of the bridges for the first time, which may indicate that each species has its own pace of adaptation.
The Alta Floresta titi monkey is the symbol of the Alta Floresta bridges program. Image courtesy of Smithsonian’s National Zoo and Conservation Biology Institute and Projeto Reconecta.

Species disappear, forests decline

Home to the world’s greatest diversity of primates, Brazil also has the world’s fourth-largest road network — a deadly combination for animals living along forest edges that have been split apart to make way for highways.

“From our human perspective, roads mean connection and development. But for wildlife, they represent disconnection, barriers and a threat to survival,” Abra said.

Nearly 9 million mammals are killed on Brazil’s roads every year, a 2022 study found. A data compilation published in the journal Nature in 2025 also found that the country ranks among those with the highest mortality rates of terrestrial vertebrates killed in roadkills.

“Habitat loss is one of the main drivers of population declines, especially among threatened species, but the impact of roadkill is still greatly underestimated,” primatologist Fabiano Rodrigues de Melo, a professor at the Federal University of Viçosa in Minas Gerais, told Mongabay.

Beyond roadkills, highways bring confinement to fauna.

“When populations become isolated, they grow smaller and more vulnerable to threats,” said Amely Branquinho Martins, an environmental analyst at the ICMBio, Brazil’s federal agency for conservation units, and coordinator of the Brazilian Biodiversity Genomics (GBB) project.

One of those threats is inbreeding, which occurs when closely related individuals reproduce. “Habitat loss and degradation can prevent an individual from one population from migrating to another — what we call gene flow. Without it, the species’ genetic diversity declines.”

The consequences continue to multiply in a domino effect, Melo said. The loss of primates, especially fruit-eating species, can alter forest composition, because they play a key role in seed dispersal and even contribute to pollination.

“A whole network of ecological interactions is ultimately lost with the disappearance of these species,” Melo said.
Biologist Fernanda Abra, founder of Reconecta. Image courtesy of Projeto Reconecta.

Reconecta expands

One of the hopes for reducing wildlife roadkill is the passage of a bill currently under consideration in Brazil’s Congress that would establish the National Road Safety Plan for Wildlife, which calls, among other measures, for the placement of wildlife warning signs, speed-reduction devices and the construction of overpasses, aerial crossings and underpasses along highways.

The bill has already been approved by the Chamber of Deputies and is now awaiting a vote in the Senate.

If approved, the canopy bridge model developed by Reconecta could be implemented nationwide. In 2026, Brazil’s National Department of Transport Infrastructure designated the design as the recommended standard for highways.

In addition to Reconecta expansion results, Abra’s efforts to protect primates have earned international recognition. In 2019, she received the Future For Nature Award, followed by the Whitley Award in 2024, often referred to as the Oscars of environmental conservation. In June, she was also named one of the recipients of the 2026 Wayfinder Award, joining the select group of National Geographic Explorers, who receive funding from the organization for their projects.

The support comes at the right time, as Abra plans to expand Reconecta, including new chapters in Suriname and Lucas do Rio Verde, a municipality in Brazil, which will install 10 canopy bridges.
Aerial image shows one of the bridges installed in Alta Floresta. Image courtesy of Programa Alta Floresta Não Atropela.

Abra also hopes to bring her canopy bridges to other biomes, including the Pantanal and the Atlantic Forest, helping prevent the deaths of monkeys such as the buffy-headed marmoset.

Expectations are especially high for bridges over BR-262, one of Brazil’s longest highways, which cuts across the Pantanal and is known as the “highway of death.” The road kills approximately 2,000 animals every year.

“I envision a future with Reconecta Biomes. We already have Reconecta Amazon, and we’ll soon launch Reconecta Pantanal. I also see canopy bridges in the Atlantic Forest for the primates that live there, including muriquis and howler monkeys, which are both highly threatened,” she said.

She stressed that for this vision to succeed, the continued engagement of government agencies, private companies and local communities will be essential, just as it was in Alta Floresta and the Waimiri-Atroari Indigenous Territory. “When everyone is involved, everyone values the initiative and works harder to make it succeed.”

Banner image: A black-faced black spider monkey (Ateles chamek) crossing one of the multilayered bridges. Image courtesy of Sergio Leal.

How effective are canopy bridges really?

FEEDBACK: Use this form to send a message to the author of this post. If you want to post a public comment, you can do that at the bottom of the page.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

25. Show HN: What 180k words look like as a temporal knowledge graph (Oz series)

Source: https://synaptale.com/graph?ch=100
Site: SynapTale
Author: SynapTale
Submitted: 2026-07-26 02:18 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 4 points · 0 comments
Language: en

The graph is free to explore and requires no registration.

SynapTale builds a model of a story as a temporal graph made up of nodes (entities) and edges (their actions and relationships).
The graph is not a visualization of the wiki. The wiki, timelines, relationship histories, and analytics are projections of the graph.

The current demo contains 232 entities, 1,852 edges, and a snapshot of the story’s state at every chapter. By chapter 100, it still remembers a promise made in chapter 8 and turns the story into a set of source-verifiable facts.

The most interesting things can be found in the graph itself and in the Analytics tab. A few things I found:

1. The character with the highest kill count is the Tin Woodman—the same character who cries over a beetle he accidentally crushed. Dorothy comes second, with three killing events.
2. Dorothy never deceives anyone during the first 100 chapters of the series.
3. The Scarecrow’s debt to the stork has remained active for 92 chapters, starting in chapter 8.
4. The Cowardly Lion ranks third by number of threats.
5. The first 100 chapters contain 60 secrets and 254 dialogue events.

Technical details

1. Five different multi-agent pipelines combining LLMs and NLP: a prescan, ontology construction, chapter-by-chapter graph extraction, retrospective validation over spans of dozens of chapters, and a linguistic prescan for speech profiles and linguistic edges.

2. A living story needs a living graph. It has to account for time, because entities and the relationships between them evolve. A simple is_active field is not enough.

I ended up with three types of edges:

event: an instantaneous action;
identity: a fact;
state: a persistent action whose termination requires justification and a supporting quote from the text.

The vast majority of edges are events and end in the same chapter in which they began. This allows the system to scale well, since only a minority of state and identity edges remain continuously active.

3. Ontology. You cannot simply ask an LLM to extract entities and relationships into a graph. With every chapter, even the smartest model will keep inventing unimportant fields, creating new aliases for existing fields, and representing the same fields inconsistently.

Before extracting the graph, the system therefore performs an ontology scan across the entire story. It captures story-specific entity and edge types, along with their fields and descriptions.

4. Epistemics. Events are only one part of a story. It is also important to understand how information is distributed, which is difficult to represent using event edges alone.

I addressed this by introducing a new node type: epistemic nodes, which capture different entities’ perspectives on the same fact. Subtle hints can still be missed, the system is not yet perfect in this area.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

26. Did They Ghost You?

Source: https://didtheyghostyou.com/
Site: Did they ghost you?
Submitter: mooreds (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-07-25 20:18 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 320 points · 143 comments
Language: en

No extractable content.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

27. DeepSeek pause fundraise after comments on compute gap to US leaked (transcript) [pdf]

Source: https://github.com/demo-zexuan/liang-wenfeng-investor-meeting-2026-7-22/blob/master/%E6%A2%81%E6%96%87%E9%94%8B%E6%8A%95%E8%B5%84%E8%80%85%E4%BA%A4%E6%B5%81%E4%BC%9A-%E6%96%87%E5%AD%97%E7%A8%BF_1_18_translate_20260723201651.pdf
Site: github.com
Submitter: oliculipolicula (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-07-25 23:32 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 97 points · 62 comments

binary file (.pdf); not scraped

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

28. Multicast TV Distribution on My Home Network

Source: https://www.apalrd.net/posts/2026/isp_mcast/
Site: apalrd's adventures
Submitter: mrngm (Hacker News)
Published: 2026-06-26
HN activity: 43 points · 12 comments
Length: 722 words (~4 min read)
Language: en

Today I am taking a look at the weird world of multicast, where packets get delivered more than once, and we route using a backwards routing table. But, once you understand how it works, a whole world of content distribution possibilities open up to you! Inspired by an old video by @TallPaulTech, I’m using live TV distribution as an example of how multicast works, and how it can potentially be a massive upgrade to your network in oddly niche use cases.

Video⌗

Prior Art⌗

These videos / etc. were very useful to me, or I think you would like them in relation to this:

Tall Paul Tech’s playlist on building an IPTV setup
Tall Paul Tech’s original video on the topic

Link-Local Examples⌗

All of these will work on a local network, but if you are not doing MLD / IGMP snooping, they may cause a generally bad experience (esp. for wireless clients).

Basic File (w/o transcoding)⌗

If your clients can decode the video / audio, you can save a lot of CPU power by sending it as-is, without transcoding. So, here we will take the media, copy the audio and video tracks, mux it into an MPEG-TS transport stream, and send it

#-re means realtime
#-i bbb.mov is the input file (big buck bunny)
#-c:v and -c:a says to copy the video and audio
#-f mpegts "udp://[ff02::69@eth0]:5002?pkt_size=1200" is the mux and udp output
ffmpeg -re -i bbb.mov -c:v copy -c:a copy -f mpegts "udp://[ff02::69@eth0]:5001?pkt_size=1200" 


Basic File (w/ transcoding)⌗

If your media is in a format that isn’t commonly supported (although if you are playing in VLC you should be able to play any format ever invented), you may need to transcode it. This example uses super basic x264 + aac, and again packs it into an MPEG-TS transport stream.

#-re means realtime
#-i bbb.mov is the input file (big buck bunny)
#-c:v libx264 -preset veryfast -profile:v high -level 4.1 -pix_fmt yuv420p is the video transcode
#-c:a aac -b:a 128k is the audio transcode
#-f mpegts "udp://[ff02::69@eth0]:5002?pkt_size=1200" is the mux and udp output
ffmpeg -re -i bbb.mov -c:v libx264 -preset veryfast -profile:v high -level 4.1 -pix_fmt yuv420p -c:a aac -b:a 128k -f mpegts "udp://[ff02::69@eth0]:5002?pkt_size=1200"


YLE TV⌗

I’m living in Finland, so I have access to the national broadcaster YLE. Your access to this of course may not be possible in your country. But, this is an example of how I am doing it.

#run yle-dl, load channel tv1, pipe to ffmpeg
#yle-dl ultimately queries the yle infra for an HLS playlist, and downloads that with ffmpeg into a matroska container
#ffmpeg realtime, input stdin, map streams and metadata, copy (no transcode), output mpegts, to udp
yle-dl tv1 --pipe | ffmpeg -re -i - -map 0 -map_metadata 0 -c copy -f mpegts "udp://[ff02::69%eth0]:5003?pkt_size=1200"


Routed Multicast⌗

For larger networks where you need to span subnets / vlans, you can use routed multicast. I’m using source-specific multicast, which is easier to work with than any-source multicast, and we get to ignore rendevous points.

FRR configuration⌗

Here’s the configuration I’m using for FRR (it’s not optimized, I’ll admit)

log syslog informational

interface eth0
 description upstream
 ipv6 pim
 ipv6 pim hello 10 40
!
interface eth1
 description downstream
 ipv6 pim
 ipv6 mld
 ipv6 mld version 2
 ipv6 mld query-interval 60
 ipv6 mld query-max-response-time 15
 ipv6 mld last-member-query-interval 10
 #If doing access list below
 #ipv6 mld access-list mld-groups
!

router pim6
 ssm prefix-list ssm6
!

ipv6 prefix-list ssm6 seq 5 permit ff3e::/16 ge 16
!

#Alternate filter on the MLD side
#ipv6 access-list mld-groups seq 5  permit ipv6 any ff3e::1/128
#ipv6 access-list mld-groups seq 10 permit ipv6 any ff3e::2/128
#ipv6 access-list mld-groups seq 100 deny ipv6 any ff3e::/16

#Filter both groups and sources
#ipv6 access-list mld-groups seq 5  permit ipv6 2001:db8:1::10/128 ff3e::1/128
#ipv6 access-list mld-groups seq 10 deny   ipv6 any                ff3e::/16


Basic file routed⌗

This example streams a file over multicast, but uses additional options for source-specific multicast and with the correct hop limit.

You can modify any of the earlier link-local examples to work over routed multicast using these options.

#-re means realtime
#-i bbb.mov is the input file (big buck bunny)
#-c:v and -c:a says to copy the video and audio
#-f mpegts needs a hop limit now also, similar to a ttl in ipv4
ffmpeg -re -i bbb.mov -c:v copy -c:a copy -f mpegts "udp://[ff35::69]:5004?hops=32&pkt_size=1200"

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

29. Bitchat is now on Radicle

Source: https://radicle.network/nodes/rosa.radicle.network/rad%3Az2v9tRJz1oknFAqCSY5W5c76nVvm6
Site: radicle.network
Submitter: h1watt (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-07-25 13:18 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 219 points · 128 comments
Language: en

No extractable content.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

30. Android May Soon Restrict On-Device ADB

Source: https://kitsumed.github.io/blog/posts/android-may-soon-restrict-on-device-adb/
Site: Kitsumed Blog
Author: Kitsumed
Published: 2026-07-20
HN activity: 885 points · 427 comments
Length: 1.9K words (~9 min read)
Language: en

Early Warning

Before we dive in, please note that this is not an official Google announcement. Instead, this is based on a recent, ongoing feature request on Google IssueTracker, in which a comment by one of the core ADB maintainers (Google employee) talked about restricting On-Device ADB connections to protect from “bad actors”.

Before you stop what you are doing to head over to that IssueTracker thread, please read this carefully:

If you plan to visit the issue tracker just to post low-quality comments (such as “Hey, don’t do this, I need Shizuku!”), complaints about monopoly, or insults, I highly recommend that you refrain from doing so. Spamming the thread will only cause Google developers to lock the issue, ignore valuable community feedback, or stop sharing public updates about this change entirely.

I think a change like this could benefit Google as it goes well along their new Sideloading changes, but I do not actively believe this is what is going on here. There is a true, valid reason behind this, and I think two different approach can be taken. We will talk about it in this blog post.

How You Can Help:

If you have a unique use case: If you are directly affected and can write a detailed, constructive message explaining your workflow, providing links, or offering technical solutions/compromises, please, by all means, share your feedback in Google issue.
If your use case has already been mentioned: You do not need to repeat it. Instead, simply click the +1 button in the top right corner of the Google IssueTracker to let Google know you are affected, and toggle notifications to stay updated on the discussion.

I am hesitant to make this blog post, as I fear it may overload the few developers that work on ADB. I am unsure if I should wait more and see what happens or hold it longer and see what approach they take. Waiting too long could also be bad… As of writing this, I am unsure when/if this post will release. I saw some recent updates on assignments which were given to the main guy who previously worked on ADB, so we will see what happens.

Introduction

Hi! I’m Kitsumed, developer of ShizuCallRecorder, a Shizuku based application. As you may have guessed by now, I would be affected by this change. Obviously, I would really like it if they do not proceed with it in a way that prevent loopback connections.

To talk briefly about myself, I made ShizuCallRecorder to help with some of my own disabilities. I can get by without it, but it’s much easier with it.

You could say I have a very unique use case, and I keep discovering other unusual ones, like this person on Reddit, who used my application to preserve the voicemail of a deceased loved one.

Call recording on Android is a complicated topic. There are countless user requests, an official attempt to add the feature in Android 11 that was later canceled, and many closed-source, privacy-invasive applications that use work-arounds.

I used to hear that many users with disabilities had to trade their privacy for an easier daily life. I guess that’s what people mean when they talk about those trade-offs.

Don’t even get me started on OEMs that force an audio warning such as “This call is being recorded,” when it’s in places where it’s not legally required. People often don’t react well to that, even if you explain why you’re recording the call, it gives a bad impression. To be honest, I probably wouldn’t react well to it either.

I’m sure most of you have a more “power-user” use of Shizuku or even use loopback ADB for developer tasks. I do those too, but I wanted to point out one of my unique use case.

Alright, back on the main topic. Before I explain what the proposed change is, I’m going to explain what is ADB for less technical users.

What’s ADB?

ADB, also called Android Debug Bridge, is protocol created by Google to let developers do developer things on Android devices…

Basically, it grant us a high level of privileges, give us access to a lot of sensible commands to tests how the phone and application behave. Useful stuff for any developers or power-users.

ADB was originally designed to work over a USB connection, but later expanded how it could works:

USB: The original way. ADB communicates directly over a USB cable.
TCP/IP: Introduced as a way to run ADB over a network using an IP address and port (typically port 5555). The connection carries ADB traffic in plain text and provides a YES/NO prompt as authentication. Can only be enabled once you already have an active ADB connection.
Wireless Debugging (Wifi 1.0/2.0): Introduced in Android 11, it aims to improve the legacy TCP/IP workflow. It requires pairing the computer with the device using a pairing code or QR code, then establishes an authenticated and encrypted connection for subsequent ADB sessions. It does not require an active ADB connection to be enabled.

What’s a On-Device ADB connection?

ADB was originally intended to be used with two devices (simplified explanation): the Android device being debugged run the ADB Daemon (ADBD) and a separate developer machine run the ADB client. In practice, however, this setup is not always convenient. Some developers work directly from their Android device and do not have access to a second machine.

This led to usage of On-Device ADB (this is not a official term). By using a terminal emulator such as Termux, developers can run an ADB client directly on their phone and establish a connection to the local daemon (ADBD) server using either ADB TCP/IP or Wireless Debugging. Since both the client and server are running on the same device, the connection is made through the loopback address (127.0.0.1). That’s what I call On-Device ADB.

While this is a niche use case compared to how ADB intended to be used, it has led to the creation of projects such as libadb-android by MuntashirAkon and Shizuku by RikkaApps. These projects, along with many others, have created a large open-source community that made a wide range of tools for developers and power-users.

The proposed change

A new feature was made on Google IssuerTracker to allow developers to choose what interface ADBD (ADB server daemon) would listen to.

This feature was proposed following a major security issue identified as CVE-2026-0073, which allowed the Wireless ADB authentication process to be fully bypassed. What is proposed in this issue is actually a nice idea.

Right now, ADBD makes itself available on every network your phone is connected to. This feature request asks to let developers choose which interface is chosen, reducing the exposure.

The problem

The problem lies in the response from one of ADB core maintainers:

sa…@google.com:

Connection to localhost has also been the source of exploit where app are using that socket to adbd to escalate their privileges.

What about we restrict to always only binding to wifi interface wlan0 ?

Here, we can see that the employee talk about only allowing wlan0, the interface of the Wifi connection. Doing so would break many things, On-Device ADB, ADB via VPN, ADB via Ethernet, and many other unique developers setups.

Another issue I see here is the stance they seems to currently have on “On-Device ADB”. Their comment suggests that On-Device ADB is viewed primarily as an exploit bad actors can use to elevate privileges, yet there a lot of legitimate usages of on-device ADB. Developers themself uses it when they can’t access a computer.

While it can indeed be used to elevate privileges, a “malicious” application cannot do so alone. It requires multiples actions that MUST be perfomed by a human.

Why On-Device ADB Is Not Really Used by Bad Actors

A malicious application could use an on-device ADB connection to perform privilege escalation. However, it cannot establish one by itself.

To illustrate this, I’ve laid out the general limitations a bad actor would face in a few scenarios, similar to my comment on IssueTracker.

Scenario 1: General Android Users

You install a malicious application.

ADB is disabled. ADBD is not running, and the application does not have the WRITE_SECURE_SETTINGS permission, as it must be manually granted via ADB. No exploitation attempts are possible.

Scenario 2: A Developer on Android 11+ Using Wireless ADB

You install a malicious application.
You enable USB debugging, starting ADBD.
You enable Wireless ADB. ADBD is now running on your phone and listening on all network interfaces.
The application would need to perform the one-time pairing process. This requires the user to manually retrieve the one-time code from Settings and provide it. No exploitation attempts are possible.

Scenario 3: A Developer Using ADB over TCP/IP

You install a malicious application.
You enable USB debugging, starting ADBD.
You connect via USB ADB to enable TCP/IP, then disconnect the USB cable.
ADBD continues running and listens on all network interfaces.
The application initiates a connection, causing an authorization prompt to appear on the screen. If the user selects No, the connection is rejected. No silent exploitation attempts are possible.

Conclusion

In a normal scenario, a bad actor cannot gain an ADB connection. It is only possible while the developer is actively using ADB on the device, because a bad actor cannot start ADBD by themselves.

However, if we return to a scenario such as CVE-2026-0073, exploitation would become possible in Scenarios 2 and 3, but only after the user has manually enabled USB debugging. As for scenario 3, it would also require the developer to MANUALLY enable TCP/IP. I can understand the motivation for preventing loopback connections by default, but not to fully prevents it.

There is a difference between preventing it by default and permanently preventing it. I think this should be something users can disable through a persistent setting. By this, I mean a toggle that survives a reboot (else it would make tools like Shizuku impracticals) and, ideally, cannot be read by third-party applications. Otherwise, developers would have to repeatedly disable it whenever banking apps or games detect that on-device ADB is availabl. That said, this part could be worked around once a application is manually granted WRITE_SECURE_SETTINGS.

I think that justifying blocking it because a human could perform actions to allow it would be far-fetched. A human could also designate a malicious application as a device administrator or grant it Accessibility permissions, and yet we would not get rid of those features.

I believe it should be an assumed risk that disabling such a security feature enables on-device debugging while also exposing the device to the rare possibility of a future vulnerability. To me, the feature/risk ratio make sense here, as there is a real, legitimate usage.

Although it may have not been originally intended, On-Device ADB has enabled a niche ecosystem of developer and power-user tools, including projects such as App Manager, libadb-android, Canta, aShell, ShizuWall, ShizuCallRecorder and Shizuku.

To conclude, I would like to mention my conclusion in What Is Shizuku? How Does It Work? Security Implications?, where I said as a joke:

Here’s my closing thought: I can’t wait to see how they’ll justify disabling loopback ADB over TCP/IP connections on non-emulator devices and start requiring a Google account…

Well I guess they may indeed disable loopback ADB. Huh… I was almost 100% right on that one I guess. If you are a technical user, I invite you to give your feedback inside the issue here. Please don’t forget the early warning.

