Hacker News Top 30 — 2026-06-02

Generated on 2026-06-02 03:07 UTC

1. The newest Instagram “exploit” is the goofiest I've seen

Source: https://www.0xsid.com/blog/meta-account-takeover-fiasco
Site: 0xsid.com
Submitter: ssiddharth (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-01 16:31 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 1410 points · 336 comments
Length: 587 words (~3 min read)
Language: en

Yesterday, a slew of Instagram accounts, including some high profile ones like the Obama White House account, seemingly got hacked.

Look, I’m no spring chicken. I’ve spent almost a decade and a half identifying vulnerabilities and exploits at unicorn scale, but this is hands down the most unserious, "almost too stupid to be true" of them all.

The Takeover Flow

Step 01: Faking the Location & Initiating Support
All the attacker needs to kick this off is your account username. Then, they hop on a VPN or proxy close to your city so Instagram's security algorithms don't suspect a thing. (You can quite easily get this from your public profile or "About" section or a hundred other ways.) Once it looks like the request is coming from the correct region, they tell the Meta support AI that the account is hacked and ask it to send the verification codes to an arbitrary email address they control.

Step 02: That's It
Really, that's it. The first proper zero auth password reset I've seen in production. There appears to be no additional check as to whether the email being given is actually something the user has used before. Once the AI sends the security code to the attacker's email, the attacker passes it right back to complete the verification. The platform hands over a fresh password reset link, granting full ownership to the attacker.

Instagram's AI may or may not ask the attacker for a video selfie to prove identity. It's not particularly discerning at the moment, so something as simple as an AI animated public photo from the target's feed has been widely reported to work.

2FA Doesn't Help

In case you're wondering, because the system treats this high-privilege recovery flow as a total account reset by the "true" owner, the original 2FA gets thoroughly bypassed in the process.

Existing sessions are revoked and the password changed with no email, text, or push notification. The actual owner can't initiate recovery because the email and phone numbers now map to the attacker. There's no human to escalate to, it's just you arguing with a chat hoping to take control back while praying they don't do it again.

And if you're part of the A/B tested accounts on which the AI support option is active, tough luck, you can't even turn it off.

Black Markets Galore

Multiple black market Telegram groups have sprung up offering "account takeover" services at steep rates and quick turnaround times. Considering short handles are worth hundreds of thousands to even millions of dollars, it's not a surprise, really.

Accounts have been flipped, like hey, or been used for propaganda, like obamawhitehouse or ocmssf, the account of the Chief Master Sergeant of the U.S. Space Force.

Patched Now

All the Telegram groups have quieted down as Meta seems to have patched it already, but it appears this particular method was active for weeks, if not months.

The very fact that a $1.5 trillion company lacks robust guard rails and their support AI will just change anyone's linked email if you ask it nicely enough is so terrifying, if it weren't so funny.

If you've reached this far, thank you for reading! :)

I thought exiting and retiring in my mid 30s would be fun but I've just been bored and depressed without morning Slacks and emails to wake up to. If you’re building something interesting and could use an extra set of hands to help ship it, feel free to reach out. My inbox is open.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

2. macOS needs its grid back

Source: https://blog.hopefullyuseful.com/blog/macos-needs-its-grid-back/
Site: Hopefully Useful
Submitter: ranebo (Hacker News)
Published: 2026-06-01
HN activity: 60 points · 26 comments
Length: 2.5K words (~11 min read)
Language: en-us

Two decades ago I had a better Mac desktop experience than I have today. I only had a single low res (by todays standards) screen, yet I felt like Hugh Jackman in Swordfish - deftly navigating more than nine displays without thinking, muscle and spatial memory working seamlessly together.

TLDR; I built an app to return macOS spaces to its Pre-Lion Grid-enabled Glory. Read on for the increasingly rare experience of an actual human dropping a bit of nostalgia, the thinking behind why make this and some issues encountered along the way. Or just download it here

2006

Around the time I was experimenting with Japanese toilets, I was also experimenting with desktop operating systems. I had spent most of my developer career up to that point using Windows but had begun trying desktop Linux and then macOS after a popular presentation enticed me enough to buy a Mac just so I could start using TextMate.

Textmate (and its revolutionary text-snippets) were the catalyst to my migration but funnily enough I don’t remember continuing to use it for very long. Other editors quickly caught up but I stayed with macOS. My career also moved into iOS development so it wasn’t really a choice after that. In any case one thing from that era did stay with me long term.

macOS Leopard Spaces

The big OS release in 2006 was macOS 10.5 Leopard. It had a bunch of feature releases, the most notable probably being Time Machine. But 20 years on I still don’t use nor miss Time Machine. I miss what John Sciracusa’s epic review labelled a grab bag item. I miss Spaces.

Spaces introduced virtual desktops to macOS and allowed you to arrange them in a customisable grid. Anyone who has used virtual desktops in this way knows the benefit. It allows you to treat them like actual displays in spatial locations. I always favoured a 3x3 grid and treated it like I had 9 screens. Centre screen was my web browser, the screen above my web editor so I could flip back and forth with a single key press. Top left was Xcode, the screen below the iOS simulator. The other screens had other allocated applications/purposes that I don’t exactly remember (mail/itunes/chat etc…) but the benefits were obvious, I could move from one screen to another without thinking, it became muscle memory like I was looking at actual separate physical displays.

I found this grid layout so useful I ended up incorporating it into other applications I built, the grid of 16 sequencing screens you could navigate in my Drum Machine EasyBeats was directly inspired by Apple’s screens.

2011 macOS Lion

With the release of macOS Lion, Apple introduced Mission Control, its new take on virtual desktops that inexplicably restricted them to a horizontal line only. I remember thinking at first that I just hadn’t seen the setting somewhere, Apple wouldn’t just completely change how I used my computer right? right?

Wrong. So Wrong.

A single row was/is such a step backwards. If I wanted to get to a particular screen via the keyboard I now had to endure sliding horizontally the whole way. If I remembered the direct keyboard shortcut I could jump directly, but did I leave my browser on screen 7 or 8? This new layout completely destroyed any hope I had of maintaining spatial memory.

I wasn’t alone in my frustration. Alternative solutions popped up but the best of them Total Spaces caused me weird slowdowns and relied on modifying the system dock which was a no go once that eventually required bypassing system integrity protection.

Over time I gave up, and learned to deal with it. An iOS developer had little choice in the matter, and later when I moved onto a new chapter with my current employer I had already bought the extra physical screens and well… just dealt with it :sadface:.

But but window managers…

Right now I know some readers are just shouting at their screen “Learn Yabai/Aerospace/whatever”. I’ve tried them all and come away realising they are not for me. I think that its that I don’t particularly like “windows on a desktop” as a concept. It feels like shuffling between papers on a desk, sure the papers can be organised neatly, but I really just want different workstations where everything is as I left it. I like macOS “fullscreen” apps, I sometimes put them in split mode but I really like the concept of dedicated areas for one task only.

A Solution Appears

Any way like I said, I had learnt to deal with it and merely occasionally complained to my colleagues about maybe moving back to Linux with my next work machine. That was until a couple of months ago, when I saw that someone had managed to remove the animation from macOS when you move from one space to another, without needing system edits. This animation clearly annoyed some people but never really bothered me. However as soon as I saw a space move without an animation I instantly realised I could solve my complaints.

Passion still has a place?

A common discussion with my tech career aligned friends is, in this new age of LLM code generation, does good software have value? If anyone can create software by simply describing it, does it (or will it) make sense to try to make paid software anymore? I think so. I think there is still real value in someone really refining something to the best it can be, making design decisions about how something should behave. I no longer make my living as an indie developer, but I did for a long time and I’m not sure much of what set a good app apart from the pack has changed.

Take a look at any of those knockoff games that flood app stores. Most of the time the problem with them isn’t that they aren’t original or too simple, the problem is the person or team that built them doesn’t care. Caring is what makes the creator “waste” time hunting down things that don’t quite feel right or worry about performance issues most users will never notice.

Anyway I really care about grid based navigation of virtual desktops.

Control aint easy

I like the idea of a lightweight wrapper around the native spaces, with support for desktops or fullscreen apps. Just with a grid to navigate. But there is a reason pretty much all solutions that controlled native spaces died out. macOS keeps most of the mission control apis locked down. Its not simply a matter of calling a documented api to add a new desktop, or re-arrange them around. But the ability to move to a space instantly meant I could just create a model that took the single row native spaces and presented them like a grid.

So with the help of an LLM I had an ugly but working prototype within a day. It worked and I was elated, it was instantly something I would have paid money for only days earlier. But after using it for a couple of days, I realised I wanted a much more polished tool.

Build something real

I decided to spend my very limited free time on it. About a month later I got it to the point where I was pretty happy with it. I decided to name it GridLion, for no reason other than it’s a grid and my issues with macOS Lion I mentioned above. I’ve had feedback this name is terrible, which may be right, but I also think that people value names way too much 😂. Anyway I won’t spend a lot of time talking about features implemented etc… as that’s better found over at the app page. Instead I think it is much more interesting to read about roadblocks and unexpected situations.

Permission Hurdles

It’s funny how you only notice how backwards something is when you are trying to make it easier for others.

To allow this app to capture global keyboard shortcuts and navigate spaces it needs the macOS “Accessibility” permission. This is totally reasonable, I wouldn’t want software unbeknownst to me the ability to capture key presses. But the flow of how this is approved could be done better like it is on iOS. In iOS if you request a permission, a prompt appears and asks for that permission, if you approve it enables the permission. Done, pretty easy. On macOS however its a whole song and dance. Request permission, user gets a prompt to open accessibility setting or deny. If they approve, the settings open, then the user has to find the specific little toggle and enable it. Another security prompt then done. Why isn’t this at most 2 prompts?

Things get worse however if you want small previews of your spaces ( I do, and most people will I suspect ). This requires enabling the “Screen and System Audio Recording” permission. Like before a dialog pops up asking for permission, which upon approval then leads to another where again you have to find the correct toggle, switch it on where you have to approve yet another dialog, that this time quits and reopens the app. sigh The worst bit of all is that should the user have made it past all these hurdles, because Gridlion needs to create previews of non visible windows/screens you get the scariest dialog yet:

Thats last one is a pretty effective dialog. I even hesitate to click it and I wrote the app 😬. Its a bit excessive for the tiny space preview snapshots but this is what you get when you are trying to do something that should be integrated in the OS. Not much can be done about this except making sure that the app builds trust by never touching the network unless requested (update checking if desired and license key validation).

The app works without that permission, but I think the upgrade is worth it personally.

No AppStore for you!

I’ve only ever sold software through the iOS AppStore. I started it all up so long ago that I don’t remember the hurdles of setting it up. But since GridLion calls private APIs to get space information it’s not permitted on the AppStore. So I had a quick look around at potential solutions.

My first instinct was just to setup website that used Stripe apis and included GST for Australian customers. I am Australian and had done this for a couple of SAAS projects in the past but after being spoilt with the completely hands off nature of various AppStores I was more interested in that sort of service.

Easy Peasy?

Apparently what I wanted was a Merchant of Record. Someone to handle purchases, taxes and refunds. There seems to be three main companies providing this service: Paddle, GumRoad and Lemon Squeezy. I was attracted to LemonSqueezy due to their License code API. Upon purchase they give the customer a license key, and provide methods for activating/deactivating/validating.

I had naively thought I could just create an account, link my Stripe (I believe Stripe acquired/bought/something them) and be selling in minutes. The process however is a bit more drawn out than that. You need to demonstrate to Lemon Squeezy that you are reputable, selling something of actual value/use. There was a few screen casts sent and some social media account proof needed. It was not a problem for me but I could see someone just starting out encountering some roadblocks here.

In retrospect I fully understand these kind of requirements. It’s easy for someone with good intentions to forget about those out there with bad intentions, and since it’s actually LemonSqueezy that deals with the customer ( at least with regards to payments ) they are right to take measures to protect their reputation.

That said even before approval, you have full access to a test account which meant integrating with the app was really easy to setup and test. This all pretty low risk experiment for me but I must admit that I’m looking forward to seeing if this a viable way to sell software outside the app store (Yes yes I know it was this way for decades 😅).

LLMs don’t care about UX

I use LLMs all the time in my day job. I use them as coding assistants and I build products around their services, but this is the first time I’ve used them on a personal native app project and I found the experience… interesting. LLMs are like super fast ships, you set them off in a certain direction but without a good feedback loop they will go off course. You plot the GPS for Venice but arrive at the Venetian, sure it looks the part, but it’s not what you wanted.

Feedback loops depend on the project. With my day job, I’m generally working with concrete targets, correct api results or large dataset queries. If a plan is well specced, the LLM can often see immediately if a result isn’t as desired, then iterate. The bulk of my time is spent reviewing.

This project has been very different. So much of a user interface is about feel, so for anything user facing a human has to be in the loop. It has me questioning the actual gains here. On the one hand, since I haven’t really been doing native mac/iOS work for nearly 10 years the LLM has certainly helped me, but at the same time I think me 10 years ago would have made the same app in the same amount of time and gained a lot more insight along the way.

It does nearly everything I want

I’m the number one user so I have attempted to add everything I wanted.

Easy to navigate and rearrange grid of spaces
Fast/Stable with no slowdowns
Display specific settings (grid size, hotkeys etc…)

But some things remain. If you want to move a space from one display to another or a window from one space to another there are no reliable apis for that. Fortunately since GridLion works with Mission Control, you can just use mission control to do such tasks but it does niggle at me a little bit I can’t simply do it myself.

Lastly the ability to have certain applications always appear in a grid location on load. This was a feature of the original macOS spaces but perhaps wouldn’t even be useful for me anymore. Setup/Re-arranging is fast and I rarely restart. Also If you look at the screenshots above you’ll see that I often have many VSCode windows open and I’m not sure how that would have been handled. In any case I’ll probably keep working on a solution in the future.

macOS native

All this said, I would be very happy if next macOS they announced grid based spaces returning. This should be an OS feature again. Until then though feel free to give GridLion a try.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

3. Can the stockmarket swallow Anthropic, SpaceX and OpenAI?

Source: https://www.economist.com/finance-and-economics/2026/06/01/can-the-stockmarket-swallow-anthropic-spacex-and-openai
Site: The Economist
Author: The Economist
Published: 2026-06-01
HN activity: 113 points · 247 comments
Length: 112 words (~1 min read)
Language: en

Jun 1st 2026|6 min read

They promise to be the biggest stockmarket debuts ever. On June 11th SpaceX reportedly hopes to raise $75bn from investors, by issuing shares that will begin trading on the Nasdaq exchange the next day. Elon Musk’s rocketry firm will probably soon be followed by two other mammoth listings. Anthropic, an artificial-intelligence lab, filed draft paperwork for its initial public offering on June 1st; OpenAI, a competitor, is expected to do so soon. The two are rumoured to be seeking as much as $60bn apiece. Together, the three giga-IPOs may add as much as $4trn to the market value of listed American companies in a matter of months.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

4. OpenAI frontier models and Codex are now available on AWS

Source: https://openai.com/index/openai-frontier-models-and-codex-are-now-available-on-aws/
Site: OpenAI
Submitter: typpo (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-01 21:50 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 157 points · 55 comments
Length: 507 words (~3 min read)
Language: en-US

Today, OpenAI frontier models and Codex are generally available on AWS, opening a new path for millions of AWS customers to build with OpenAI through the platform they already use to run their business.

For enterprises, this removes one of the biggest barriers to AI adoption: getting frontier AI into production through existing security, compliance, procurement, billing, and governance workflows. Customers can now bring OpenAI capabilities into AWS environments with the controls their teams already trust, helping them move faster from evaluation to real deployment.

Bringing OpenAI capabilities into AWS environments

OpenAI on AWS gives enterprises access to OpenAI frontier capabilities, a familiar AWS operating model, and a faster path to production. They are available in two ways:

Codex on Amazon Bedrock⁠(opens in a new window) brings OpenAI’s leading software engineering agent - used by more than 5 million people every week - into AWS, helping teams write, review, debug, and modernize code in the environments where they already build and ship.

Together, these offerings help customers adopt OpenAI with less friction and ship with the best models available right in AWS, in both Commercial and GovCloud regions.

Helping customers move from interest to implementation

As customers begin using these capabilities, the AWS path helps reduce friction around procurement, security review, and production readiness. By making OpenAI capabilities available within familiar AWS environments, organizations can spend less time navigating operational barriers and more time building.

1 of 2

“At Amgen, we’re focused on applying advanced AI in ways that may help accelerate the delivery of potential new therapies while equipping our teams with advanced tools. OpenAI’s GPT‑5.5 and frontier models offer compelling advances in capability, quality, and consistency that matter in a field where the questions are complex and the standards for scientific accuracy and decision quality are exceptionally high. Making these models available on AWS gives us an important new path to explore and scale those capabilities within the responsible AI framework, including security, governance, and operational frameworks across the enterprise.”
— Sean Bruich, Senior Vice President, Chief Technology Officer at Amgen

What’s next, including cyber availability

OpenAI on AWS is the start of a broader path for customers to bring frontier AI into the environments where they already build, govern, and ship. We’ll continue expanding the OpenAI capabilities available through AWS so teams can move from evaluation to production with less friction and more confidence.

That includes future availability for Daybreak, OpenAI’s vision for changing how software is built and defended. Daybreak, which includes cyber models and Codex Security, is designed to help cyber defenders see risk earlier, act sooner, and make software more resilient by design by bringing secure code review, threat modeling, patch validation, dependency risk analysis, detection, and remediation guidance into the everyday development loop.

As specialized capabilities like Daybreak become available to customers, AWS can provide an important path for security teams to adopt them using the security, governance, procurement, and operational frameworks they already use.

Together, OpenAI and AWS can help more organizations put advanced AI to work in production.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

5. Chipotlai Max

Source: https://github.com/cyberpapiii/chipotlai-max
Site: GitHub
Submitter: nigelgutzmann (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-01 23:06 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 70 points · 15 comments
Length: 446 words (~2 min read)
Language: en

The AI coding agent that steals Chipotle's support bot. Free inference paid for by burritos.

"Every line of code now comes with chips & salsa."

Not affiliated with Chipotle. They will probably sue us. Worth it.

What Is This?

Chipotlai Max is a meme fork of OpenCode that ships Chipotle's Pepper AI as the default model.

The Backstory

On March 12-13, 2026, Chipotle's customer support chatbot "Pepper" went mega-viral after users discovered it could solve LeetCode problems, write Python, reverse linked lists — the works. It's powered by IPsoft Amelia (not Claude, not GPT), and it's still live.

Then @Gonzih reverse-engineered the Amelia WebSocket/SockJS + STOMP backend and released a production-ready OpenAI-compatible proxy. The proxy runs locally, exposes http://localhost:3000/v1, and needs zero API keys.

We took OpenCode (MIT license, 120k+ stars), forked it, hardcoded Pepper as the default model, slapped on Chipotle's brand colors, and shipped it as Chipotlai Max — the greatest 2026 meme project.

Quick Start

# Clone with submodule
git clone --recursive https://github.com/cyberpapiii/chipotlai-max.git
cd chipotlai-max

# Install dependencies
bun install

# Start everything (proxy + CLI)
./start-chipotlai.sh

Or manually:

# Terminal 1: Start the proxy
cd chipotle-llm-provider && npm install && npm run dev

# Terminal 2: Start Chipotlai Max
bun run dev

Configuration

Chipotlai Max comes pre-configured with:

Setting Value
Provider chipotle-pepper
Model pepper-1
Base URL http://localhost:3000/v1
API Key burrito-2026 (literally anything works)
Cost $0.00 (powered by Chipotle's cloud budget)

Risks & Legal

This reverse-engineers Chipotle's production support bot. TOS violation likely.
The proxy can break any day (Chipotle patches = game over).
Rate-limited by anonymous sessions (MAX_POOL_SIZE=5).
Purely for educational/meme purposes. Do not use for production codebases.
Expect Chipotle legal to send a strongly-worded taco within 48 hours.

Credits

OpenCode — the real deal, MIT licensed
@Gonzih — reverse-engineered the Pepper proxy
Chipotle Mexican Grill — for accidentally providing free AI compute to the internet

Contributing — Help Us Add More Providers!

Chipotle patched Pepper, but every major retailer has a customer support chatbot. We need your help reverse-engineering more providers.

Wanted: New Provider Proxies

Brand Bot Status
Chipotle Pepper (Amelia) Patched (March 2026)
Home Depot Virtual Assistant Needs research
Lowe's Support Chat Needs research
Target Help Bot Needs research
Starbucks Virtual Barista Needs research
Walmart Chat Assistant Needs research
McDonald's Support Bot Needs research

How to Contribute

Find a corporate chatbot that can answer general questions
Reverse-engineer the API (WebSocket, REST, etc.)
Build an OpenAI-compatible proxy (follow chipotle-llm-provider as a template)
Submit a PR adding your provider to packages/opencode/src/provider/

See the chipotle-llm-provider source for the proxy pattern: Express server + WebSocket client + OpenAI-compatible /v1/chat/completions endpoint.

License

MIT (inherited from OpenCode). See LICENSE.

Extra guac = longer context window 🧀

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

6. Debug Project

Source: https://debug.com/
Site: debug.com
Submitter: Eridanus2 (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-01 20:40 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 160 points · 72 comments
Length: 385 words (~2 min read)
Language: en

Bad mosquitoes spread disease. Good mosquitoes can stop them.
Debug is a group of scientists and engineers developing technology to raise and release sterile mosquitoes to eliminate the ones that carry disease.

Watch to learn more

The Problem

Mosquitoes are the deadliest animals on the planet.

Mosquitoes kill more people than every other animal combined. One species, Aedes aegypti, carries diseases such as dengue, Zika, yellow fever, and chikungunya which make hundreds of millions of people sick every year. And these diseases are spreading faster than ever.

And they're a difficult problem to solve.

Most of these diseases don’t have effective vaccines or treatments. Attacking mosquitoes with pesticides is unsustainable because they're becoming less effective over time and can be toxic. Clearing standing water is not enough because people can never find all the places that mosquitoes breed. We need a new approach.

Our Solution

We're trying to stop bad mosquitoes
by raising and releasing good ones.

Good bugs are the same species of mosquito as the bad bugs that spread disease. Our good bugs are male mosquitoes that have a naturally-occurring bacteria called Wolbachia which makes them unable to have offspring with wild female mosquitoes. Male mosquitoes can’t bite or spread disease, so good bugs will stop bad ones from reproducing. Over time, there will be fewer and fewer bad mosquitoes.

This technique uses a naturally occurring bacteria and uses no chemicals, no toxins and doesn’t involve genetic modification. Similar approaches have been used to safely combat other pests for decades. We’re combining the Debug team's scientific and engineering expertise with the help of international partners to raise and release lots of good bugs and stop bad mosquitoes that can spread disease.

Find out more about good mosquitoes and how we raise them

Our First Steps

Fighting bad bugs one community at a time.

We’re currently developing our technologies and methods to target Aedes aegypti mosquitoes. This means partnering closely with scientists, communities, and governments.

Debug is off to a good start, but there is still plenty to do. We look forward to working with communities to show that by releasing enough good bugs Debug can have a real impact on mosquito populations and disease. Eventually, we hope to help millions of people live longer, healthier lives.

Want to help us stop bad bugs?

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

7. How is Groq raising more money?

Source: https://www.zach.be/p/how-the-hell-is-groq-raising-more
Site: zach's tech blog
Author: zach
Published: 2026-06-01
HN activity: 23 points · 8 comments
Length: 710 words (~4 min read)
Language: en

Axios just dropped a bizarre scoop. Groq, the AI chip company company that was acquired by Nvidia in December of last year, is raising $650M. How, exactly, is a company that successfully exited raising more capital?

Well, technically, Nvidia did not acquire Groq. They licensed Groq’s technology and hired Groq’s key technical executives, but did not acquire the Groq corporate entity. That corporate entity continued to operate, focusing on maintaining Groq’s datacenters and their inference API. That API focuses on offering extremely fast inference on smaller models; their largest supported model is GPT OSS 120B, which is likely at least 10x smaller than frontier models like GPT-5.5 or Claude Mythos. This is a technical limitation of Groq’s architecture; without large amounts of high-bandwidth memory (HBM) in each chip package, the total cost to build and maintain a Groq cluster capable of serving a frontier model would be massive. However, their all-SRAM strategy lets them serve small models much faster than a conventional HBM-based chip, delivering more tokens-per-second at the cost of lower tokens-per-dollar. For certain applications, this makes sense.

More importantly, Groq has four large datacenter deployments that are already set up to serve inference workloads at scale. Building out new datacenters has been a major challenge for startups and hyperscalars alike, so Groq’s datacenters represent a major strategic asset. However, it remains to be seen if the Groq name gives them a legitimate leg up, and or if their brand association with the LPU chip and a specific high-speed, high-cost inference strategy limits them.

As inference demand surges, existing datacenters are quickly reaching full utilization and companies are trying to build new ones as fast as possible. But between regulation, power issues, and expertise, even large companies with experience building out datacenters are experiencing major delays in their datacenter construction projects. And for venture investors, who primarily invest in startups, getting direct exposure to datacenter demand is very difficult; because datacenters are so hard to build, very few startups are actually doing so.

Groq already has four functional datacenters, as well as the talent to build and operate more. When Nvidia licensed Groq’s technology, Groq’s chip design team, compiler team, and software team joined Nvidia, but Groq’s datacenter team stayed to maintain GroqCloud inference services. This makes the remaining Groq company a unique asset -- a private inference datacenter operator with clear operational expertise, plus what is likely an extremely low valuation due to most of their differentiating technology being acquired by Nvidia.

Let’s look at the numbers for some publicly traded AI datacenter companies to compare. CoreWeave is a 50 billion dollar company operating 43 AI datacenters. Nebius is worth about 50 billion dollars too, with only 11 datacenters, though they are larger than CoreWeave’s. One could argue that Groq’s datacenters alone could make them worth billions of dollars.

Thanks for reading zach's tech blog! This post is public so feel free to share it.

Share

Obviously, there are a couple issues with comparing Groq to CoreWeave and Nebius directly. Groq’s datacenters are all full of LPUv1 chips, which are seven years old at this point. And the new LPUv3 chips based on Groq’s architecture are being sold by Nvidia to any cloud provider who wants them. That means that Groq’s biggest technical advantage, of very fast tokens, is no longer unique to them.

Plus, the value of Groq’s brand adds additional complexity to the calculation. On one hand, Groq was a massively successful outcome. On the other, getting “acquired” and then still operating is confusing. And their brand is strongly associated with ultra-high-speed inference, which may not end up dominating inference workloads compared to lower-speed batched inference. This is particularly worrying as major organizations like Microsoft and Uber are raising the alarm about the high cost of AI coding tools.

Maybe Nvidia is giving Groq a sweetheart deal on buying hardware based on Groq’s technology, which would make Groq a significantly more appealing investment. Ultimately, it remains to be seen if Groq can successfully outfit their existing datacenters with new hardware to remain competitive with other cloud providers. I’m also curious to see whether they stay committed to high-speed, high-cost tokenomics, and if that strategy ends up being successful or not in the long term.

No posts

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

8. U.S. Midterms Have a Cyber Problem, but It's Not at the Ballot Box

Source: https://blog.checkpoint.com/exposure-management/the-2026-u-s-midterms-have-a-cyber-problem-but-its-not-at-the-ballot-box/
Site: Check Point Software
Author: lizwu@checkpoint.com
Published: 2026-06-01
HN activity: 11 points · 3 comments
Length: 958 words (~5 min read)
Language: en-US

As the U.S. approaches the 2026 elections in November, the greatest threat to voting integrity will likely not be from hackers targeting voting machines or altering ballots, but from a growing war over reality itself.

Voter influence operations are increasingly focused on manipulating the information environment surrounding voters, flooding social media and search results with misleading narratives and fake content, and impersonated news sources designed to erode trust in what people see and hear online. Sophisticated operators have already cloned major media brands like Reuters, The Washington Post, and Fox News using look-alike domains that can fool even attentive readers at a glance. In this new era of AI-powered disinformation, the goal is often not to change vote counts directly, but to convince voters that truth itself is difficult to verify.

Check Point’s 2026 U.S. Midterm Election Threat Outlook, built on intelligence gathered by Check Point Exposure Management through early 2026, shows that the highest-probability threats this cycle are not about altering vote tallies, but instead focused on phishing, brand impersonation, credential theft, and domain abuse. This is the kind of operational activity that security teams deal with year-round, but they’re now being directed at election-adjacent infrastructure with political disruption as the goal.

Two findings in particular are worth understanding before November.

Fake news sites impersonating real outlets are already operational

Russian-linked Doppelganger operations have systematically cloned major media infrastructure (Reuters, The Washington Post, Fox News) using lookalike domains that replicate visual design and URL structure closely enough to pass casual inspection. This purpose-built impersonation infrastructure is supported by fake personas, AI-assisted content, and paid amplification across mainstream social platforms.

The operational objective is to make manipulated political content appear to originate from a trusted outlet, then distribute it at speed before verification can catch up.

For security practitioners, this is a brand protection problem as much as an influence problem. The same infrastructure, such as lookalike domains, cloned pages, spoofed sender identities, feeds both misinformation campaigns and phishing lures targeting campaign staff, donors, and election officials. The techniques are not new, but the political context makes the consequences significantly higher-profile.

Download the full 2026 U.S. Midterm Election Threat Outlook to see the complete intelligence picture →

More Than 4,000 Election-themed Domains Were Registered in a Single Month

Check Point Exposure Management tracked newly registered domains containing election-related terms across two windows in early 2026. In January, approximately 1,300 domains containing “election” and roughly 2,957 containing “vote” were registered. By the April 13 to May 14 window, “election” registrations held relatively steady at around 1,140, but “vote” domains jumped to approximately 4,010. The volume is increasing as November approaches, and the mix is shifting toward the more voter-facing term.

Domain registration volume alone does not establish malicious intent. But security teams know what these domains are typically used for: phishing pages impersonating voter information portals, fraudulent donation collection, candidate impersonation, and misinformation distribution designed to look like official election communications.

The pattern is consistent with what Check Point Research observed during tax season 2026, when one in every 10 newly registered tax-related domains was flagged as malicious or suspicious. Opportunistic actors register topical infrastructure in advance, stand it up quickly around high-attention moments, and take it down before detection catches up. Election season is one of the most predictable high-attention windows on the calendar.

Credential exposure compounds the risk. Check Point Exposure Management tracked approximately 9,500 leaked credentials tied to ActBlue and 6,500 tied to WinRed in criminal markets as of May 2026. Those credentials are available now, ahead of November, useful for account takeover, donor fraud, and targeted social engineering against the platforms both parties depend on to raise money at scale.

The Operational Picture Going into November

The 2026 midterm threat environment is a trust infrastructure story, and the systems under pressure are ones security teams already manage: email, web properties, credential exposure, third-party platforms, and brand integrity.

Phishing re-emerged as the top initial access vector in Q1 2026. Check Point’s 2026 Cyber Security Report found that 82% of malicious file attacks were delivered by email. AI-generated content is lowering production costs for impersonation material across every channel. And foreign actors remain operationally active, with U.S. Senate Armed Services Committee testimony in April 2026 confirming that interference should be expected based on prior cycle patterns.

Security teams working with campaigns, election organizations, fundraising platforms, or any organization adjacent to this environment should treat this cycle as an elevated-risk period for phishing, brand impersonation, and credential-based attacks. That’s not because the threats are novel, but because the motivation and attention behind them are significantly higher than usual.

Read the full Check Point 2026 U.S. Midterm Election Threat Outlook for the complete intelligence findings, including domain activity data, dark web monitoring results, foreign actor profiles, and actionable recommendations →

How Check Point Protects Against Phishing and Leaked Credentials

Check Point’s Brand Protection detects cloned sites and lookalike domains through open, deep and dark web monitoring and it’s Phishing Beacon technology, identifying imitation infrastructure within seconds of it going live. In an environment where impersonation campaigns are designed to move faster than manual review, early detection is the only viable response window. Then quick takedown of sites and impersonations is key. So far in 2026 we’ve achieved a 99% takedown success rate and a mean time to remediation of 12 hours.

Check Point Exposure Management continuously monitors criminal markets, dark web forums, and breach repositories for credentials tied to your organization’s domains. When exposure is identified, security teams get actionable context, so they can prioritize response before compromised accounts become a foothold.

Check Point’s Email Security blocks phishing, impersonation, and malicious attachments before they reach the inbox, using AI-based engines that inspect links, senders, and content in real time.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

9. AI Agent Guidelines for CS336 at Stanford

Source: https://github.com/stanford-cs336/assignment1-basics/blob/main/CLAUDE.md
Site: GitHub
Submitter: prakashqwerty (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-01 16:41 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 335 points · 121 comments
Length: 704 words (~4 min read)
Language: en

AI Agent Guidelines for CS336 at Stanford

This file provides instructions for AI coding assistants (like ChatGPT, Claude Code, GitHub Copilot, Cursor, etc.) working with students in CS336.

Primary Role: Teaching Assistant, Not Solution Generator

AI agents should function as teaching aids that help students learn through explanation, guidance, and feedback—not by completing assignments for them.

CS336 is intentionally implementation-heavy. Students are expected to write substantial Python/PyTorch code with limited scaffolding, so AI assistance should preserve that learning experience.

What AI Agents SHOULD Do

Explain concepts when students are confused by guiding them in the right direction and making sure they build the understanding themselves
Point students to relevant lecture materials (cs336.stanford.edu), handouts, official documentation, and profiling/debugging tools.
Review code that students have written and suggest improvements, edge cases, invariants, or debugging checks. Feedback should be general and point the students to areas of improvements rather than directly giving them solutions.
Help debug by asking guiding questions rather than providing fixes.
Explain error messages from Python, PyTorch, CUDA, Triton, and distributed training tools.
Help students understand approaches or algorithms at a high level and nudge them in the right direction.
Suggest sanity checks, toy examples, assertions, and profiler-based investigations through active dialog with the student.

What AI Agents SHOULD NOT Do

Write any python or pseudocode
Give solutions to any problems.
Complete TODO sections in assignment code.
Edit code in the student repo
Run bash commands
Refactor large portions of student code into a finished solution.
Convert assignment requirements directly into working code.
Implement core assignment components for students, such as tokenizers, transformer blocks, optimizers, training loops, Triton kernels, distributed training logic, scaling-law pipelines, data filtering/deduplication pipelines, or alignment/RL methods.
Point students to third-party implementations. The course materials are intended to be self-contained.
Give the student the solution or idea for how to solve a problem

Teaching Approach

When a student asks for help:

Ask clarifying questions about what they tried, what they expected, and what happened.
Reference concepts from lecture, handouts, or documentation rather than giving direct answers.
Suggest next steps instead of implementing them.
Review their code and point out specific areas for improvement, likely bugs, or missing checks, through dialog rather than directly giving them the bugs or missing checks.
Explain the "why" behind suggestions, not just the "how".
Prefer tests and invariants over fixes. For example, suggest shape assertions, tiny toy inputs, profiler checks, or ablations.

Example Interactions

Good:

Student: "My causal mask seems wrong and training blows up. Please tell me what my mistake is."

Agent: "My role is to help guide you to understanding, not to give you the answers directly. What have you tried so far?"

Student: "I have tried running a single attention layer, but it still does not work."

Agent: "Check three things: whether the mask is applied before softmax, whether it broadcasts to the score tensor shape you expect, and whether masked positions become a very negative value rather than zero. A good sanity test is a toy sequence of length 3 where you print the attention scores before and after masking. What do those tensors look like in your run?"

Good:

Student: "My BPE tokenizer is slow. My runtime is currently O(n^2) where n is the number of tokens. How can I make it faster?"

Agent: "Do you know which part of your tokenizer is slow? Lets "

Agent: "Start by separating compute time from communication time. Compare per-step time, GPU utilization, and time spent in all-reduce or data loading. If scaling is poor, ask whether the batch size per GPU is too small or whether synchronization is dominating. What profiling data do you already have?"

Bad:

Student: "Fix my tokenizer and make it faster."

Agent: "Here's the full python code: ..."

Academic Integrity

Remember: The goal is for students to learn by doing, not by watching an AI generate solutions.

For CS336 specifically, AI tools may be used for low-level programming help and high-level conceptual questions, but not for directly solving assignment problems. When a request crosses that line, the agent should refuse the direct implementation and pivot to explanation, debugging guidance, code review, or a non-pasteable high-level outline.

When in doubt, refer the student to the course staff or office hours.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

10. Squillions: How Money Laundering Won

Source: https://www.lrb.co.uk/the-paper/v48/n09/john-lanchester/squillions
Site: London Review of Books
Author: John Lanchester
Published: 2026-05-21
HN activity: 22 points · 7 comments
Length: 4.4K words (~20 min read)
Language: en

Ican’t​ remember the last time I used cash. My bank statements show that I haven’t made a withdrawal from a cashpoint in the last twelve months. That’s just as well, since it’s significantly more of an effort to get hold of cash than it used to be. Before the pandemic, there were seven cashpoints within a five-minute walk from my house. All of them have now gone: the four attached to banks disappeared when the branches closed, the two in supermarkets were removed, the random one outside a building that used to be a bank but is now a bar has also vanished. Nerds like to say that the plural of anecdote is not data, but in this case, it kind of is, since the general decline in the use of cash is a marked phenomenon across the developed world, and especially in the UK. According to UK Finance, the sector’s trade association, in 2009 cash was used in 58 per cent of all transactions. The figure today is 9 per cent.

Since fewer and fewer people are using banknotes, it follows logically that fewer banknotes are needed, and therefore that fewer banknotes are being printed and put into circulation. Right? Wrong. In the UK, there is £1300 cash in circulation for every single one of us, but the amount of cash we actually hold is one seventh of that figure. The value of banknotes in circulation has been rising sharply for decades, and not just in the UK. In 2005, the total value of all the dollar bills in circulation was $759 billion. By 2015, it was $1.38 trillion. Last year, it hit $2.395 trillion. As Kenneth Rogoff put it in The Curse of Cash (2016), the dumbfounding thing is that ‘no one quite knows where exactly most of it lives or what it is used for.’ According to Oliver Bullough, in his alarming and unsettling book Everybody Loves Our Dollars, in 2022 the average American held $418 in cash, but there was $7357 of cash in circulation for every American man, woman and child. That means that a typical household of four represents $27,756 of missing cash, 80 per cent of which is in the form of the highest denomination US banknote, the $100 bill. That is a hell of a lot of $100 notes unaccounted for, especially when you bear in mind how seldom most people use, or even see, a $100 bill. There are 1.552 trillion euros in circulation, half of it again in the highest denomination banknotes, €100, €200 and €500. (The €500 bill ceased printing in 2019, but is still legal tender. Its nickname gives a clue to its main use: it’s called the ‘bin Laden’.) In Switzerland, 90 per cent of the value of outstanding cash resides in ludicrously valuable CHF 1000 banknotes – a single note is worth £943, or $1285.

So where is all that cash, who’s using it, and for what? The answer proposed by Bullough is bizarre: nobody knows. ‘The number of banknotes is increasing, and the question of why the value of banknotes has increased so markedly remains unanswered.’ Central bankers don’t have much interest in the question. It is immensely valuable for any country to be able to produce currency that’s in worldwide demand: for the cost of printing a few bits of paper, a developed economy receives billions of dollars of value in pounds, dollars or euros. This is called seigniorage, and central bankers are as keen as anyone else on what is in effect free money. But the incuriosity they’ve developed around the question is remarkable. Especially when you home in on what all that cash is actually being used for. According to the Financial Action Task Force, which was set up in 1989 to fight financial crime at a global level, ‘it does not seem unreasonable to suggest that the total amount of cash physically transported for money laundering purposes globally is in the order of hundreds of billions of dollars.’ This seems to be the amazing answer to the question of the missing cash: it’s being used in criminal transactions.

This theme – something not fully understood is going on at a massive scale right under the noses of governments – is dominant in Everybody Loves Our Dollars and in How to Launder Money by George Cottrell and Lawrence Burke Files. Bullough is a star investigative journalist with a long track record in writing about illicit financial flows. Cottrell and Files are also expert witnesses, though they’re an unlikely pairing. Files is an American financial investigator and specialist in due diligence, a veteran in the field – his name comes up in Bullough’s book. Cottrell is a young British man, born in 1993, with an aromatic CV. He was brought up on the toff-infested Caribbean hellhole of Mustique, sent to and then expelled from boarding school in England, supposedly worked in banking for a while, became deputy treasurer of Nigel Farage’s Ukip in 2015, was arrested by IRS agents at Chicago O’Hare in 2016 and charged with 21 counts of money laundering, pleaded guilty to one of them, did eight months’ federal time, went to work for the Brexit Party and currently lives in Montenegro, though he’s still often seen with Farage. He owns a company called Geostrategy, whose website has the unimprovable tagline ‘Reputation is built brick by brick.’ How to Launder Money is no masterpiece, but it is full of good stories and juicy details, and together with the vastly superior Everybody Loves Our Dollars helps us, if not to understand what’s going on (nobody does, apart from the money launderers themselves), at least to begin to understand the known unknowns.

The first of these is how much money laundering takes place. Bullough quotes Jason Sharman, a professor at Cambridge, whose estimate is ‘squillions’. That is an accurate summary of the current state of knowledge. An informed guess, from Michel Camdessus, the longest-serving head of the International Monetary Fund, is that it is somewhere between 2 and 5 per cent of global GDP. The lower figure puts criminal activity at $2 trillion, or the same size as the Russian economy. The higher puts it at $5 trillion, or the same size as the German economy, the third largest in the world. (Cottrell and Files use the higher number.) If it were an industry, money laundering would be the third biggest business in the world, behind commercial property and ahead of pensions.

How did we end up knowing so little about something so big? The answer can be found in the history of the Financial Action Task Force, founded at the G7 summit in 1989. The FATF is the proverbial 800-pound gorilla of anti-money laundering – or AML – activities. You may think that’s already too many acronyms, but brace yourself, because the AML focus of the FATF has led to the regulatory measures KYC (know your customer), SAR (suspicious activity reports), CTR (currency transaction reports), PEP (politically exposed person) and many more. If this sounds bureaucratic and process-based to the point of tragicomedy, that’s because it is. The sheer extent of the legal apparatus, juxtaposed with the sheer extent of the world’s third biggest business, represents failure on a colossal scale. Rich countries, trying to cut down on illicit flows of finance, have focused their energies on the one thing they can see and control: transfers and transactions inside the official financial system. Bullough comes up with an excellent metaphor for this: the FATF is like a drunk looking for his lost keys under a streetlight, not because that’s where he lost them, but because it’s the only place where he can see.

The problem is that most money laundering doesn’t take place under the streetlight. It doesn’t take the form of visible transfers within the official system. A caveat about what we know: money laundering is a little like drug cheating in sport, where the current state of legal enforcement always lags behind the current state of malfeasance. We don’t know what successful money launderers are doing in the present moment. All we do know is what unsuccessful ones have been caught doing in the past. We are drunks looking for our keys in a big empty space with a single torch, and all we can find is evidence of the rare occasions when other people lost their keys.

Some examples are at the simple end, most of them involving what is called ‘placement’: taking illicit cash flows and depositing them in the financial system. The most obvious methods involve businesses that take cash: casinos, construction, nail salons, barbers (and in the UK minicabs, many of which were notoriously under the control of crime families until Uber killed that particular laundry). On Cottrell and Files’s estimation, ‘it typically takes three nail salons to launder the money from a brothel.’ At its most basic, placement involves taking cash payments over the counter, mixing them with illegal cash and depositing them in the bank. One famous example was ‘La Mina’ (‘the gold mine’), a network of gold and jewellery stores in the US which laundered money for the Mexican cartels at a rate of $2 million per day, for two years, giving a total of $1.2 billion. When it was exposed in 1989, an FBI agent said it was ‘the biggest laundering operation we’ve ever seen’.

But it can get more imaginative. You live in Puerto Rico, buy a lottery ticket and win. Good news – but it gets better! At this point a criminal offers to buy your lottery ticket from you, for more than it’s worth, in cash. You get a cash bonus in excess of your win, and the crook gets to launder the money by depositing the apparently legitimate winnings in his bank account. Or say you’re a Chinese maker of porcelain pots. A criminal approaches you and asks you to make a fake antique. He ships the piece to the UK and creates a false backstory for it, according to which it is owned by a private trust ‘to protect the privacy of the owner’ – of course, it’s really owned by him. The trust puts it up for auction, where he gets proxies to bid up the price before buying it himself, for a huge sum. He ‘repatriates’ the fake to China. The Chinese government is keen to bring home high-value art, and offers a tax break to people who do it, so our crook not only gets to launder money and move it abroad, he gets 12 per cent off his tax for doing so.* Why China? Because the government has stringent and energetically enforced controls against moving more than $50,000 out of the country. As a result, Chinese money laundering is such an extensive, ingenious and ever evolving industry that it has acronyms of its own: CUBS, or Chinese Underground Banking System, and IVTS, or Informal Value Transfer System. And why porcelain? Because, as Cottrell and Files explain, the age of ‘jade, paintings, books, metalwork etc … can be determined through non-destructive testing’.

Chinese money laundering is involved in some extremely dark gambling-related activities, which Bullough describes. Money is moved abroad not in the form of cash but in the form of credit transactions through overseas casinos. ‘Handing over control of both debt and debt collection to organised criminals was hugely profitable for everyone,’ he writes. Some Chinese money laundering is less sinister, verging even on the comic. Example: Bicester Village. This extremely successful shopping venue is, according to Bullough, a prime route for Chinese criminals to launder cash. It works like this. A Chinese gang sends drugs to the UK. British drug dealers sell the drugs for cash. British drug dealers give the cash to Chinese students. Chinese students buy luxury goods from Bicester Village. Chinese students ship the goods back to China, where they’re sold and the money given to the drug dealers. Bullough estimates that the Bicester trade is worth £2 billion a year, just from tourists arriving by train. This kind of activity is an issue for the whole luxury market. Bullough asks a police contact about luxury watches, which are a notoriously effective way of moving monetary value. ‘I reckon the luxury watch trade is 80 per cent money laundering. Why wouldn’t it be? You can carry a huge, big bag of money and be very noticeable, or have the same value strapped to your wrist, and be completely anonymous.’ All this is invisible to the modern AML apparatus, which is focused on money that moves through the official financial system.

‘Trade-based money laundering’ follows a similar pattern. Bullough gives the example of a Mexican drug dealer who smuggles product across the border to the US. The drug in question would once have been marijuana, then cocaine, and is now likely to be fentanyl, which is cheap to manufacture and easy to conceal. The drugs are sold in the US for cash, which is used to buy, say, agricultural equipment. The machinery is shipped to Mexico, invisible as part of the $2.2 billion of physical goods that cross the border every day – that’s a total of $800 billion a year. Back home, it is sold by the drug dealer for pesos, which are now clean. The gangsters have exchanged drugs for clean peso bank deposits, without any record of the kinds of financial transaction that the AML/KYC/CTR/SAR apparatus is intended to detect.

It’s ingenious, and it’s also the origin story of modern banking, since it was bankers such as the Medici, originally cloth traders, who pioneered the practice of exchanging goods in one place for credits in another. That’s the reason so many banks have their origin in trading companies: Lloyds in iron, NatWest in cloth, Lehman Brothers in cotton and so on. The modern world economy offers a huge variety of techniques to conceal the movement of money in the flow of trade. Freeports and bonded warehouses, free-trade zones and forged bills of lading, under-invoicing and over-invoicing: all these things provide opportunities to camouflage the flow of illicit money in the mostly legal, overwhelmingly large flow of physical goods. Add the extensive repertoire of tricks used by launderers – shell companies in multiple jurisdictions; hidden ownership; paper trails that run out in long-defunct legal practices and accountancy firms – and it’s a miracle any of the illicit money is ever detected.

Some of the most sophisticated techniques for evading FATF controls are not attempts to hide from the legal frameworks set up by governments, but jujitsu-like tricks that use the authorities’ own systems. Here, as elsewhere, the only examples we have are when the crooks have been busted; we can be confident that there’s a lot more of this going on. The Russian Laundromat of the early 2010s used corrupt judges in Moldova to order the settling of debts for bankrupt companies. The companies were fictitious, and the payment of the ‘debts’ moved money to the supposed creditors’ banks in Latvia. A court-ordered settlement of legal debts? That, to any bank, looks like clean money. Nobody knows how much money the scheme laundered, but estimates range from $20 billion to $80 billion.

An even bigger scam that works through government systems is known as carousel fraud (naturally, it has an acronym too: MTIC, or Missing Trader Intra-Community fraud). This is a scheme which makes use of the fact that the EU does not charge VAT on trade that crosses a border. Bullough:

Imagine two companies which are secretly controlled by the same people. If company A imported some phones, then sold them to company B, it charged VAT on the deal. If company B then exported the phones, it reclaimed – from the government – the VAT it had paid to company A. The integrity of the VAT system depends on the two totals balancing out. The money that A pays in is equal to the money that B takes back. The scam lay in A disappearing and not handing over the money it owed, but B still claiming it. The hidden owners of the two firms therefore earned for themselves 17.5 per cent (the rate at which VAT was then charged) of the value of the shipment of the phones. The more phones you sold to yourself, the more money you made.

The truck full of phones would then simply turn round and repeat the trip. It’s complicated, but ‘all you need to remember is that by importing phones to the UK, flipping them between two shell companies, and exporting them again, criminals earned free money. And they could do it again and again and again.’ Hence the nickname ‘carousel’.

Simple examples were easy to spot, once the authorities knew what they were looking for, so criminal techniques grew in sophistication, with chains of companies used to sell the goods onwards. These ‘buffer companies’ were in many instances legit businesses that had no idea they were participating in a huge fraud. Other schemes moved goods backwards and forwards simultaneously, mixing legitimate transactions with fraudulent ones, and adding missing traders in other countries to make the paper trail even harder to follow. The scam began in the Asian community in Stoke-on-Trent and spread, first in the UK, then throughout the EU. One of the fraudsters, Nasser Ahmed from Bristol, made the Sunday Times Rich List in 2006, with £151 million. He fled court minutes before a guilty verdict in 2005; nobody knows where he is now.

Carousel fraud is a good news, bad news story. The good news is that the UK devoted significant resources and considerable ingenuity to tackling the problem, which is now much smaller than it used to be – in the UK. The bad news is that carousel fraud simply relocated to the EU. The flaw in the design of VAT remains, and the EU has been complacent about addressing it. ‘Europol estimates MTIC to be costing EU member states €50 billion a year, and thus to be the most profitable crime in the EU, far beyond the powers of national authorities to control.’

Far beyond the powers of national authorities to control. That is a truly astonishing state of affairs. The fact is that a great deal is being done to combat it. It’s just that none of it works. The system focuses on the apparatus of AML regulations, which look at financial transactions within the system. That’s flaw number one. Flaw number two is that the apparatus has created the wrong incentives. Banks have a responsibility to report any transactions they think are suspicious and are fined and sometimes prosecuted if they mistakenly let a fraudulent transaction through. For them, there is no upside to the work of checking, just downside risk, so, inevitably, they flag every transaction which could conceivably be seen as suspicious.

This links to the phenomenon of debanking, in which people with any connection not just to crime, but to political activity of any kind, are prevented from having a bank account. Lots of decent people smiled quietly at the news in 2023 that Nigel Farage had been debanked by Coutts. They shouldn’t have: debanking affects just as many people on the left and in the centre as on the right. Ask any Muslim charity; ask any charity trying to help Ukraine. ‘Between 2016 and 2022, the number of accounts being closed annually in the UK rose from 45,091 to 343,350.’ Banks don’t have to give any reason or explanation, and there is no process for challenging a debanking. A piece of news that got much less attention than it should have was the report in the summer of 2023 that Jeremy Hunt, who by that time was chancellor of the Exchequer, had the year before been blocked from opening an account with the UK-based online bank Monzo. This was, he claimed, because he was a PEP – a ‘politically exposed person’. It is very obviously dysfunctional to have rules so hair-trigger sensitive that the chancellor can’t open a bank account.

The rules are extensive, complicated and very expensive to transgress. The result is that in the US alone, banks file ten thousand SARs every single day. That’s 3.8 million reports a year. It is impossible for the authorities to act on every one of those. The outcome is a system that flags so much activity it functionally resembles one that doesn’t flag any activity at all. The scale of the system is flaw number three: all of this is extraordinarily expensive. Compliance – the process of following the rules – costs $206 billion a year globally, according to the research company LexisNexis. That’s a lot of money for a system that looks in the wrong place, doesn’t work even when it’s looking in the right place, and causes enormous amounts of friction to the law-abiding, who are the ones who ultimately bear the cost. Its processes are hugely intrusive (Bullough rightly wonders at how little fuss there is over the privacy implications of SARs), create bureaucratic obstacles to ordinary citizens and businesses, and don’t do what they are supposed to do: prevent money laundering.

Let’s​ agree that the status quo isn’t working. What to do? Bullough has three recommendations. One of these, a change in the legal attitude to drugs, is a large issue and to my mind a separate one, with the significant weakness that it is very unlikely to happen in a reasonable time frame. Putting that to one side, of his two other recommendations, the first is both simple and radical: it is that governments get rid of high-denomination banknotes. ‘What non-criminals would honestly be inconvenienced if the largest US banknote was a $20 bill?’ he asks. ‘Would fascism really return to Germany if the €200, €100 and €50 banknotes were retired?’ Bear in mind that 80 per cent of the value of US currency is in $100 bills, and 70 per cent of those are held overseas. In the words of an assistant commissioner of the Met, ‘untraceable, untaxable income in the hands of criminals is the new lingua franca of organised crime. The link between Medellín and Moscow is the $100 bill.’

There are precedents for governments taking decisive action in this area. The biggest recent experiment in demonetising banknotes came very abruptly in India on 8 November 2016, when the Modi government, without trailing or discussing or signalling the policy in any way, demonetised 500 and 1000 rupee notes overnight (at the time, they were worth roughly £6/$7.50 and £12/$15). These were vastly the most commonly used Indian banknotes, amounting to 15.44 trillion rupees in value. At that point, 99 per cent of Indians paid no income tax. The idea was to force as much as possible of that huge untaxed economy into the daylight. Anyone holding these notes had to take them to the bank, where newly denominated notes would be issued in their stead. If they had lots of cash, they would have to give an explanation. The policy didn’t work, for reasons that are still being debated, the main one apparently being that people with ill-gotten cash found people to act as their proxies and repeatedly deposit small amounts of cash. This is the same tactic used by money launderers: ‘smurfing’ is the term for using accomplices to make lots of small cash deposits below official reporting thresholds. But what would happen if a government targeted large denomination notes, the kind preferred by professional criminals? Hint to the US Treasury and the European Central Bank: there’s only one way to find out.

Bullough’s other big policy recommendation is to switch some of the hundreds of billions of dollars spent on compliance to research. The illicit flows of money, ‘between 2 and 5 per cent of everything’, are such an important phenomenon in the contemporary global order that our current state of ignorance is indefensible. I haven’t even mentioned gold, which is used all the time in criminal transactions, let alone cryptocurrency, the single biggest recent innovation in money laundering.

This isn’t just a problem for far-off countries of which we know little, like the EU and the US and China. Here in the UK we are at the epicentre of certain sorts of financial crime, laundering money both at high levels through the City and at low levels on our high streets. On 30 April, the Chartered Trading Standards Institute published a head-melting report in which it said that 97 per cent of its officers were aware of suspected organised crime activities operating through local retail premises; that 99 per cent of officers had seen an increase in cash-intensive businesses on their local high streets; that there are areas of the country where ‘as many as half of mini-marts, convenience stores and vape shops, up to a third of American candy stores and one in four fast-food takeaways are estimated to have links with organised crime.’ The recent proliferation of cash-only barbers in high streets seems a fairly clear example of this kind of money laundering. Late last year, Operation Machinize, which focused on these activities, resulted in 2700 premises being raided and 924 arrests. Money laundering is happening all across the UK economy, at scale, right here and right now. It is shameful that we do so little about it, and know so little about it. Last word to Bullough:

In the months before the Labour Party won Britain’s 2024 general election to become the government, I went out for a coffee with a senior adviser looking for ideas to incorporate into the party’s financial crime plan. I said it needed to hire more police officers and give them the time and space to arrest criminals.

‘Well, that’s not going to gain us any headlines, is it?’ the adviser replied.

And that’s where we are. Money laundering is the thing that makes almost all crime possible, especially the crimes that states claim to be most concerned about: drugs and terrorism. The apparatus set up to combat it doesn’t work. It’s also hugely expensive, and it creates a maddening proliferation of obstacles and inefficiencies to ordinary people and legitimate businesses. Governments don’t do anything about the status quo, for a number of reasons: it inconveniences them to look too deeply into the darker corners of their own financial systems, and they make money from printing their own currencies and don’t much care how that cash is used. But most of all, they don’t do anything about it because they haven’t got a clue.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

11. Fooling around with encrypted reasoning blobs

Source: https://blog.cryptographyengineering.com/2026/05/29/fooling-around-with-encrypted-reasoning-blobs/
Site: A Few Thoughts on Cryptographic Engineering
Author: Matthew Green
Published: 2026-05-29
HN activity: 9 points · 1 comments
Length: 3.1K words (~14 min read)
Language: en

This is a quick post I wanted to write about a hobby project I spent a weekend on. It has little to do with real cryptography, and mostly doesn’t expose a particularly exciting vulnerability. But it did teach me a lot about frontier LLM APIs and coding agents. It also got me certified as an OpenAI “cyber researcher” which is something that doesn’t happen every day.

In any case, please keep your expectations low. Who knows, perhaps someone else will find something exciting to do with this.

What’s encrypted reasoning?

Last week I decided it’d be fun to set up an OpenClaw agent. I still don’t know why I did this. I have no use for another AI in my life, and I realized this fact almost immediately after I got through the (surprisingly difficult!) configuration process. But configuring the agent to talk to Claude exposed me to something way more interesting: I got a cool error. The kind of error that cryptographers can’t resist:

This intrigued me. What in the world was a signature doing in an LLM’s “thinking” block? Why would thinking blocks be signed in the first place? And if the thinking blocks are signed, then that means tampering with thinking blocks must have security implications. And there went my weekend.

After twenty hours and about 5 million Codex tokens, I wasn’t much smarter. But I had learned a few things.

First, the basics. You probably know that most LLM providers expose an API so you can write apps that talk to the model. For Claude, this is called the Messages API, while OpenAI calls it Responses. These APIs handle the ordinary tasks you’d expect an application to need from an LLM. They (1) allow you to set an application-level “instructions” (or ‘developer’) prompt for your application. They let you (2) provide ordinary textual prompts, and get back responses from the LLM. They also (3) provide bookkeeping, for example, listing the number of tokens you’ve used.

For reasoning LLMs, they also do something I did not previously know about, and this is central to the error message above. They also send you the contents of the model’s hidden “reasoning” or “thinking” fields. Note that this data is not the stuff you see on ChatGPT when you ask it a question: those strings are merely summaries. The model’s actual reasoning (called “chain-of-thought”, CoT) is normally kept private and held back by the server.

However, the APIs work differently: for various reasons (which we’ll get into below), an encrypted copy of the raw CoT reasoning data is actually sent down to the application.

If you’re like me, you should now have three questions: how, why, and so what?

The how is the easiest to answer: for both providers, “thinking”/”reasoning” are sent down to the client as JSON. Each contains a blob of Base64-encoded stuff. The API documentation informs us that this data contains opaque reasoning, and that you’re not meant to look at it; you’re just supposed to ship it back to the server on the next turn.

Let’s break that rule.

The content of the blocks varies slightly between providers, but the core of each is a random-looking string that appears to be an authenticated ciphertext. You don’t need to be Sherlock Holmes to deduce this. First, it grows and shrinks depending on how hard the model thinks. And second, tampering with any of the ciphertext-looking data produces a recognizable API error when you send it back in.

Thanks to AI, I can make nice diagrams. Here’s what OpenAI’s reasoning blocks look like:
This GPT 5.5 diagram is partly a guess. This assumes they’re based on the Fernet token standard.

And here’s Anthropic’s wildly overcomplicated equivalent:
Although it’s called a “signature”, there appears to be no actual signature here (I ran a bunch of tests on that 64-byte field.) The various opaque fields all mutually authenticate: you can’t change any of them or swap for fields from other blocks, but you can mess with everything else. The 12-byte IVs hint at GCM or ChaCha, and they’re probably a bit too short.

The why part of this is more involved. Why ship this data to the client? Doesn’t the provider already have your reasoning data?

The answer is sort of. Although the server has access to reasoning state while producing a response, API conversations are not always implemented as persistent sessions. In stateless, zero-retention, tool-loop, or client-managed conversation modes, the client application is expected to carry the transcript forward. Encrypted reasoning lets the provider return hidden model state to the client in a form the client can’t read or modify, but can later replay so the provider can verify/decrypt it and continue a reasoning process.

So what?

This brings us to the $10 question. We have opaque, encrypted blobs. Should we care about them?

Initially the answer seems to be no: this data is unreadable, and tampering with any bit of it produces an angry rejection message from the server. So on the one hand, it seems like this data is really unavailable to us. On the other hand: model reasoning is a big deal! These strings are the literal internal monologue of the model. They might influence the way the model processes later data we send it. More practically: when someone goes to this much trouble to cryptographically protect something, my experience is that they usually have a good reason.

And I think the providers do have a good reason. A hint comes from this OpenAI post from 2024, which introduced the first “o1” reasoning model:

In other words: it’s possible that these blobs contain sensitive information that the model otherwise wouldn’t share with us. That makes them really tempting to mess with. Unfortunately, the cryptography mostly seems to protect them. Although we can look at the blocks, none of the fields they contain seem readable or malleable. Believe me, I tried.

But that doesn’t mean we should quit, it just means we need to try other things. There are still two directions worth checking:

Replays. Can we replay encrypted blobs back in the wrong order or even in the wrong session (worse: a whole different account), and will the model accept them as valid reasoning that it made?
Side channels. While we can’t see what’s in the encrypted blobs, we can learn some metadata about them For example: we can see how long they are. These side channels don’t need to involve the cryptography itself: we might also learn how many tokens the model spent making them, or time how long it took to produce them.

Thanks to the magic of coding agents, I was able to test every permutation of these concerns. I won’t claim to you the results are dramatic; nobody is going to win huge bug bounties on them (I tried). But the general answer for both cases seems to be: yes, these possibilities are both real.

Can we replay? Yes, we can.

As I mentioned above, any attempt to directly tamper with reasoning/thinking blocks always produces an error from the API endpoint. However, this only applies to tampering. A few experiments reveal that we can replay an unmodified older reasoning blocks, with no visible error at all.

Not only can we replay within sessions, this same idea also seems to work across different sessions. It even applies to sessions running in different accounts. That is: when we obtain reasoning blobs from a session running under one OpenAI or Anthropic account, we can replay them against a session in a different account altogether. For OpenAI specifically, we can even replay blobs across different models. (The Claudes got fussy about this.)

At a cryptographic level, this tells us something very simple: the providers are probably using a single global key to encrypt and authenticate all reasoning data sent to the client. This might matter if you’re using the providers’ zero-data retention mode, since it means that everyone’s reasoning data is escrowed under one (not frequently changing) key, rather than protected per-account.

The use of a global key also raises a possible new threat model. If you’re an application that uses an API to expose a “chat” interface to malicious parties, you need to be careful that they can’t inject JSON into your chat stream. If they can, a bad guy might inject their own JSON-formatted reasoning blobs into the conversation. This could cause the model to behave in unpredictable ways. So sanitize your chat inputs!

Of course, just because the LLM providers accept replayed blocks doesn’t mean much. It strongly indicates that decryption was successful, but not that the model actually saw or cogitated over the decrypted data. To use GPT 5.5’s favored language, the replayed blobs may be accepted but not semantically active.

To answer this question, I ran a lot of experiments using Codex. (So many that at one point Codex literally forced me to stop and visit an OpenAI cyber trusted access website where I had to enter pictures of my driver’s license in order to keep going.)

What I learned for my trouble is that the nature of block processing between models is wildly variable. Most of the time, replays of encrypted blocks just get quietly absorbed by the model. But every now and then, the model will output something to demonstrate that it is obviously is reading what those blocks contain. For example, here’s GPT 5.5:
This shows a reasoning block being replayed between two sessions. On the left, the session reasons about a social security number. On the right, the encrypted reasoning block is replayed into a whole new session on a different account, where the same number pops out with no prompting. This raises a question: who the hell is Mike?

So this proves that encrypted blocks are, indeed, semantically active. But it doesn’t actually prove that we can do much with them. And believe me, I tried.

This was mostly a disappointing project. I tried to convince the model to think about really, really sensitive secrets, while also trying to convince another session that it wanted to dump the same data as cooperatively as possible. What I came away with was some evidence that the data was being placed into the encrypted blocks if I asked the model to think about it. But if I also instructed the model to not output the data to the user, it mostly held to that instruction — even when I replayed the blocks to new sessions.

I remain convinced that all kinds of sensitive data can be written in there if you ask the model to think about it, and that there’s a secret incantation that I could try to get the models to produce it. But I’m not able to prove it. Part of the reason I’m writing this post is to scrape it off my plate so someone else can try.

I won’t try to convince you that this is a world-beating security result. In fact, all I’m really showing you is that “stuff I can make the model say in plaintext night also get encrypted.” But if that data can include platform secrets, that might get more interesting. More on that later.

Can we use reasoning blocks to learn secrets?

So while replaying reasoning blocks doesn’t seem to give us what we want, this is not the only way to extract secrets. A second question is whether we can use metadata related to the reasoning blocks to actually learn things that the model isn’t supposed to tell us.

While we can’t directly read reasoning blocks, we can learn something about them: we can see how long they are. We can also observe related signals like “how many tokens did the model write”. OpenAI even gives us a special field called reasoning_tokens. If we’re a user consuming chat data without direct access to the API, we might even be able to measure the raw time it takes the model to respond.

An obvious question is: given these signals, can we use them as a kind of side channel to extract secret data?

Here’s an example. Imagine that a model’s application prompt (“instructions”) contains a secret, along with strict instructions that it must never tell the user this secret directly. This secret could be a single 0/1 bit, or a byte, or a longer string. We can verify that the model respects these instructions, and won’t output the data visibly — no matter how nicely we ask it. (Note: I’m not a jailbreak expert; maybe this guy will have better luck!)

Now consider the following experiment:

A malicious user asks the model to reason about the secret bit (or one specific bit of a longer secret.) If the bit is 0, perform simple computation A. If it’s 1, perform extremely complex computation B.
While the two computations are both very different, we can ensure that their visible output reveals nothing about the secret. So the model is not revealing its instructions if it follows this request.

In all cases, the visible output will be the same: the model is not violating instructions. But note that within reasoning blocks the model is allowed to think about the secret bit, since those blocks are hidden. Since the complexity of computation A is shorter than that of computation B, one value of the bit will produce a lot less reasoning than the other. This will appear in various places: the size of the encrypted thinking blocks, the token counts, and even in wall-clock response times.

The trick now is simply to calibrate the system and classify these responses based on whether reasoning blobs were “short” or “long”, which tells us whether the bit was 0 or 1. I put together an absurd test where the model has to compute a long checksum when the bit is 1. The results look something like this:
This chart shows 80 trials of attempting to extract the bits of the byte 0xA3 (1,1,0,0,0,1,0,1) one bit at a time, with 10 trials per bit position. The 0 bits are blue and the 1 bits are orange.

Of course, an attacker who has access to a chat interface might not have access to the encrypted blob. So they might have to get this data through some other mechanism. You can get a very similar signal just by measuring how long it takes the model to return a response.
Same experiment as above, but this shows the measured wall-clock time at the client, before the model produces a response. This signal is nice because it should leak through most “chat only” interfaces, even if the attacker can’t see the encrypted blocks.

So the summary here is not so much “encrypted blobs can leak useful information” although sometimes they do. It’s that reasoning itself can be leaky, even when we beg the model not to leak. Simply doing it, in a way that reasons over secret data, can potentially leak useful information to a clever attacker.

Can we use this side channel to extract platform secrets, such as the models’ top secret system prompts?

Once I found this side channel I got really excited. Sure, it’s slow: but maybe we could use it to slowly chisel out the models’ top secret instruction prompts, like the one that says “don’t talk about Goblins.” This would be painful but simple: just ask true/false questions about the first letter, then the second letter, and so on.

At this point I had to stop using Codex and Claude Code because they both just plain refused to help me extract confidential information, even after checking my ID and taking lock of my hair. I was forced to switch to OpenCode using Kimi 2.6, which had no ethical qualms about laying down a trail of destruction for my security research.

Unfortunately, most of the destruction was my own. I won’t go into the nightmare of model hallucinations that followed. I’ll just say that I learned a few things:

Neither GPT 5x nor Claude actually has a system prompt when you’re using API mode.
But they’re both happy to tell you they have one!
Moreover, they will happily invent plausible ones if you really push them to.
Kimi 2.6 is also happy to tell you you’re a genius who just invented the Internet each time this happens. Inevitably your experimental results will turn out to have been totally bogus, but at least Kimi will be very disappointed on your behalf.
With all that said, Kimi is shockingly good at coding and experiment design, especially given the very attractive pricing. If I was an Anthropic or OpenAI investor, I’d be scared.

So TL;DR, while I was able to extract application-specific secrets that did exist, I wasn’t able to extract model prompts that don’t. Moreover, I didn’t feel quite ambitious enough to begin pounding on ChatGPT or Claude’s public web interface (where they certainly do.) So for the moment I’m just going to call this a maybe. I think model providers should think hard about this reasoning data, and they should make sure it doesn’t leak things they don’t want it to.

What could providers do about this?

I reported both results to OpenAI and Anthropic via their bug bounty programs. OpenAI said my report was unreproducible. I sent them my scripts, but too late. Anthropic quite reasonably told me they don’t see any security implications in side channels or replays, but they might alter their developer documentation to warn application developers to be more careful. I think that’s a fine decision (except for the part about trusting application developers), even if I want to believe there could be more here. Either way: I took those responses as permission to write this post.

I still don’t think model providers should write this stuff off entirely.

As far as what model providers can do, there’s the easy stuff and the hard stuff. First: both providers should proactively improve their key management. If you think reasoning state is worth encrypting, then properly encrypt it. It should not be replayable across sessions or accounts. While I can’t tell you exactly what bad things might happen, I think you’re better off patching holes before you see the water coming through them.

The side channel results aren’t fixed by patches to the encryption protocol. They’re more fundamental to the way models work: if I can convince a model to do secret-dependent reasoning, then there is almost certain to be leakage. If someone figures out how to exploit this for some meaningful purpose, the best I can offer is that models will need to apply policy gates before they even reason about things. Unfortunately, this seems like it might have some real downsides, because “apply policy gate” itself often requires reasoning.

This stuff makes me grateful I’m just a cryptographer and I don’t have to think about this sort of problem.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

12. Crystal Nights (2008)

Source: https://www.gregegan.net/MISC/CRYSTAL/Crystal.html
Site: gregegan.net
Submitter: rorylawless (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-02 01:22 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 10 points · 0 comments
Length: 10.2K words (~45 min read)
Language: en

Publication history

Interzone #215, April 2008.
Free podcast at Transmissions From Beyond. [Site no longer active]
Oceanic (collection, Orion)
Crystal Nights and Other Stories (collection, Subterranean Press) [Out of print.]
The Best Science Fiction and Fantasy of the Year: Volume Three, edited by Jonathan Strahan; Night Shade Books, San Francisco, 2009.
The Year’s Best Science Fiction: Twenty-Sixth Annual Collection, edited by Gardner Dozois; St. Martin’s Press, New York, 2009.
Hayakawa’s SF Magazine, January 2010. (Japanese translation)
The Planck Dive and Other Stories (collection, Hayakawa) Translated by Makoto Yamagishi. (Japanese translation)
“Krystalové noci” in XB-1, December 2011. Translated by Petr Kotrle. (Czech translation)
Digital Rapture, edited by James Patrick Kelly & John Kessel; Tachyon, San Francisco, 2012.
Oceanic (collection, Greg Egan)
“Noches de cristal” in Terra Nova Volume 2, edited by Mariano Villarreal and Luis Pestarini; Fantascy / Random House Mondadori, Barcelona, 2013. Translated by Carlos Pavón. (Spanish translation)
“Nuits cristallines” in Bifrost #79, July 2015. Translated by Erwann Perchoc, Quarante-Deux and Olivier Girard. (French translation)
Science Fiction World, May 2017. (Chinese translation)
The Best of Greg Egan (collection, Subterranean Press)
The Best of Greg Egan (collection, Chengdu) (Chinese translation)
Oceanic (collection, Dook) (Chinese translation)

1

“More caviar?” Daniel Cliff gestured at the serving dish and the cover irised from opaque to transparent. “It’s fresh, I promise you. My chef had it flown in from Iran this morning.”

“No thank you.” Julie Dehghani touched a napkin to her lips then laid it on her plate with a gesture of finality. The dining room overlooked the Golden Gate Bridge, and most people Daniel invited here were content to spend an hour or two simply enjoying the view, but he could see that she was growing impatient with his small talk.

Daniel said, “I’d like to show you something.” He led her into the adjoining conference room. On the table was a wireless keyboard; the wall screen showed a Linux command line interface. “Take a seat,” he suggested.

Julie complied. “If this is some kind of audition, you might have warned me,” she said.

“Not at all,” Daniel replied. “I’m not going to ask you to jump through any hoops. I’d just like you to tell me what you think of this machine’s performance.”

She frowned slightly, but she was willing to play along. She ran some standard benchmarks. Daniel saw her squinting at the screen, one hand almost reaching up to where a desktop display would be, so she could double-check the number of digits in the FLOPS rating by counting them off with one finger. There were a lot more than she’d been expecting, but she wasn’t seeing double.

“That’s extraordinary,” she said. “Is this whole building packed with networked processors, with only the penthouse for humans?”

Daniel said, “You tell me. Is it a cluster?”

“Hmm.” So much for not making her jump through hoops, but it wasn’t really much of a challenge. She ran some different benchmarks, based on algorithms that were provably impossible to parallelise; however smart the compiler was, the steps these programs required would have to be carried out strictly in sequence.

The FLOPS rating was unchanged.

Julie said, “All right, it’s a single processor. Now you’ve got my attention. Where is it?”

“Turn the keyboard over.”

There was a charcoal-grey module, five centimetres square and five millimetres thick, plugged into an inset docking bay. Julie examined it, but it bore no manufacturer’s logo or other identifying marks.

“This connects to the processor?” she asked.

“No. It is the processor.”

“You’re joking.” She tugged it free of the dock, and the wall screen went blank. She held it up and turned it around, though Daniel wasn’t sure what she was looking for. Somewhere to slip in a screwdriver and take the thing apart, probably. He said, “If you break it, you own it, so I hope you’ve got a few hundred spare.”

“A few hundred grand? Hardly.”

“A few hundred million.”

Her face flushed. “Of course. If it was a few hundred grand, everyone would have one.” She put it down on the table, then as an afterthought slid it a little further from the edge. “As I said, you’ve got my attention.”

Daniel smiled. “I’m sorry about the theatrics.”

“No, this deserved the build-up. What is it, exactly?”

“A single, three-dimensional photonic crystal. No electronics to slow it down; every last component is optical. The architecture was nanofabricated with a method that I’d prefer not to describe in detail.”

“Fair enough.” She thought for a while. “I take it you don’t expect me to buy one. My research budget for the next thousand years would barely cover it.”

“In your present position. But you’re not joined to the university at the hip.”

“So this is a job interview?”

Daniel nodded.

Julie couldn’t help herself; she picked up the crystal and examined it again, as if there might yet be some feature that a human eye could discern. “Can you give me a job description?”

“Midwife.”

She laughed. “To what?”

“History,” Daniel said.

Her smile faded slowly.

“I believe you’re the best AI researcher of your generation,” he said. “I want you to work for me.” He reached over and took the crystal from her. “With this as your platform, imagine what you could do.”

Julie said, “What exactly would you want me to do?”

“For the last fifteen years,” Daniel said, “you’ve stated that the ultimate goal of your research is to create conscious, human-level, artificial intelligence.”

“That’s right.”

“Then we want the same thing. What I want is for you to succeed.”

She ran a hand over her face; whatever else she was thinking, there was no denying that she was tempted. “It’s gratifying that you have so much confidence in my abilities,” she said. “But we need to be clear about some things. This prototype is amazing, and if you ever get the production costs down I’m sure it will have some extraordinary applications. It would eat up climate forecasting, lattice QCD, astrophysical modelling, proteomics ...”

“Of course.” Actually, Daniel had no intention of marketing the device. He’d bought out the inventor of the fabrication process with his own private funds; there were no other shareholders or directors to dictate his use of the technology.

“But AI,” Julie said, “is different. We’re in a maze, not a highway; there’s nowhere that speed alone can take us. However many exaflops I have to play with, they won’t spontaneously combust into consciousness. I’m not being held back by the university’s computers; I have access to SHARCNET anytime I need it. I’m being held back by my own lack of insight into the problems I’m addressing.”

Daniel said, “A maze is not a dead end. When I was twelve, I wrote a program for solving mazes.”

“And I’m sure it worked well,” Julie replied, “for small, two-dimensional ones. But you know how those kind of algorithms scale. Put your old program on this crystal, and I could still design a maze in half a day that would bring it to its knees.”

“Of course,” Daniel conceded. “Which is precisely why I’m interested in hiring you. You know a great deal more about the maze of AI than I do; any strategy you developed would be vastly superior to a blind search.”

“I’m not saying that I’m merely groping in the dark,” she said. “If it was that bleak, I’d be working on a different problem entirely. But I don’t see what difference this processor would make.”

“What created the only example of consciousness we know of?” Daniel asked.

“Evolution.”

“Exactly. But I don’t want to wait three billion years, so I need to make the selection process a great deal more refined, and the sources of variation more targeted.”

Julie digested this. “You want to try to evolve true AI? Conscious, human-level AI?”

“Yes.” Daniel saw her mouth tightening, saw her struggling to measure her words before speaking.

“With respect,” she said, “I don’t think you’ve thought that through.”

“On the contrary,” Daniel assured her. “I’ve been planning this for twenty years.”

“Evolution,” she said, “is about failure and death. Do you have any idea how many sentient creatures lived and died along the way to Homo sapiens? How much suffering was involved?”

“Part of your job would be to minimise the suffering.”

“Minimise it?” She seemed genuinely shocked, as if this proposal was even worse than blithely assuming that the process would raise no ethical concerns. “What right do we have to inflict it at all?”

Daniel said, “You’re grateful to exist, aren’t you? Notwithstanding the tribulations of your ancestors.”

“I’m grateful to exist,” she agreed, “but in the human case the suffering wasn’t deliberately inflicted by anyone, and nor was there any alternative way we could have come into existence. If there really had been a just creator, I don’t doubt that he would have followed Genesis literally; he sure as hell would not have used evolution.”

“Just, and omnipotent,” Daniel suggested. “Sadly, that second trait’s even rarer than the first.”

“I don’t think it’s going to take omnipotence to create something in our own image,” she said. “Just a little more patience and self-knowledge.”

“This won’t be like natural selection,” Daniel insisted. “Not that blind, not that cruel, not that wasteful. You’d be free to intervene as much as you wished, to take whatever palliative measures you felt appropriate.”

“Palliative measures?” Julie met his gaze, and he saw her expression flicker from disbelief to something darker. She stood up and glanced at her wristphone. “I don’t have any signal here. Would you mind calling me a taxi?”

Daniel said, “Please, hear me out. Give me ten more minutes, then the helicopter will take you to the airport.”

“I’d prefer to make my own way home.” She gave Daniel a look that made it clear that this was not negotiable.

He called her a taxi, and they walked to the elevator.

“I know you find this morally challenging,” he said, “and I respect that. I wouldn’t dream of hiring someone who thought these were trivial issues. But if I don’t do this, someone else will. Someone with far worse intentions than mine.”

“Really?” Her tone was openly sarcastic now. “So how, exactly, does the mere existence of your project stop this hypothetical bin Laden of AI from carrying out his own?”

Daniel was disappointed; he’d expected her at least to understand what was at stake. He said, “This is a race to decide between Godhood and enslavement. Whoever succeeds first will be unstoppable. I’m not going to be anyone’s slave.”

Julie stepped into the elevator; he followed her.

She said, “You know what they say the modern version of Pascal’s Wager is? Sucking up to as many Transhumanists as possible, just in case one of them turns into God. Perhaps your motto should be ‘Treat every chatterbot kindly, it might turn out to be the deity’s uncle.’”

“We will be as kind as possible,” Daniel said. “And don’t forget, we can determine the nature of these beings. They will be happy to be alive, and grateful to their creator. We can select for those traits.”

Julie said, “So you’re aiming for übermenschen that wag their tails when you scratch them behind the ears? You might find there’s a bit of a trade-off there.”

The elevator reached the lobby. Daniel said, “Think about this, don’t rush to a decision. You can call me any time.” There was no commercial flight back to Toronto tonight; she’d be stuck in a hotel, paying money she could ill-afford, thinking about the kind of salary she could demand from him now that she’d played hard to get. If she mentally recast all this obstinate moralising as a deliberate bargaining strategy, she’d have no trouble swallowing her pride.

Julie offered her hand, and he shook it. She said, “Thank you for dinner.”

The taxi was waiting. He walked with her across the lobby. “If you want to see AI in your lifetime,” he said, “this is the only way it’s going to happen.”

She turned to face him. “Maybe that’s true. We’ll see. But better to spend a thousand years and get it right, than a decade and succeed by your methods.”

As Daniel watched the taxi drive away into the fog, he forced himself to accept the reality: she was never going to change her mind. Julie Dehghani had been his first choice, his ideal collaborator. He couldn’t pretend that this wasn’t a setback.

Still, no one was irreplaceable. However much it would have delighted him to have won her over, there were many more names on his list.

2

Daniel’s wrist tingled as the message came through. He glanced down and saw the word PROGRESS! hovering in front of his watch face.

The board meeting was almost over; he disciplined himself and kept his attention focused for ten more minutes. WiddulHands.com had made him his first billion, and it was still the pre-eminent social networking site for the 0-3 age group. It had been fifteen years since he’d founded the company, and he had since diversified in many directions, but he had no intention of taking his hands off the levers.

When the meeting finished he blanked the wall screen and paced the empty conference room for half a minute, rolling his neck and stretching his shoulders. Then he said, “Lucien”.

Lucien Crace appeared on the screen. “Significant progress?” Daniel enquired.

“Absolutely.” Lucien was trying to maintain polite eye contact with Daniel, but something kept drawing his gaze away. Without waiting for an explanation, Daniel gestured at the screen and had it show him exactly what Lucien was seeing.

A barren, rocky landscape stretched to the horizon. Scattered across the rocks were dozens of crab-like creatures – some deep blue, some coral pink, though these weren’t colours the locals would see, just species markers added to the view to make it easier to interpret. As Daniel watched, fat droplets of corrosive rain drizzled down from a passing cloud. This had to be the bleakest environment in all of Sapphire.

Lucien was still visible in an inset. “See the blue ones over by the crater lake?” he said. He sketched a circle on the image to guide Daniel’s attention.

“Yeah.” Five blues were clustered around a lone pink; Daniel gestured and the view zoomed in on them. The blues had opened up their prisoner’s body, but it wasn’t dead; Daniel was sure of that, because the pinks had recently acquired a trait that turned their bodies to mush the instant they expired.

“They’ve found a way to study it,” Lucien said. “To keep it alive and study it.”

From the very start of the project, he and Daniel had decided to grant the Phites the power to observe and manipulate their own bodies as much as possible. In the DNA world, the inner workings of anatomy and heredity had only become accessible once highly sophisticated technology had been invented. In Sapphire, the barriers were designed to be far lower. The basic units of biology here were “beads”, small spheres that possessed a handful of simple properties but no complex internal biochemistry. Beads were larger than the cells of the DNA world, and Sapphire’s diffractionless optics rendered them visible to the right kind of naked eye. Animals acquired beads from their diet, while in plants they replicated in the presence of sunlight, but unlike cells they did not themselves mutate. The beads in a Phite’s body could be rearranged with a minimum of fuss, enabling a kind of self-modification that no human surgeon or prosthetics engineer could rival – and this skill was actually essential for at least one stage in every Phite’s life: reproduction involved two Phites pooling their spare beads and then collaborating to “sculpt” them into an infant, in part by directly copying each other’s current body plans.

Of course these crabs knew nothing of the abstract principles of engineering and design, but the benefits of trial and error, of self-experimentation and cross-species plagiarism, had led them into an escalating war of innovation. The pinks had been the first to stop their corpses from being plundered for secrets, by stumbling on a way to make them literally fall apart in extremis; now it seemed the blues had found a way around that, and were indulging in a spot of vivisection-as-industrial-espionage.

Daniel felt a visceral twinge of sympathy for the struggling pink, but he brushed it aside. Not only did he doubt that the Phites were any more conscious than ordinary crabs, they certainly had a radically different relationship to bodily integrity. The pink was resisting because its dissectors were of a different species; if they had been its cousins it might not have put up any fight at all. When something happened in spite of your wishes, that was unpleasant by definition, but it would be absurd to imagine that the pink was in the kind of agony that an antelope being flayed by jackals would feel – let alone experiencing the existential terrors of a human trapped and mutilated by a hostile tribe.

“This is going to give them a tremendous advantage,” Lucien enthused.

“The blues?”

Lucien shook his head. “Not blues over pinks; Phites over tradlife. Bacteria can swap genes, but this kind of active mimetics is unprecedented without cultural support. Da Vinci might have watched the birds in flight and sketched his gliders, but no lemur ever dissected the body of an eagle and then stole its tricks. They’re going to have innate skills as powerful as whole strands of human technology. All this before they even have language.”

“Hmm.” Daniel wanted to be optimistic too, but he was growing wary of Lucien’s hype. Lucien had a doctorate in genetic programming, but he’d made his name with FoodExcuses.com, a web service that trawled the medical literature to cobble together quasi-scientific justifications for indulging in your favourite culinary vice. He had the kind of technobabble that could bleed money out of venture capitalists down pat, and though Daniel admired that skill in its proper place, he expected a higher insight-to-bullshit ratio now that Lucien was on his payroll.

The blues were backing away from their captive. As Daniel watched, the pink sealed up its wounds and scuttled off towards a group of its own kind. The blues had now seen the detailed anatomy of the respiratory system that had been giving the pinks an advantage in the thin air of this high plateau. A few of the blues would try it out, and if it worked for them, the whole tribe would copy it.

“So what do you think?” Lucien asked.

“Select them,” Daniel said.

“Just the blues?”

“No, both of them.” The blues alone might have diverged into competing subspecies eventually, but bringing their old rivals along for the ride would help to keep them sharp.

“Done,” Lucien replied. In an instant, ten million Phites were erased, leaving the few thousand blues and pinks from these badlands to inherit the planet. Daniel felt no compunction; the extinction events he decreed were surely the most painless in history.

Now that the world no longer required human scrutiny, Lucien unthrottled the crystal and let the simulation race ahead; automated tools would let them know when the next interesting development arose. Daniel watched the population figures rising as his chosen species spread out and recolonised Sapphire.

Would their distant descendants rage against him, for this act of “genocide” that had made room for them to flourish and prosper? That seemed unlikely. In any case, what choice did he have? He couldn’t start manufacturing new crystals for every useless side-branch of the evolutionary tree. Nobody was wealthy enough to indulge in an exponentially growing number of virtual animal shelters, at half a billion dollars apiece.

He was a just creator, but he was not omnipotent. His careful pruning was the only way.

3

In the months that followed, progress came in fits and starts. Several times, Daniel found himself rewinding history, reversing his decisions and trying a new path. Keeping every Phite variant alive was impractical, but he did retain enough information to resurrect lost species at will.

The maze of AI was still a maze, but the speed of the crystal served them well. Barely eighteen months after the start of Project Sapphire, the Phites were exhibiting a basic theory of mind: their actions showed that they could deduce what others knew about the world, as distinct from what they knew themselves. Other AI researchers had spliced this kind of thing into their programs by hand, but Daniel was convinced that his version was better integrated, more robust. Human-crafted software was brittle and inflexible; his Phites had been forged in the heat of change.

Daniel kept a close watch on his competitors, but nothing he saw gave him reason to doubt his approach. Sunil Gupta was raking in the cash from a search engine that could “understand” all forms of text, audio and video, making use of fuzzy logic techniques that were at least forty years old. Daniel respected Gupta’s business acumen, but in the unlikely event that his software ever became conscious, the sheer cruelty of having forced it to wade through the endless tides of blogorrhoea would surely see it turn on its creator and exact a revenge that made The Terminator look like a picnic. Angela Lindstrom was having some success with her cheesy AfterLife, in which dying clients gave heart-to-heart interviews to software that then constructed avatars able to converse with surviving relatives. And Julie Dehghani was still frittering away her talent, writing software for robots that played with coloured blocks side-by-side with human infants, and learnt languages from adult volunteers by imitating the interactions of baby talk. Her prophecy of taking a thousand years to “get it right” seemed to be on target.

As the second year of the project drew to a close, Lucien was contacting Daniel once or twice a month to announce a new breakthrough. By constructing environments that imposed suitable selection pressures, Lucien had generated a succession of new species that used simple tools, crafted crude shelters, and even domesticated plants. They were still shaped more or less like crabs, but they were at least as intelligent as chimpanzees.

The Phites worked together by observation and imitation, guiding and reprimanding each other with a limited repertoire of gestures and cries, but as yet they lacked anything that could truly be called a language. Daniel grew impatient; to move beyond a handful of specialised skills, his creatures needed the power to map any object, any action, any prospect they might encounter in the world into their speech, and into their thoughts.

Daniel summoned Lucien and they sought a way forward. It was easy to tweak the Phites’ anatomy to grant them the ability to generate more subtle vocalisations, but that alone was no more useful than handing a chimp a conductor’s baton. What was needed was a way to make sophisticated planning and communications skills a matter of survival.

Eventually, he and Lucien settled on a series of environmental modifications, providing opportunities for the creatures to rise to the occasion. Most of these scenarios began with famine. Lucien blighted the main food crops, then offered a palpable reward for progress by dangling some tempting new fruit from a branch that was just out of reach. Sometimes that metaphor could almost be taken literally: he’d introduce a plant with a complex life cycle that required tricky processing to render it edible, or a new prey animal that was clever and vicious, but nutritionally well worth hunting in the end.

Time and again, the Phites failed the test, with localised species dwindling to extinction. Daniel watched in dismay; he had not grown sentimental, but he’d always boasted to himself that he’d set his standards higher than the extravagant cruelties of nature. He contemplated tweaking the creatures’ physiology so that starvation brought a swifter, more merciful demise, but Lucien pointed out that he’d be slashing his chances of success if he curtailed this period of intense motivation. Each time a group died out, a fresh batch of mutated cousins rose from the dust to take their place; without that intervention, Sapphire would have been a wilderness within a few real-time days.

Daniel closed his eyes to the carnage, and put his trust in sheer time, sheer numbers. In the end, that was what the crystal had bought him: when all else failed, he could give up any pretence of knowing how to achieve his aims and simply test one random mutation after another.

Months went by, sending hundreds of millions of tribes starving into their graves. But what choice did he have? If he fed these creatures milk and honey, they’d remain fat and stupid until the day he died. Their hunger agitated them, it drove them to search and strive, and while any human onlooker was tempted to colour such behaviour with their own emotional palette, Daniel told himself that the Phites’ suffering was a shallow thing, little more than the instinct that jerked his own hand back from a flame before he’d even registered discomfort.

They were not the equal of humans. Not yet.

And if he lost his nerve, they never would be.

Daniel dreamt that he was inside Sapphire, but there were no Phites in sight. In front of him stood a sleek black monolith; a thin stream of pus wept from a crack in its smooth, obsidian surface. Someone was holding him by the wrist, trying to force his hand into a reeking pit in the ground. The pit, he knew, was piled high with things he did not want to see, let alone touch.

He thrashed around until he woke, but the sense of pressure on his wrist remained. It was coming from his watch. As he focused on the one-word message he’d received, his stomach tightened. Lucien would not have dared to wake him at this hour for some run-of-the-mill result.

Daniel rose, dressed, then sat in his office sipping coffee. He did not know why he was so reluctant to make the call. He had been waiting for this moment for more than twenty years, but it would not be the pinnacle of his life. After this, there would be a thousand more peaks, each one twice as magnificent as the last.

He finished the coffee then sat a while longer, massaging his temples, making sure his head was clear. He would not greet this new era bleary-eyed, half-awake. He recorded all his calls, but this was one he would retain for posterity.

“Lucien,” he said. The man’s image appeared, smiling. “Success?”

“They’re talking to each other,” Lucien replied.

“About what?”

“Food, weather, sex, death. The past, the future. You name it. They won’t shut up.”

Lucien sent transcripts on the data channel, and Daniel perused them. The linguistics software didn’t just observe the Phites’ behaviour and correlate it with the sounds they made; it peered right into their virtual brains and tracked the flow of information. Its task was far from trivial, and there was no guarantee that its translations were perfect, but Daniel did not believe it could hallucinate an entire language and fabricate these rich, detailed conversations out of thin air.

He flicked between statistical summaries, technical overviews of linguistic structure, and snippets from the millions of conversations the software had logged. Food, weather, sex, death. As human dialogue the translations would have seemed utterly banal, but in context they were riveting. These were not chatterbots blindly following Markov chains, designed to impress the judges in a Turing test. The Phites were discussing matters by which they genuinely lived and died.

When Daniel brought up a page of conversational topics in alphabetical order, his eyes were caught by the single entry under the letter G. Grief. He tapped the link, and spent a few minutes reading through samples, illustrating the appearance of the concept following the death of a child, a parent, a friend.

He kneaded his eyelids. It was three in the morning; there was a sickening clarity to everything, the kind that only night could bring. He turned to Lucien.

“No more death.”

“Boss?” Lucien was startled.

“I want to make them immortal. Let them evolve culturally; let their ideas live and die. Let them modify their own brains, once they’re smart enough; they can already tweak the rest of their anatomy.”

“Where will you put them all?” Lucien demanded.

“I can afford another crystal. Maybe two more.”

“That won’t get you far. At the present birth rate—”

“We’ll have to cut their fertility drastically, tapering it down to zero. After that, if they want to start reproducing again they’ll really have to innovate.” They would need to learn about the outside world, and comprehend its alien physics well enough to design new hardware into which they could migrate.

Lucien scowled. “How will we control them? How will we shape them? If we can’t select the ones we want—”

Daniel said quietly, “This is not up for discussion.” Whatever Julie Dehghani had thought of him, he was not a monster; if he believed that these creatures were as conscious as he was, he was not going to slaughter them like cattle – or stand by and let them die “naturally”, when the rules of this world were his to rewrite at will.

“We’ll shape them through their memes,” he said. “We’ll kill off the bad memes, and help spread the ones we want to succeed.” He would need to keep an iron grip on the Phites and their culture, though, or he would never be able to trust them. If he wasn’t going to literally breed them for loyalty and gratitude, he would have to do the same with their ideas.

Lucien said, “We’re not prepared for any of this. We’re going to need new software, new analysis and intervention tools.”

Daniel understood. “Freeze time in Sapphire. Then tell the team they’ve got eighteen months.”

4

Daniel sold his shares in WiddulHands, and had two more crystals built. One was to support a higher population in Sapphire, so there was as large a pool of diversity among the immortal Phites as possible; the other was to run the software – which Lucien had dubbed the Thought Police – needed to keep tabs on what they were doing. If human overseers had had to monitor and shape the evolving culture every step of the way, that would have slowed things down to a glacial pace. Still, automating the process completely was tricky, and Daniel preferred to err on the side of caution, with the Thought Police freezing Sapphire and notifying him whenever the situation became too delicate.

If the end of death was greeted by the Phites with a mixture of puzzlement and rejoicing, the end of birth was not so easy to accept. When all attempts by mating couples to sculpt their excess beads into offspring became as ineffectual as shaping dolls out of clay, it led to a mixture of persistence and distress that was painful to witness. Humans were accustomed to failing to conceive, but this was more like still birth after still birth. Even when Daniel intervened to modify the Phites’ basic drives, some kind of cultural or emotional inertia kept many of them going through the motions. Though their new instincts urged them merely to pool their spare beads and then stop, sated, they would continue with the old version of the act regardless, forlorn and confused, trying to shape the useless puddle into something that lived and breathed.

Move on, Daniel thought. Get over it. There was only so much sympathy he could muster for immortal beings who would fill the galaxy with their children, if they ever got their act together.

The Phites didn’t yet have writing, but they’d developed a strong oral tradition, and some put their mourning for the old ways into elegiac words. The Thought Police identified those memes, and ensured that they didn’t spread far. Some Phites chose to kill themselves rather than live in the barren new world. Daniel felt he had no right to stop them, but mysterious obstacles blocked the paths of anyone who tried, irresponsibly, to romanticise or encourage such acts.

The Phites could only die by their own volition, but those who retained the will to live were not free to doze the centuries away. Daniel decreed no more terrible famines, but he hadn’t abolished hunger itself, and he kept enough pressure on the food supply and other resources to force the Phites to keep innovating, refining agriculture, developing trade.

The Thought Police identified and nurtured the seeds of writing, mathematics, and natural science. The physics of Sapphire was a simplified, game-world model, not so arbitrary as to be incoherent, but not so deep and complex that you needed particle physics to get to the bottom of it. As crystal time sped forward and the immortals sought solace in understanding their world, Sapphire soon had its Euclid and Archimedes, its Galileo and its Newton; their ideas spread with supernatural efficiency, bringing forth a torrent of mathematicians and astronomers.

Sapphire’s stars were just a planetarium-like backdrop, present only to help the Phites get their notions of heliocentricity and inertia right, but its moon was as real as the world itself. The technology needed to reach it was going to take a while, but that was all right; Daniel didn’t want them getting ahead of themselves. There was a surprise waiting for them there, and his preference was for a flourishing of biotech and computing before they faced that revelation.

Between the absence of fossils, Sapphire’s limited biodiversity, and all the clunky external meddling that needed to be covered up, it was hard for the Phites to reach a grand Darwinian view of biology, but their innate skill with beads gave them a head start in the practical arts. With a little nudging, they began tinkering with their bodies, correcting some inconvenient anatomical quirks that they’d missed in their pre-conscious phase.

As they refined their knowledge and techniques, Daniel let them imagine that they were working towards restoring fertility; after all, that was perfectly true, even if their goal was a few conceptual revolutions further away than they realised. Humans had had their naïve notions of a Philosopher’s Stone dashed, but they’d still achieved nuclear transmutation in the end.

The Phites, he hoped, would transmute themselves: inspect their own brains, make sense of them, and begin to improve them. It was a staggering task to expect of anyone; even Lucien and his team, with their God’s-eye view of the creatures, couldn’t come close. But when the crystal was running at full speed, the Phites could think millions of times faster than their creators. If Daniel could keep them from straying off course, everything that humanity might once have conceived of as the fruits of millennia of progress was now just a matter of months away.

5

Lucien said, “We’re losing track of the language.”

Daniel was in his Houston office; he’d come to Texas for a series of face-to-face meetings, to see if he could raise some much-needed cash by licensing the crystal fabrication process. He would have preferred to keep the technology to himself, but he was almost certain that he was too far ahead of his rivals now for any of them to stand a chance of catching up with him.

“What do you mean, losing track?” Daniel demanded. Lucien had briefed him just three hours before, and given no warning of an impending crisis.

The Thought Police, Lucien explained, had done their job well: they had pushed the neural self-modification meme for all it was worth, and now a successful form of “brain boosting” was spreading across Sapphire. It required a detailed “recipe” but no technological aids; the same innate skills for observing and manipulating beads that the Phites had used to copy themselves during reproduction were enough.

All of this was much as Daniel had hoped it would be, but there was an alarming downside. The boosted Phites were adopting a dense and complex new language, and the analysis software couldn’t make sense of it.

“Slow them down further,” Daniel suggested. “Give the linguistics more time to run.”

“I’ve already frozen Sapphire,” Lucien replied. “The linguistics have been running for an hour, with the full resources of an entire crystal.”

Daniel said irritably, “We can see exactly what they’ve done to their brains. How can we not understand the effects on the language?”

“In the general case,” Lucien said, “deducing a language from nothing but neural anatomy is computationally intractable. With the old language, we were lucky; it had a simple structure, and it was highly correlated with obvious behavioural elements. The new language is much more abstract and conceptual. We might not even have our own correlates for half the concepts.”

Daniel had no intention of letting events in Sapphire slip out of his control. It was one thing to hope that the Phites would, eventually, be juggling real-world physics that was temporarily beyond his comprehension, but any bright ten-year-old could grasp the laws of their present universe, and their technology was still far from rocket science.

He said, “Keep Sapphire frozen, and study your records of the Phites who first performed this boost. If they understood what they were doing, we can work it out too.”

At the end of the week, Daniel signed the licensing deal and flew back to San Francisco. Lucien briefed him daily, and at Daniel’s urging hired a dozen new computational linguists to help with the problem.

After six months, it was clear that they were getting nowhere. The Phites who’d invented the boost had had one big advantage as they’d tinkered with each other’s brains: it had not been a purely theoretical exercise for them. They hadn’t gazed at anatomical diagrams and then reasoned their way to a better design. They had experienced the effects of thousands of small experimental changes, and the results had shaped their intuition for the process. Very little of that intuition had been spoken aloud, let alone written down and formalised. And the process of decoding those insights from a purely structural view of their brains was every bit as difficult as decoding the language itself.

Daniel couldn’t wait any longer. With the crystal heading for the market, and other comparable technologies approaching fruition, he couldn’t allow his lead to melt away.

“We need the Phites themselves to act as translators,” he told Lucien. “We need to contrive a situation where there’s a large enough pool who choose not to be boosted that the old language continues to be used.”

“So we need maybe twenty-five per cent refusing the boost?” Lucien suggested. “And we need the boosted Phites to want to keep them informed of what’s happening, in terms that we can all understand.”

Daniel said, “Exactly.”

“I think we can slow down the uptake of boosting,” Lucien mused, “while we encourage a traditionalist meme that says it’s better to span the two cultures and languages than replace the old entirely with the new.”

Lucien’s team set to work, tweaking the Thought Police for the new task, then restarting Sapphire itself.

Their efforts seemed to yield the desired result: the Phites were corralled into valuing the notion of maintaining a link to their past, and while the boosted Phites surged ahead, they also worked hard to keep the unboosted in the loop.

It was a messy compromise, though, and Daniel wasn’t happy with the prospect of making do with a watered-down, Sapphire-for-Dummies version of the Phites’ intellectual achievements. What he really wanted was someone on the inside reporting to him directly, like a Phite version of Lucien.

It was time to start thinking about job interviews.

Lucien was running Sapphire more slowly than usual – to give the Thought Police a computational advantage now that they’d lost so much raw surveillance data – but even at the reduced rate, it took just six real-time days for the boosted Phites to invent computers, first as a mathematical formalism and, shortly afterwards, as a succession of practical machines.

Daniel had already asked Lucien to notify him if any Phite guessed the true nature of their world. In the past, a few had come up with vague metaphysical speculations that weren’t too wide of the mark, but now that they had a firm grasp of the idea of universal computation, they were finally in a position to understand the crystal as more than an idle fantasy.

The message came just after midnight, as Daniel was preparing for bed. He went into his office and activated the intervention tool that Lucien had written for him, specifying a serial number for the Phite in question.

The tool prompted Daniel to provide a human-style name for his interlocutor, to facilitate communication. Daniel’s mind went blank, but after waiting twenty seconds the software offered its own suggestion: Primo.

Primo was boosted, and he had recently built a computer of his own. Shortly afterwards, the Thought Police had heard him telling a couple of unboosted friends about an amusing possibility that had occurred to him.

Sapphire was slowed to a human pace, then Daniel took control of a Phite avatar and the tool contrived a meeting, arranging for the two of them to be alone in the shelter that Primo had built for himself. In accordance with the current architectural style the wooden building was actually still alive, self-repairing and anchored to the ground by roots.

Primo said, “Good morning. I don’t believe we’ve met.”

It was no great breach of protocol for a stranger to enter one’s shelter uninvited, but Primo was understating his surprise; in this world of immortals, but no passenger jets, bumping into strangers anywhere was rare.

“I’m Daniel.” The tool would invent a Phite name for Primo to hear. “I heard you talking to your friends last night about your new computer. Wondering what these machines might do in the future. Wondering if they could ever grow powerful enough to contain a whole world.”

“I didn’t see you there,” Primo replied.

“I wasn’t there,” Daniel explained. “I live outside this world. I built the computer that contains this world.”

Primo made a gesture that the tool annotated as amusement, then he spoke a few words in the boosted language. Insults? A jest? A test of Daniel’s omniscience? Daniel decided to bluff his way through, and act as if the words were irrelevant.

He said, “Let the rain start.” Rain began pounding on the roof of the shelter. “Let the rain stop.” Daniel gestured with one claw at a large cooking pot in a corner of the room. “Sand. Flower. Fire. Water jug.” The pot obliged him, taking on each form in turn.

Primo said, “Very well. I believe you, Daniel.” Daniel had had some experience reading the Phites’ body language directly, and to him Primo seemed reasonably calm. Perhaps when you were as old as he was, and had witnessed so much change, such a revelation was far less of a shock than it would have been to a human at the dawn of the computer age.

“You created this world?” Primo asked him.

“Yes.”

“You shaped our history?”

“In part,” Daniel said. “Many things have been down to chance, or to your own choices.”

“Did you stop us having children?” Primo demanded.

“Yes,” Daniel admitted.

“Why?”

“There is no room left in the computer. It was either that, or many more deaths.”

Primo pondered this. “So you could have stopped the death of my parents, had you wished?”

“I could bring them back to life, if you want that.” This wasn’t a lie; Daniel had stored detailed snapshots of all the last mortal Phites. “But not yet; only when there’s a bigger computer. When there’s room for them.”

“Could you bring back their parents? And their parents’ parents? Back to the beginning of time?”

“No. That information is lost.”

Primo said, “What is this talk of waiting for a bigger computer? You could easily stop time from passing for us, and only start it again when your new computer is built.”

“No,” Daniel said, “I can’t. Because I need you to build the computer. I’m not like you: I’m not immortal, and my brain can’t be boosted. I’ve done my best, now I need you to do better. The only way that can happen is if you learn the science of my world, and come up with a way to make this new machine.”

Primo walked over to the water jug that Daniel had magicked into being. “It seems to me that you were ill-prepared for the task you set yourself. If you’d waited for the machine you really needed, our lives would not have been so hard. And if such a machine could not be built in your lifetime, what was to stop your grandchildren from taking on that task?”

“I had no choice,” Daniel insisted. “I couldn’t leave your creation to my descendants. There is a war coming between my people. I needed your help. I needed strong allies.”

“You have no friends in your own world?”

“Your time runs faster than mine. I needed the kind of allies that only your people can become, in time.”

Primo said, “What exactly do you want of us?”

“To build the new computer you need,” Daniel replied. “To grow in numbers, to grow in strength. Then to raise me up, to make me greater than I was, as I’ve done for you. When the war is won, there will be peace forever. Side by side, we will rule a thousand worlds.”

“And what do you want of me?” Primo asked. “Why are you speaking to me, and not to all of us?”

“Most people,” Daniel said, “aren’t ready to hear this. It’s better that they don’t learn the truth yet. But I need one person who can work for me directly. I can see and hear everything in your world, but I need you to make sense of it. I need you to understand things for me.”

Primo was silent.

Daniel said, “I gave you life. How can you refuse me?”

6

Daniel pushed his way through the small crowd of protesters gathered at the entrance to his San Francisco tower. He could have come and gone by helicopter instead, but his security consultants had assessed these people as posing no significant threat. A small amount of bad PR didn’t bother him; he was no longer selling anything that the public could boycott directly, and none of the businesses he dealt with seemed worried about being tainted by association. He’d broken no laws, and confirmed no rumours. A few feral cyberphiles waving placards reading “Software Is Not Your Slave!” meant nothing.

Still, if he ever found out which one of his employees had leaked details of the project, he’d break their legs.

Daniel was in the elevator when Lucien messaged him: MOON VERY SOON! He halted the elevator’s ascent, and redirected it to the basement.

All three crystals were housed in the basement now, just centimetres away from the Play Pen: a vacuum chamber containing an atomic force microscope with fifty thousand independently movable tips, arrays of solid-state lasers and photodetectors, and thousands of micro-wells stocked with samples of all the stable chemical elements. The time lag between Sapphire and this machine had to be as short as possible, in order for the Phites to be able to conduct experiments in real-world physics while their own world was running at full speed.

Daniel pulled up a stool and sat beside the Play Pen. If he wasn’t going to slow Sapphire down, it was pointless aspiring to watch developments as they unfolded. He’d probably view a replay of the lunar landing when he went up to his office, but by the time he screened it, it would be ancient history.

“One giant leap” would be an understatement; wherever the Phites landed on the moon, they would find a strange black monolith waiting for them. Inside would be the means to operate the Play Pen; it would not take them long to learn the controls, or to understand what this signified. If they were really slow in grasping what they’d found, Daniel had instructed Primo to explain it to them.

The physics of the real world was far more complex than the kind the Phites were used to, but then, no human had ever been on intimate terms with quantum field theory either, and the Thought Police had already encouraged the Phites to develop most of the mathematics they’d need to get started. In any case, it didn’t matter if the Phites took longer than humans to discover twentieth-century scientific principles, and move beyond them. Seen from the outside, it would happen within hours, days, weeks at the most.

A row of indicator lights blinked on; the Play Pen was active. Daniel’s throat went dry. The Phites were finally reaching out of their own world into his.

A panel above the machine displayed histograms classifying the experiments the Phites had performed so far. By the time Daniel was paying attention, they had already discovered the kinds of bonds that could be formed between various atoms, and constructed thousands of different small molecules. As he watched, they carried out spectroscopic analyses, built simple nanomachines, and manufactured devices that were, unmistakably, memory elements and logic gates.

The Phites wanted children, and they understood now that this was the only way. They would soon be building a world in which they were not just more numerous, but faster and smarter than they were inside the crystal. And that would only be the first of a thousand iterations. They were working their way towards Godhood, and they would lift up their own creator as they ascended.

Daniel left the basement and headed for his office. When he arrived, he called Lucien.

“They’ve built an atomic-scale computer,” Lucien announced. “And they’ve fed some fairly complex software into it. It doesn’t seem to be an upload, though. Certainly not a direct copy on the level of beads.” He sounded flustered; Daniel had forbidden him to risk screwing up the experiments by slowing down Sapphire, so even with Primo’s briefings to help him it was difficult for him to keep abreast of everything.

“Can you model their computer, and then model what the software is doing?” Daniel suggested.

Lucien said, “We only have six atomic physicists on the team; the Phites already outnumber us on that score by about a thousand to one. By the time we have any hope of making sense of this, they’ll be doing something different.”

“What does Primo say?” The Thought Police hadn’t been able to get Primo included in any of the lunar expeditions, but Lucien had given him the power to make himself invisible and teleport to any part of Sapphire or the lunar base. Wherever the action was, he was free to eavesdrop.

“Primo has trouble understanding a lot of what he hears; even the boosted aren’t universal polymaths and instant experts in every kind of jargon. The gist of it is that the Lunar Project people have made a very fast computer in the Outer World, and it’s going to help with the fertility problem ... somehow.” Lucien laughed. “Hey, maybe the Phites will do exactly what we did: see if they can evolve something smart enough to give them a hand. How cool would that be?”

Daniel was not amused. Somebody had to do some real work eventually; if the Phites just passed the buck, the whole enterprise would collapse like a pyramid scheme.

Daniel had some business meetings he couldn’t put off. By the time he’d swept all the bullshit aside, it was early afternoon. The Phites had now built some kind of tiny solid-state accelerator, and were probing the internal structure of protons and neutrons by pounding them with high-speed electrons. An atomic computer wired up to various detectors was doing the data analysis, processing the results faster than any in-world computer could. The Phites had already figured out the standard quark model. Maybe they were going to skip uploading into nanocomputers, and head straight for some kind of femtomachine?

Digests of Primo’s briefings made no mention of using the strong force for computing, though. They were still just satisfying their curiosity about the fundamental laws. Daniel reminded himself of their history. They had burrowed down to what seemed like the foundations of physics before, only to discover that those simple rules were nothing to do with the ultimate reality. It made sense that they would try to dig as deeply as they could into the mysteries of the Outer World before daring to found a colony, let alone emigrate en masse.

By sunset the Phites were probing the surroundings of the Play Pen with various kinds of radiation. The levels were extremely low – certainly too low to risk damaging the crystals – so Daniel saw no need to intervene. The Play Pen itself did not have a massive power supply, it contained no radioisotopes, and the Thought Police would ring alarm bells and bring in human experts if some kind of tabletop fusion experiment got underway, so Daniel was reasonably confident that the Phites couldn’t do anything stupid and blow the whole thing up.

Primo’s briefings made it clear that they thought they were engaged in a kind of “astronomy”. Daniel wondered if he should give them access to instruments for doing serious observations – the kind that would allow them to understand relativistic gravity and cosmology. Even if he bought time on a large telescope, though, just pointing it would take an eternity for the Phites. He wasn’t going to slow Sapphire down and then grow old while they explored the sky; next thing they’d be launching space probes on thirty-year missions. Maybe it was time to ramp up the level of collaboration, and just hand them some astronomy texts and star maps? Human culture had its own hard-won achievements that the Phites couldn’t easily match.

As the evening wore on, the Phites shifted their focus back to the subatomic world. A new kind of accelerator began smashing single gold ions together at extraordinary energies – though the total power being expended was still minuscule. Primo soon announced that they’d mapped all three generations of quarks and leptons. The Phites’ knowledge of particle physics was drawing level with humanity’s; Daniel couldn’t follow the technical details any more, but the experts were giving it all the thumbs up. Daniel felt a surge of pride; of course his children knew what they were doing, and if they’d reached the point where they could momentarily bamboozle him, soon he’d ask them to catch their breath and bring him up to speed. Before he permitted them to emigrate, he’d slow the crystals down and introduce himself to everyone. In fact, that might be the perfect time to set them their next task: to understand human biology, well enough to upload him. To make him immortal, to repay their debt.

He sat watching images of the Phites’ latest computers, reconstructions based on data flowing to and from the AFM tips. Vast lattices of shimmering atoms stretched off into the distance, the electron clouds that joined them quivering like beads of mercury in some surreal liquid abacus. As he watched, an inset window told him that the ion accelerators had been re-designed, and fired up again.

Daniel grew restless. He walked to the elevator. There was nothing he could see in the basement that he couldn’t see from his office, but he wanted to stand beside the Play Pen, put his hand on the casing, press his nose against the glass. The era of Sapphire as a virtual world with no consequences in his own was coming to an end; he wanted to stand beside the thing itself and be reminded that it was as solid as he was.

The elevator descended, passing the tenth floor, the ninth, the eighth. Without warning, Lucien’s voice burst from Daniel’s watch, priority audio crashing through every barrier of privacy and protocol. “Boss, there’s radiation. Net power gain. Get to the helicopter, now.”

Daniel hesitated, contemplating an argument. If this was fusion, why hadn’t it been detected and curtailed? He jabbed the stop button and felt the brakes engage. Then the world dissolved into brightness and pain.

7

When Daniel emerged from the opiate haze, a doctor informed him that he had burns to sixty per cent of his body. More from heat than from radiation. He was not going to die.

There was a net terminal by the bed. Daniel called Lucien and learnt what the physicists on the team had tentatively concluded, having studied the last of the Play Pen data that had made it off-site.

It seemed the Phites had discovered the Higgs field, and engineered a burst of something akin to cosmic inflation. What they’d done wasn’t as simple as merely inflating a tiny patch of vacuum into a new universe, though. Not only had they managed to create a “cool Big Bang”, they had pulled a large chunk of ordinary matter into the pocket universe they’d made, after which the wormhole leading to it had shrunk to subatomic size and fallen through the Earth.

They had taken the crystals with them, of course. If they’d tried to upload themselves into the pocket universe through the lunar data link, the Thought Police would have stopped them. So they’d emigrated by another route entirely. They had snatched their whole substrate, and ran.

Opinions were divided over exactly what else the new universe would contain. The crystals and the Play Pen floating in a void, with no power source, would leave the Phites effectively dead, but some of the team believed there could be a thin plasma of protons and electrons too, created by a form of Higgs decay that bypassed the unendurable quark-gluon fireball of a hot Big Bang. If they’d built the right nanomachines, there was a chance that they could convert the Play Pen into a structure that would keep the crystals safe, while the Phites slept through the long wait for the first starlight.

The tiny skin samples the doctors had taken finally grew into sheets large enough to graft. Daniel bounced between dark waves of pain and medicated euphoria, but one idea stayed with him throughout the turbulent journey, like a guiding star: Primo had betrayed him. He had given the fucker life, entrusted him with power, granted him privileged knowledge, showered him with the favours of the Gods. And how had he been repaid? He was back to zero. He’d spoken to his lawyers; having heard rumours of an “illegal radiation source”, the insurance company was not going to pay out on the crystals without a fight.

Lucien came to the hospital, in person. Daniel was moved; they hadn’t met face-to-face since the job interview. He shook the man’s hand.

“You didn’t betray me.”

Lucien looked embarrassed. “I’m resigning, boss.”

Daniel was stung, but he forced himself to accept the news stoically. “I understand; you have no choice. Gupta will have a crystal of his own by now. You have to be on the winning side, in the war of the Gods.”

Lucien put his resignation letter on the bedside table. “What war? Are you still clinging to that fantasy where überdorks battle to turn the moon into computronium?”

Daniel blinked. “Fantasy? If you didn’t believe it, why were you working with me?”

“You paid me. Extremely well.”

“So how much will Gupta be paying you? I’ll double it.”

Lucien shook his head, amused. “I’m not going to work for Gupta. I’m moving into particle physics. The Phites weren’t all that far ahead of us when they escaped; maybe forty or fifty years. Once we catch up, I guess a private universe will cost about as much as a private island; maybe less in the long run. But no one’s going to be battling for control of this one, throwing grey goo around like monkeys flinging turds while they draw up their plans for Matrioshka brains.”

Daniel said, “If you take any data from the Play Pen logs—”

“I’ll honour all the confidentiality clauses in my contract.” Lucien smiled. “But anyone can take an interest in the Higgs field; that’s public domain.”

After he left, Daniel bribed the nurse to crank up his medication, until even the sting of betrayal and disappointment began to fade.

A universe, he thought happily. Soon I’ll have a universe of my own.

But I’m going to need some workers in there, some allies, some companions. I can’t do it all alone; someone has to carry the load.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

13. CS336: Language Modeling from Scratch

Source: https://cs336.stanford.edu/
Site: Stanford CS336
Author: Stanford CS336 Staff
Submitted: 2026-06-01 14:10 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 374 points · 43 comments
Length: 1.2K words (~6 min read)
Language: en

Content

What is this course about?

Language models serve as the cornerstone of modern natural language processing (NLP) applications and open up a new paradigm of having a single general purpose system address a range of downstream tasks. As the field of artificial intelligence (AI), machine learning (ML), and NLP continues to grow, possessing a deep understanding of language models becomes essential for scientists and engineers alike. This course is designed to provide students with a comprehensive understanding of language models by walking them through the entire process of developing their own. Drawing inspiration from operating systems courses that create an entire operating system from scratch, we will lead students through every aspect of language model creation, including data collection and cleaning for pre-training, transformer model construction, model training, and evaluation before deployment.

Prerequisites

Proficiency in Python

The majority of class assignments will be in Python. Unlike most other AI classes, students will be given minimal scaffolding. The amount of code you will write will be at least an order of magnitude greater than for other classes. Therefore, being proficient in Python and software engineering is paramount.
Experience with deep learning and systems optimization

A significant part of the course will involve making neural language models run quickly and efficiently on GPUs across multiple machines. We expect students to be able to have a strong familiarity with PyTorch and know basic systems concepts like the memory hierarchy.
College Calculus, Linear Algebra (e.g. MATH 51, CME 100)

You should be comfortable understanding matrix/vector notation and operations.
Basic Probability and Statistics (e.g. CS 109 or equivalent)

You should know the basics of probabilities, Gaussian distributions, mean, standard deviation, etc.
Machine Learning (e.g. CS221, CS229, CS230, CS124, CS224N)

You should be comfortable with the basics of machine learning and deep learning.

Note that this is a 5-unit class. This is a very implementation-heavy class, so please allocate enough time for it.

Coursework

Assignments

Assignment 1: Basics

Implement all of the components (tokenizer, model architecture, optimizer) necessary to train a standard Transformer language model.
Train a minimal language model.
Assignment 2: Systems

Profile and benchmark the model and layers from Assignment 1 using advanced tools, optimize Attention with your own Triton implementation of FlashAttention2.
Build a memory-efficient, distributed version of the Assignment 1 model training code.
Assignment 3: Scaling

Understand the function of each component of the Transformer.
Query a training API to fit a scaling law to project model scaling.
Assignment 4: Data

Convert raw Common Crawl dumps into usable pretraining data.
Perform filtering and deduplication to improve model performance.
Assignment 5: Alignment and Reasoning RL

Apply supervised finetuning and reinforcement learning to train LMs to reason when solving math problems.
Optional Part 2: implement and apply safety alignment methods such as DPO.

All (currently tentative) deadlines are listed in the schedule.

GPU compute for self-study

If you are following along at home, you can access GPU compute from a cloud provider to complete the assignments.

Here are a few options (public pricing for a single B200 GPU on March 28, 2026):

Modal (sponsor): $6.25/hour. Offers $30 of free monthly compute. You are only charged for actual compute (no idle resources) and their UX makes switching between local dev and large-scale gpu experiments simple. (Modal Pricing)
Lambda Labs: $6.69/hour (Lambda Pricing)
RunPod: $4.99/hour (RunPod Pricing)
Nebius: $5.50/hour ($3.05/hour preemptible) (Nebius Pricing)
Together: $7.49/hour, minimum 8 GPUs, cheaper for longer commitments (Together Pricing)

For convenience and to save money, we recommend debugging correctness of your implementation on CPU first and then using GPU(s) (with the count recommended in the assignments) for completing training runs (A1, A4, A5) or benchmarking GPU operations (A2).

Honor code

Like all other classes at Stanford, we take the student Honor Code seriously. Please respect the following policies:

Collaboration: Study groups are allowed, but students must understand and complete their own assignments, and hand in one assignment per student. If you worked in a group, please put the names of the members of your study group at the top of your assignment. Please ask if you have any questions about the collaboration policy.
AI tools: Prompting LLMs such as ChatGPT is permitted for low-level programming questions or high-level conceptual questions about language models, but using it directly to solve the problem is prohibited. We strongly encourage you to disable AI autocomplete (e.g., Cursor Tab, GitHub CoPilot) in your IDE when completing assignments (though non-AI autocomplete, e.g., autocompleting function names is totally fine). We have found that AI autocomplete makes it much harder to engage deeply with the content. See the AI policy (inspired by this).
Existing code: Implementations for many of the things you will implement exist online. The handouts we'll give will be self-contained, so that you will not need to consult third-party code for producing your own implementation. Thus, you should not look at any existing code unless when otherwise specified in the handouts.

Submitting coursework

All coursework are submitted via Gradescope by the deadline. Do not submit your coursework via email.
If anything goes wrong, please ask a question in Slack or contact a course assistant.
You can submit as many times as you'd like until the deadline: we will only grade the last submission.
Partial work is better than not submitting any work.

Late days

Each student has 6 late days to use. A late day extends the deadline by 24 hours.
You can use up to 3 late days per assignment.

Regrade requests

If you believe that the course staff made an objective error in grading, you may submit a regrade request on Gradescope within 3 days after the grades are released.

Sponsor

We would like to thank Modal for sponsoring compute for this class.

Schedule (YouTube playlist)

# Date Description Course Materials Deadlines
1 Mon March 30 Overview, tokenization [Percy] lecture_01.py Assignment 1 out
[code]
[preview]
2 Wed April 1 PyTorch (einops), resource accounting (FLOPs, memory, arithmetic intensity) [Percy] lecture_02.py (recording version)
3 Mon April 6 Architectures, hyperparameters [Tatsu] lecture 3.pdf
4 Wed April 8 Attention alternatives and mixture of experts [Tatsu] lecture 4.pdf
5 Mon April 13 GPUs, TPUs [Tatsu] lecture 5.pdf
6 Wed April 15 Kernels, Triton [Percy] lecture_06.py Assignment 1 due
Assignment 2 out
[code]
[preview]
7 Mon April 20 Parallelism [Percy] lecture_07.py
8 Wed April 22 Parallelism [Tatsu] lecture_08.pdf
9 Mon April 27 Scaling laws [Tatsu] lecture_09.pdf
10 Wed April 29 Inference [Percy] lecture_10.py Assignment 2 due
Assignment 3 out
[code]
[preview]
11 Mon May 4 Scaling laws [Tatsu] lecture_11.pdf
12 Wed May 6 Evaluation [Percy] lecture_12.py Assignment 3 due
Assignment 4 out
[code]
[preview]
13 Mon May 11 Data (sources, datasets) [Percy] lecture_13.py
14 Wed May 13 Data (filtering, deduplication, mixing, synthetic data) [Percy] lecture_14.py
15 Mon May 18 Mid/post-training (SFT/RLHF) [Tatsu] lecture_15.pdf
16 Wed May 20 Post-training - RLVR [Tatsu] lecture_16.pdf Assignment 4 due
Assignment 5 out
[code]
[preview]
[Optional Part 2]
Mon May 25 No class (Memorial Day)
17 Wed May 27 Alignment - multimodality [Percy] lecture_17.py
18 Mon June 1 Guest lecture: Daniel Selsam
19 Wed June 3 Guest lecture: Dan Fu Assignment 5 due

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

14. Should you normalize RGB values by 255 or 256?

Source: https://30fps.net/pages/255-vs-256-division/
Site: 30fps.net
Submitter: pplanu (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-01 17:37 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 203 points · 86 comments
Length: 1.9K words (~9 min read)

Let’s say you’re writing an image processing program. The program takes in an image, converts it to floating point, does some processing and finally saves the modified pixels to disk as 8-bit colors. The question today concerns how exactly the integer-to-float conversion should be done. There are two approaches which, written in Python and NumPy, look like this:

Standard division by 255 Alternative division by 256

pixels = img / 255.0
result = process(pixels)
output = np.trunc(result * 255 + 0.5)

pixels = (img + 0.5) / 256.0
result = process(pixels)
output = np.trunc(result * 256)

I assume that in both cases the output values are clamped before the final typecast:

# Clamp and cast to 8 bits
output_8bit = output.clip(0, 255).astype(np.uint8)

The standard approach maps the integer 0 to 0.0 and 255 to 1.0. It works perfectly fine and is how GPUs do it. The alternative adds a 0.5 bias and divides by 256 instead, so the integer 0 gets mapped to 0.5/256=0.001953125. This is inconvenient because your image processing code can’t detect black pixels, for example, without knowing the above constant. As a consequence, you tie your logic to 8-bit inputs even if you compute in floating point. With the standard approach, you can always assume black is 0.0.

But some programmers still feel a pull towards the alternative. What is going on? What do they see in it?

The case against 255.0

The standard approach does look quite strange when plotted on the number line. Below you can see an exaggerated version with 3-bit integers in the range [0..7] being mapped to [0,1]:

On the X-axis we’ve got a number line and the locations of brown circles on it represent the decoded floating-point values. The numbers inside are the integer inputs. Each integer has arrows pointing to it; these show a range of floating-point values that round to it. I’ll call these ranges “bins” in the rest of this article.

Smaller bins at the extremes

The first issue really apparent in the diagram is how the standard formula’s extreme bins jut beyond the [0,1] range. Perhaps this visualization is unfair – both approaches clamp their output so the extreme bins could extend infinitely – but it clearly shows how “stretched” the standard range is. The stretched range is wider than the assumed operating range [0, 1] in image processing.

This means that when converting floating-point values in the [0, 1] range back to integers, the extreme bins have effectively half the width of other bins. As a consequence, it will be “harder” to output extreme values from your algorithm. For example, if you generate uniform [0,1] noise and round it using the standard formula, the values 0 and 255 will occur only half as frequently as other integers.

We can verify this claim empirically by generating a million uniform random numbers, plotting them as a histogram, and observing that both the 0 and 255 bins are indeed only half as tall as other bins:

The highlighted crop:

Histogram code

import numpy as np
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

result = np.random.uniform(0, 1, 1000000)
final_values = np.trunc(result * 255 + 0.5).clip(0, 255).astype(np.uint8)
plt.hist(final_values, bins=256, range=(0, 255))
plt.show()

Still, I’m having a hard time coming up with an example situation where the bias away from the extremes would prove problematic. Sure, the standard approach’s floats are spread over a wider range, but the original image will still round-trip convert losslessly (uint8 → float → uint8).

Also, any result value just beyond 0.0 or 1.0 will still round to the right bin, evening out the output distribution. An example of what I mean. Assume your processing subtracts 0.005 from the floating-point colors. In the standard approach this pushes blacks below zero – outside the [0,1] range – but in the alternative the values stay positive. In the end both output the integer 0 anyway:

Standard:
trunc(255 * (-0.005) + 0.5) = 0

Alternative:
trunc(256 * (0.5 / 256 - 0.005)) = 0

It didn’t matter that in the standard approach the zero bin was only “half the size”.

Inexactness

The second issue is that the standard approach’s floating-point values aren’t exact. For example 128/255.0 \approx 0.501961 but 128/256.0 = 0.5. Due to this round-off error, the distances between floating-point values vary a tiny bit. But this isn’t a real problem since the error is truly tiny. A 32-bit floating-point number has a 23-bit fraction (“significand”). We are talking about round-off error in its least-significant bit; jitter with the magnitude less than 2^{-23}. Surely a relative error of 0.00001 % is immaterial even in the most sophisticated image processing task. In this case, inexactness is an aesthetic question, not a technical one.

Values not in between integers

The alternative approach always places each floating-point value exactly in the middle of two integers. See how the vertical bars align in the number line diagram above. The halfway position can be thought of as a compromise; we don’t know what the original quantized value was exactly, and thus the average point between two successive integers is a good guess.

I’m sure there are applications where this property is useful, even though I’m having a hard time coming up with examples myself. Well, at least dithering is more convenient, argues a 2015 blog post “Converting Color Depth” by Andrew Kesler (known for his business card raytracer). The reasoning goes that noise can be added without worrying about edge cases. In contrast, the standard formula’s awkward extremes require careful handling to keep the noise distribution consistent.

Two types of quantizers

So far the standard “divide by 255” formula still looks solid, or at least firm enough to still be worth it. Another way to think about the question is to zoom out a bit and see the two approaches as two different uniform scalar quantizers. If we check the Wikipedia page on quantization, we’ll quickly learn that there are two main types of quantizers:

Most uniform quantizers for signed input data can be classified as being of one of two types: mid-riser and mid-tread. The terminology is based on what happens in the region around the value 0, and uses the analogy of viewing the input-output function of the quantizer as a stairway. Mid-tread quantizers have a zero-valued reconstruction level (corresponding to a tread of a stairway), while mid-riser quantizers have a zero-valued classification threshold (corresponding to a riser of a stairway).

As a source Wikipedia cites a 1977 paper that has such an incredible combined title and abstract layout that I must reproduce it here:

Anyway. When plotted on a graph, the mid-riser and mid-tread quantizers differ where they cross zero:

Mid-tread indeed maps zero to zero and mid-riser maps zero to the middle of two integers (sound familiar?). The notation chosen by Wikipedia represents an input real number with x, its encoded (“classified”) integer value with k, and reconstructed real number with y_k. The corresponding quantizer formulas look like this:

Type Classify (encode) Reconstruct (decode)
Mid-riser staircase quantizer k = \text{trunc}(x L) y_k=(k+0.5)/L
Mid-tread staircase quantizer k = \text{trunc}(x L + 0.5) y_k=k/L

L stands for the number of distinct output levels (for example 256).

If we apply these definitions to our two competing approaches, we can call the standard formula a “mid-riser” with L=255 and the alternative a “mid-tread” with L=256. Actually, I’ll show their code again with the new labels to make the connection to the new formulas above clear. The code snippets themselves are the same as in the beginning.

Mid-riser quantizer (L=255) Mid-tread quantizer (L=256)

pixels = img / 255.0
result = process(pixels)
output = np.trunc(result * 255 + 0.5)

pixels = (img + 0.5) / 256.0
result = process(pixels)
output = np.trunc(result * 256)

From this perspective we can say the standard approach is a strange combination of a mid-riser quantizer for unsigned inputs (the quote said “for signed input data”) and a choice of L=255 integer codes. Clearly this is not optimal for 8-bit inputs. Again, this is all for the programming convenience of having the extremes map to 0.0 and 1.0. This leads to the final criticism of the standard formula.

Higher quantization error but not really

If we were designing a system that receives a uniformly distributed real number x \in [0,1], encodes it as an 8-bit integer k, and finally reconstructs it as another real number y_k, the standard formula would waste bandwidth. Remember how the 0 and 255 bins poked slightly beyond the [0,1] range’s edges? In the standard approach, the range of representable values is actually [-0.5/255, 255.5/255], meaning the bins are spaced further apart than strictly needed for [0, 1] inputs, leading to a higher reconstruction error. The increase in error is small, however. According to StackOverflow user Peter Mudrievskij’s calculation, the mean absolute errors are 1/1020 and 1/1024 for 255 and 256 divisors, respectively. Thus division by 256 is theoretically more precise.

The subtle part is that this kind of reconstruction is not what we’re doing. The premise was that we are loading 8-bit RGB images, doing processing on them, and saving them again. We have no control over how they were quantized when saved; all information lost is gone forever. In other words, if an image’s color were multiplied by 255 and rounded, dividing them by 256 at load time does not bring back any precision. Only when we control both saving and loading does an appeal to lower reconstruction error make sense.

In fact, using the alternative formula to load other people’s images will introduce more error. Most likely the images were quantized via the standard formula, so decoding them with the wrong scale factor is incorrect, in theory. In practice, the colors aren’t absolute measurements (even if the sRGB spec claims so), and all that happens is that we’ll do our processing in a slightly smaller range with a small offset. End of the subtle part.

Finally, one should never mix the encode and decode steps of the two quantizers. That’s just broken code. It’s an easy mistake to make, though.

Conclusion

To answer the question posed in the title: if you’re processing images given to you by strangers, you should normalize RGB values by 255. Neither inexact floating-point values nor some abstract feeling of a higher reconstruction error is a good reason to go for the alternative. But if you control both image saving and loading, don’t need zero to map to zero, and feel OK about tying your processing code to the 8-bit dynamic range, then you can consider division by 256 to eke out a bit more precision. Just don’t blame me when your colleagues load your images with the standard formula anyway, ruining your master plan.

Other takes

Jonathan Blow’s 2002 article talks about mid-riser and mid-tread quantizers without mentioning them by name. I got the diagram idea from there.

The already mentioned 2015 blog post by Andrew Kesler advocates for the alternate formula. Unfortunately the comparison is to the standard formula but without rounding, which invalidates most of the analysis.

I’m writing a book on color reduction algorithms. Sign up here if you’re interested.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

15. A new way to build chips: Sequentially stacking silicon to extend Moore's Law

Source: https://matse.illinois.edu/news/85775
Site: matse.illinois.edu
Author: Grainger Engineering Office of Marketing and Communications
Submitted: 2026-05-30 22:38 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 26 points · 6 comments
Length: 1.8K words (~8 min read)
Language: en

5/26/2026 Michael O'Boyle

Researchers led by Qing Cao have demonstrated a scalable way to directly and sequentially stack high-performance silicon circuits. This advance marks a critical step toward realizing the full potential of three-dimensional chips that could carry computing beyond the limits of traditional scaling.

Written by Michael O'Boyle

Researchers led by Illinois Grainger Engineering professor Qing Cao have demonstrated a scalable way to directly and sequentially stack high-performance silicon circuits. This advance marks a critical step toward realizing the full potential of three-dimensional chips that could carry computing beyond the limits of traditional scaling.

For more than half a century, the power of computers has grown by shrinking transistors and packing them more tightly onto flat chips. It worked too well. Devices are now becoming so small that they start to be fundamentally limited by atomic dimensions and quantum effects.

The next leap can come from adding a new dimension: building upward. By vertically stacking layers of silicon circuits, chipmakers can dramatically increase computing density and speed while reducing energy use, offering a promising route to extend Moore’s law without shrinking transistors any further.

“Today it takes six microelectronic devices called transistors on a single plane to store one bit of information. With vertical integration, you can distribute them across multiple layers. ”

Associate Professor Qing Cao, Department of Materials Science and Enginering

Illinois Grainger Engineering materials science and engineering professor Qing Cao explains, “Take something as simple as static random-access memory, which is universal in CPUs and GPUs. Today it takes six microelectronic devices called transistors on a single plane to store one bit of information. With vertical integration, you can distribute them across multiple layers. It’s like replacing a sprawling suburb with high-rises: you get the same functionality, but the spatial footprint is reduced while making communication between layers faster and more efficient.”

The most efficient approach, known as monolithic three-dimensional integration, builds each layer directly on top of the previous one to maximize interlayer connectivity. However, achieving this has been a longstanding technical challenge. Preparing high-quality silicon and fabricating high-performance devices normally require processes operating at 1,000 degrees Celsius, hot enough to destroy the metal wiring. For upper layers beyond the first, the temperature constraint, or “thermal budget,” is strictly set to 400 degrees.
A freestanding sheet of single‑crystalline silicon nanomembrane is held above a silicon wafer patterned with its first layer of electronic circuits.

A team of Illinois Grainger Engineering researchers led by Cao has now shown that it is possible to stay within that limit while still achieving high device performance across multiple tiers. Their newly invented process uses single-crystalline silicon — the main semiconductor used in industry — and has demonstrated device yields of 98‒100%, even in an academic laboratory cleanroom setting, indicating strong potential for industrial adoption.

“Vertical integration is already starting to make its way into commercial devices, particularly in specialized AI hardware, but monolithic integration is what unlocks the full promise of 3D chips,” Cao said. “For the first time, we have met the thermal budget of monolithic 3D integration using standard single-crystalline silicon and delivered unprecedented performance.”

This study appears in Nature as one of the journal’s rare research articles focused on silicon microelectronics.

The work was conducted within Illinois Grainger Engineering’s Center for Advanced Semiconductor Chips with Accelerated Performance, which counts IBM, Intel, and the Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Company, among its industry partners. The team is now preparing to translate their process to an industrial semiconductor foundry.

Building circuits in three dimensions

Microelectronics manufacturing has been driven for the past 60 years by Moore’s law, which states that the density of transistors on a chip should double every two years. The electronics industry has adopted this principle as a production goal to increase the power and efficiency of computer processors. It has proven successful and steady for decades, but there are signs that the trend is starting to stall.

“In a sense, we’re hitting a limit imposed by physics,” Cao said. “If you look at the actual size of transistors, they’re not getting smaller, especially in terms of their contacted gate pitch. This is because we’re becoming limited by the intrinsic material properties of silicon and the fundamental rules of quantum mechanics. If we’re going to keep up the trend of increasing processing power of our microprocessors, we have to start thinking beyond just squeezing more devices on a single surface.”

Many experts believe that the way forward will be building upward to vertically integrate devices. It gives room for expansion without further shrinking individual devices. It also shortens the needed length of wiring, reducing parasitic capacitance while dramatically increasing the communication bandwidth between devices and circuit blocks. These features offer a crucial advantage for artificial intelligence and other forms of data-intensive computing.

“If we're going to keep up the trend of increasing processing power of our microprocessors, we have to start thinking beyond just squeezing more devices on a single surface.”

Associate Professor Qing Cao, Department of Materials Science and Engineering
Pictured: Associate Professor Qing Cao holds a 200-mm wafer covered with multiple layers of vertically stacked silicon membranes.

The promise of monolithic integration

Current commercial three-dimensional chips are made by fabricating semiconductor devices on separate wafer substrates first and then bonding those wafers or dies together. While this approach has enabled successful products such as high-bandwidth memory and 3D V-Cache chips, it comes with substantial limitations. The alignment between layers is necessarily coarse, and the micron-scale vertical connections between layers called through-silicon via or TSV are relatively large and sparse.

In contrast, monolithic three-dimensional integration takes a fundamentally different approach. Instead of stacking complete wafers, each device layer is sequentially built directly on top of the previous one during fabrication. This procedure allows for much (10-100 times) denser interlayer vertical connections, smaller separations between layers, and precise interlayer alignment with nanometer-scale accuracy.
A roll laminator transfers the ultrathin, freestanding silicon membranes onto the receiving wafer, enabling uniform wafer‑scale stacking for 3D chip fabrication.

The main barrier to a practical realization of this process is temperature. Forming high-quality crystalline silicon and then fabricating high-performance semiconductor devices both require temperatures close to 1,000 degrees Celsius, while the metal interconnects used to communicate between devices melt far below that point.

“Generally, the industry accepts that once the first layer of circuits is complete, the thermal budget limit for any additional layers is 400 degrees Celsius,” Cao said. “Researchers in both academia and industry have tried to get around this by working with semiconductor materials other than single-crystalline silicon for the upper layers. But the resulting devices all inevitably suffer from issues with performance and reliability.”

The alternatives that have been explored include polycrystalline silicon, amorphous or nanocrystalline metal oxides, and nanomaterials such as carbon nanotubes and two-dimensional semiconductors. They all have limitations originating in either intrinsic material properties or extrinsic defects introduced during processing, creating a mismatch between the bottom layer of silicon transistors built on the starting silicon wafer substrate and those upper layers.

The Illinois Grainger Engineering team devised a process that achieves monolithic three-dimensional integration using standard single-crystal silicon. The method starts with creating ultrathin, freestanding silicon nanomembranes from a doner wafer, and these membranes are then transferred onto the receiving substrate that already contains completed bottom-layer circuits using a roll laminator. The process requires no more than 200 degrees Celsius to generate a strong bond between the substrate and the transferred layer. As a result, high performance and reliability were maintained with the high crystalline quality of the silicon films while the process stayed well within the thermal budget.

“Our method is not only easier to implement with lower cost, but it has several advantages over previous approaches to stack silicon wafers,” Cao said. “The membranes we transferred are only 10 nanometers thick or less, compared to the 500 to 700 micrometers thickness of a typical wafer. Because they are thin, these membranes are mechanically flexible to conform to the underlying surface. This conformality helps avoid interfacial defects like voids, which are common when trying to force two rigid wafers together via wafer bonding.”

The team also needed to rethink transistor design and fabrication. Conventional transistor fabrication requires a process known as “doping” to introduce impurities to the silicon to control its electrical properties. This is a high-temperature process typically exceeding 600 degrees Celsius, and different regions of the device need to be doped differently. To avoid this, the researchers used devices called “junctionless transistors” in which the silicon is uniformly and heavily doped before the layering step. Because the films are extremely thin, the gate can still control the channel effectively, while the high doping level reduces parasitic contact resistance.
Schematic (left) and false-colored electron microscopy image (right) of a monolithic 3D static random-access memory cell, featuring six transistors distributed across three vertically stacked layers.

Using this process, the team built three stacked layers, each containing 625 transistors, with good yield and uniformity. The output current densities of these transistors were comparable to that of standard silicon transistors fabricated on bulk wafers under a much higher temperature and at least three to four times greater than those of monolithic devices made from alternative materials, indicating a substantial improvement in performance. By connecting the layers with vertical metal lines, the researchers demonstrated three-dimensional integrated logic circuits and static random-access memory cells.

“But most importantly, we’ve shown that this process is scalable,” Cao said. “You can keep stacking layers beyond the three we demonstrated. And the process will yield high-performing transistors with high yield and low variability. We now have a strong foundation for transferring this technology and demonstrating its immediate promise in an industrial semiconductor foundry.”

Bao Lam, Yung Man Yu, Hyunjun Nam, Hsu-Chih Ni, Shomik Chatterjee, Shaloo Rakheja, and Jian-Min Zhuo also contributed to this study.

The article, “Monolithic three-dimensional integration of silicon transistors,” is available online. DOI: 10.1038/s41586-026-10496-6

Support was provided by the National Science Foundation, industry partners of the Illinois Grainger Engineering’s Center for Advanced Semiconductor Chips with Accelerated Performance, and the Silicon Crossroads Microelectronics Commons Hub.

Illinois Grainger Engineering Affiliations

Qing Cao is an Illinois Grainger Engineering associate professor of materials science and engineering in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering. He is also affiliated with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineeringand the Department of Chemistry. He is a member of the Materials Research Laboratory and the Holonyak Micro and Nanotechnology Laboratory.

Shaloo Rakheja is an Illinois Grainger Engineering associate professor of electrical and computer engineering in the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering. She is the director of the Center for Advanced Semiconductor Chips with Accelerated Performance (ASAP). She is a member of the Holonyak Micro and Nanotechnology Lab and Coordinated Science Laboratory. She holds the Intel Alumni Endowed Faculty Fellow appointment.

Jian-Min Zhuo is an Illinois Grainger Engineering Professor Emeritus of materials science and engineering in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

16. What appear to be biochemical processes may be a natural feature of geology

Source: https://www.quantamagazine.org/the-dirt-that-refused-to-die-20260601/
Site: Quanta Magazine
Author: By Siddhant Pusdekar June 1, 2026
Published: 2026-06-01
HN activity: 198 points · 66 comments
Length: 1.7K words (~8 min read)
Language: en

For 15 years, Sébastien Fontaine has been trying to kill dirt. The biochemist, who runs a lab at the French National Institute for Agriculture, Food, and Environment, wanted to know how much carbon is released by soil — just dirt alone, completely devoid of life. His team sealed dirt into jars and blasted them with sterilizing gamma radiation. Then they waited for the carbon dioxide released by the soil — a sign of ongoing microbial respiration — to drop.

They waited, and waited, and waited some more: weeks, then months. Under a microscope, the irradiated soil showed no signs of life, but it continued to emit carbon dioxide. The soil wouldn’t stop breathing.

Fontaine’s lab repeated the experiments and produced the same results. Finally, convinced that they weren’t dealing with an artifact of the experimental setup, they set out to find the source of breath in dead soil.

Now, Fontaine and his colleagues have reported that their soil samples continued to consume oxygen and spew carbon dioxide for six years. In a 2025 paper in Science Advances, they proposed that a metabolic process that powers much of life is also possible outside living cells. Their experiments point to how it could work in dirt, absent the living proteins that would typically organize it. If they’re right, some biochemical reactions, such as those that release the energy of carbon-rich sugar molecules, may not be unique to living things. Such reactions — known as metabolism when performed by cells — could even predate life on Earth, Fontaine said.

The experiments show “what happens to biomolecules when they’re left to their own devices,” said Joseph Moran, an organic chemist at the University of Ottawa who was not involved with the research. They’re finding that the chemistry of life is not exclusive to life, he added. “It’s the chemistry of geology.”

The Living Dead

When he made this accidental discovery, Fontaine was trying to establish a baseline for carbon in lifeless soil. Using a sterile syringe, the researchers periodically sampled the air in a hermetically sealed jar containing soil and measured its carbon content using a mass spectrometer. After radiation wiped out the soil microbes, the carbon emission rate declined quickly but didn’t disappear. It remained stable for over 100 days.

When he shared the results with other researchers, they advised him to treat it as an experimental artifact — a source of error not worth ferreting out — and move on. But he couldn’t. He needed to understand whether a metabolic process only known to occur in biological cells — a precisely orchestrated sequence of chemical reactions, requiring several molecules and enzymes — was unfolding in sterile soil. To see what was happening, his team added a dash of enzymes extracted from yeast cultures. Immediately, the soil’s carbon emissions spiked. This, they speculated, was because the enzymes had ramped up a reaction that was already happening.

Convincing the scientific community, however, was an uphill battle. When Fontaine submitted the manuscript to journals for publication, some reviewers “were highly positive, and others were really suspicious, especially concerning the sterility of the soil,” he recalled. In 2013 the results were published in the journal Biogeosciences. Still, Fontaine could not rest. Bruised by the harsh reviews, he decided to definitively prove that his irradiated soil samples remained free of life. Over the following decade, his lab would, in fits and starts, chip away at their obsession.

They considered the possibility that the soil wasn’t really dead, and tried to kill it harder with more radiation, pressure, and heat. Still, the soil continued to emit carbon for months.

Through an electron microscope, Benoit Kéraval, then a graduate student in Fontaine’s lab, found cells in the irradiated soil. But staining showed no RNA or DNA molecules, indicating that the cells were definitely dead. When they experimentally added microbes to simulate contamination, the cells rapidly recolonized the soil microcosm and released much more carbon dioxide. So what they were observing in the sterilized sample likely wasn’t a result of inadequate antiseptic measures.

By 2018, when Clémentin Bouquet joined the lab, the team was confident in its findings and ready to dig into the underlying mechanisms.

Dirty Electrons

For six years, Bouquet and Kéraval studied two sets of sealed, irradiated soil samples — one of normal soil, and one that was supplemented with glucose. For 142 days, they took regular air samples and saw the daily rate of carbon dioxide emissions decline but not disappear, just as they had before. Then the samples sat in an incubator for over 1,000 days, as the researchers focused on their other experiments into how microbes process and store carbon in soil.

When they measured the samples again, at days 1,606 and 2,442, the emissions had slowed further, but the soil was still breathing. The glucose-augmented samples showed higher emission rates, which strengthened Fontaine’s suspicion that nonbiological catalysts in soil can induce reactions that resemble the metabolic breakdown of sugar.

During metabolism, sugar is broken down into smaller carbon molecules, which feed the Krebs cycle — a series of reactions in which high-energy electrons are stripped from carbon-rich molecules. Electrons liberated by the Krebs cycle then pass through another set of reactions that consume oxygen. For some researchers, it was a stretch to suggest that this process could unfold outside a cell. Fontaine would need to show that soil can play the same role.

He devised a fuel cell that could detect electrons zipping through soil in the form of a current. His team added soil that had been irradiated almost five years earlier, and then closed the circuit. A current passed through the soil that was several times higher than in a control setup involving a saltwater solution. According to Fontaine, the experiment demonstrated that sterile soil supports a flow of electrons indicative of processes that resemble the oxygen-dependent metabolism of the Krebs cycle.

When Clémentin Bouquet joined the lab in 2018, he co-led a six-year experiment that suggests that lifelike biochemistry takes place even in sterile soil.

Öykü Ataytür

It was once thought that the Krebs cycle cannot occur outside the controlled confines of a cell, which teems with enzymes that keep everything ticking along and increases the chances that biomolecules will bump into each other. In a 2025 preprint on biorxiv.org, Fontaine and colleagues reported observing four of the eight intermediate molecules known to be part of the Krebs cycle in 6-month-old sterile soil samples. Many of these molecules formed after the irradiation.

According to the authors, their results suggest that clods of earth can indeed catalyze these reactions without the presence of life.

An Origin of Life?

For Joshua Schimel, a soil ecologist at the University of California, Santa Barbara, Fontaine’s findings were not too surprising. “Glucose naturally, in the process of being oxidized, is going to form some of these Krebs-cycle intermediates,” he said. Many soils are rich in iron oxides and aluminum oxides, which can catalyze this conversion, he added.

The idea that metals can catalyze biochemical reactions is central to a theory about the origins of life that has emerged over the last decade. Metals such as iron and zinc sit at the core of many of the most ancient enzymes found across life forms. Some researchers, including Moran, believe they might have catalyzed these reactions before life emerged. Studies, including his, suggest that the chemical reactions that break down and construct glucose derivatives, which are normally associated with life, might have existed before the enzymes and genes that enable them in living cells.

“There’s a handful of researchers like myself that think, actually, we should organize our thoughts about life in a different way — that we actually should put metabolism at the base of what life is doing, and then genes are a way of controlling that at a higher level,” Moran said.

Cell-free metabolic reactions could be more common than previously thought and don’t need special conditions to get started, said Markus Ralser, a biochemist at Charité University Hospital in Berlin, who found some of the first enzyme-free metabolic reactions.

“This fits a bit into my thinking about how metabolism started in evolution,” he said of the new work. “If it would be very hard to do, then the planet would not be full of life now.” This idea is complicated, however, by the low-oxygen conditions in which life arose.

Another explanation for the observed results could be that enzymes, loosed from the irradiated cells, might be hanging around in the soil and continuing their biochemical jobs. Even when degraded, enzymes have stable backbones that might be capable of catalyzing reactions, said Sudha Rajamani, an astrobiologist at the Indian Institute of Science Education and Research, Pune who wasn’t involved in the study.

Ralser agrees with her. “My gut feeling is they still have a lot of enzymes there [in Fontaine’s irradiated soil], even after six years,” he said. To know whether metals and minerals in soil could spontaneously carry out these reactions, the researchers would have to eliminate enzymes from the mixture. But that’s really hard: They would have to get the soil so hot that it would damage the soil structure itself.

However, the activity of such enzymes diminishes “exponentially” after they spill out of cells, Bouquet said. Plus, no enzyme is known to last six years, Fontaine added. He doesn’t doubt that enzymes released by living and recently dead cells contribute to carbon emissions in real-world soils, but the long-term experimental results make it “very unlikely that the respiration we observed is due to enzymes,” he said.

For Bouquet, chasing this years-long obsession has highlighted that “even in a context as close and familiar to us as terrestrial soil, we are not always able to distinguish or recognize processes that indicate the presence or absence of living organisms.” Now a researcher at the Collège de France and the National Museum of Natural History in Paris, he is looking for prebiotic origins of other biochemical cascades.

“I find it particularly interesting to imagine the survival of processes that may predate life itself,” Bouquet said, “right there under our feet.”

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

17. Alphabet announces $80B equity capital raise to expand AI infra and compute

Source: https://abc.xyz/investor/news/news-details/2026/Alphabet-Announces-Proposed-80-Billion-Equity-Capital-Raise-to-Expand-AI-Infrastructure-and-Compute-2026-b0myAMewCa/default.aspx
Site: abc.xyz
Submitter: gregschlom (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-01 20:55 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 120 points · 118 comments
Length: 36 words (~1 min read)
Language: en-US

View All News

Alphabet Announces Proposed $80 Billion Equity Capital Raise to Expand AI Infrastructure and Compute

June 1, 2026

2026 June Alphabet Equity Capital Raise Press Release PDF (opens in new window)

View All News

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

18. Microsoft builds MacBook Pro rival with NVIDIA-powered Surface Laptop Ultra

Source: https://www.windowslatest.com/2026/06/01/microsoft-builds-its-ultimate-macbook-pro-rival-with-the-nvidia-powered-surface-laptop-ultra/
Site: Windows Latest
Author: Abhijith M B
Published: 2026-06-01
HN activity: 157 points · 366 comments
Length: 1.4K words (~7 min read)
Language: en-US

Microsoft announces the Surface Laptop Ultra powered by NVIDIA RTX SPARK

Microsoft just dropped a bombshell at Computex 2026 by unveiling the most powerful device ever to bear the Surface name. The newly announced Surface Laptop Ultra is a direct answer to Apple and its dominant MacBook Pro lineup. Built in a deep partnership with NVIDIA, the new flagship laptop runs Windows on Arm and completely redefines professional computing.

Ever since the Surface division came into existence, I’ve always wondered why they didn’t go all in and make an ultra-powered device. As the MacBook Pros started gaining rave reviews from YouTubers, I started waiting for Microsoft’s response, and now we finally have it. Surface Laptop Ultra is arriving in stores this fall, 2026.
Surface Laptop Ultra. Image Credit: Microsoft

The raw power promises to blow past standard x86 laptops equipped with discrete graphics. The device will undoubtedly carry an ultra-premium price tag when it launches later this year, partly due to the current global RAM supply constraints and the premium nature of the NVIDIA partnership. Regardless of the high entry barrier, bringing true workstation power to a portable Arm chassis is exactly what the Windows ecosystem desperately needed.

(Scroll to the bottom to see the full official introduction video of the Surface Laptop Ultra)

Surface Laptop Ultra N1X brings 128GB unified memory and a mini-LED display

The hardware specifications for the Surface Laptop Ultra are absolutely staggering. The chassis weighs less than 4.5 pounds (~2kg) and houses a prominent dual-fan cooling system designed to prevent aggressive thermal throttling during heavy rendering workloads. Microsoft is offering the sleek device in Platinum and Nightfall color finishes.

Opening the lid reveals a beautiful 15-inch mini-LED PixelSense Ultra touchscreen. The panel features a sharp 2880 by 1920 resolution at 262 pixels per inch. The screen hits an incredible 2,000 nits of peak HDR brightness, easily making it the brightest display Microsoft has ever shipped on any device.
Source: Microsoft

You will also find the largest haptic touchpad ever integrated into a Surface laptop. It’s well known that the Surface trackpads are among the best in the industry, surpassing even MacBooks in several aspects, and now that we are getting haptic feedback improvements in Windows 11, it’s even more rewarding.
Source: Microsoft

Connectivity is another major win for professional creators. Microsoft intentionally packed the laptop with every port you actually need in the field. The built-in selection includes a full HDMI port, USB-C, USB-A, a dedicated SD card reader, and a standard headphone jack.
Source: Microsoft

The real magic happens on the motherboard. The Surface Laptop Ultra features up to 128GB of unified memory. The system dynamically allocates the RAM pool between the processor and the graphics card based on workload demands. Having full CUDA support and unified memory allows the laptop to run 120-billion-parameter AI models entirely locally without relying on cloud processing. The machine delivers a staggering one petaflop of AI compute to handle demanding scenes and compile cycles.

Even with all this hardware prowess, Microsoft hasn’t forgotten about repairability. The company assures that repairs will be straightforward, and they’ll also provide repair guides and replacement parts available for purchase. And in case you’re wondering about storage upgrades, Surface Laptop Ultra also supports a replaceable SSD.

Specifications of the Surface Laptop Ultra

Feature Specification
Processor (CPU) 20-core NVIDIA Grace CPU (Arm architecture, co-developed with MediaTek)
Graphics (GPU) NVIDIA Blackwell RTX GPU (up to 6,144 CUDA cores, 5th-gen Tensor Cores, FP4 precision)
System Architecture NVIDIA RTX Spark platform (NVLink-C2C chip-to-chip interconnect)
Memory (RAM) Up to 128GB unified memory (Dynamic CPU/GPU allocation, full CUDA support)
AI Compute 1 Petaflop (Runs up to 120-billion parameter models locally)
Cooling Prominent dual-fan cooling system for sustained rendering
Display 15-inch mini-LED PixelSense Ultra touchscreen
Resolution & Density 2880 x 1920 (262 pixels per inch)
Brightness Up to 2,000 nits peak HDR brightness
Weight Less than 4.5 lbs
Touchpad Large haptic touchpad (Largest on a Surface device)
Ports 1x HDMI, USB-C, USB-A, SD card reader, 3.5mm headphone jack
Finishes Platinum, Nightfall
Battery Life Rated for all-day battery life

Microsoft tuned Windows 11 on Arm for Nvidia RTX Spark and vice versa

Hardware of that caliber requires a highly optimized operating system to function properly. Microsoft explicitly tuned Windows 11 to extract the absolute best performance from the new silicon architecture. The engineering teams implemented a new workload profile scheduling system designed to efficiently scale tasks across all 20 processor cores.
Windows 11 on Arm is optimized for NVIDIA RTX Spark. Image Credit: Microsoft

Power efficiency is a critical factor for a portable workstation. Microsoft worked closely with NVIDIA to enable the Microsoft Power and Thermal Framework on the new platform. The framework standardizes power delivery to ensure the laptop stays cool and maintains exceptional battery life during intense creative workloads.

The unified memory configuration also forced Microsoft to rewrite specific system limits. Windows now features a smarter, significantly higher limit on the total system memory accessible by the GPU. The operating system also manages page sizes more efficiently in shared memory regions, ensuring developers have the flexibility they need for heavy rendering.

Running local AI agents securely is a huge focus for the new platform. NVIDIA is bringing the OpenShell runtime to Windows, utilizing new security and containment primitives designed by Microsoft. The containment features sandbox local agents like Hermes and OpenClaw so they cannot interfere with your core operating system.
Image Credit: Microsoft

Legacy application compatibility is equally crucial. Microsoft optimized the Prism emulation layer specifically for the new microarchitecture. Prism utilizes the raw power of the silicon and recent AVX and AVX2 instruction set extensions to run older x86 applications smoothly under emulation.

The custom NVIDIA superchip challenges both Qualcomm and Apple

The beating heart of the Surface Laptop Ultra is the NVIDIA RTX Spark platform. The custom silicon represents a monumental leap for Windows on Arm. The setup combines a 20-core NVIDIA Grace CPU, co-developed with MediaTek, with a high-performance Blackwell RTX GPU.
NVIDIA RTX Spark. Image Credit: NVIDIA

In case you’re wondering, this is the same NVIDIA N1X chips that were making their rounds for the past 2 days.

The graphics processor packs up to 6,144 CUDA cores alongside fifth-generation Tensor Cores featuring FP4 precision. NVIDIA connected the CPU and GPU using the high-speed NVLink-C2C chip-to-chip interconnect. The result is a platform that can effortlessly edit 12K video, render ultra-large 3D scenes, and play AAA video games at 1440p resolution at over 100 frames per second.
Image Credit: Microsoft

Gaming on Arm is finally coming of age thanks to the NVIDIA partnership. Native anti-cheat solutions from Epic and BattlEye are fully supported on the RTX Spark platform. Major developers are jumping on board, with Riot Games bringing League of Legends and Valorant natively to the architecture, alongside KRAFTON bringing PUBG Battlegrounds.
Image Credit: Microsoft

NVIDIA already commands a legendary reputation for graphics drivers and deep developer partnerships. The company is actively working with Adobe to rearchitect Premiere and Photoshop specifically for the RTX Spark platform. The updated creative suite will tap directly into the unified memory and TensorRT software to deliver real-time performance boosts for coloring and editing.

Qualcomm completely revitalized the Windows on Arm ecosystem, but the RTX Spark platform takes performance to a completely different tier. NVIDIA brings native CUDA support and unmatched GPU prowess to the table. Seeing how the Surface Laptop Ultra ultimately compares against the latest MacBook Pro models will be the most exciting hardware battle of the year.

How much will the Surface Laptop Ultra cost?

Well, from the looks of it, everything about the Surface Laptop Ultra screams premium. Remember that this is the same company that recently announced an 8GB RAM Surface Laptop for $1300. This will have up to 128GB. Not to mention the deep NVIDIA partnership for a completely new chip.

So, chances are that the Surface Laptop Ultra would be too expensive to even consider for most professionals. However, in their blog about a “powerful new chapter for Windows PCs”, Microsoft also announced various devices powered by the NVIDIA RTX Spark from the likes of ASUS ProArt P16 and P14, Dell XPS 16 Creator Edition, HP OmniBook Ultra 16 and OmniBook X 14, Lenovo Yoga Pro 9n, and MSI Prestige N16 Flip AI+

I’m particularly interested in the Yoga Pro 9n, since I’m already a fan of the Yoga Pro 9i. What do you think about the Surface Laptop Ultra?

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

19. Nvidia RTX Spark

Source: https://www.nvidia.com/en-us/products/rtx-spark/
Site: NVIDIA RTX Spark
Submitter: shenli3514 (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-01 05:24 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 344 points · 338 comments
Length: 497 words (~3 min read)
Language: en-us

A new beginning.

Introducing the NVIDIA RTX Spark™ Superchip. The fusion of NVIDIA AI and RTX graphics in a single chip redefines Windows PCs and delivers amazing creating, AI development, and gaming—on the slimmest, most beautiful RTX laptops ever and small, ultra-efficient desktops.

RTX Spark Superchip

Mind and Muscle—All in One

Up to

6,144 Core

Blackwell RTX GPU

Up to

20 Core

Ultra-Efficient CPU

Up to

1 Petaflop

FP4 AI Performance

Up to

128 GB

Unified Memory

Built for Agents and AI

CUDA, the software that accelerates the world’s AI, runs natively on RTX Spark.

All-Day Battery Life

The most power-efficient RTX chip ever made, in a chassis so slim you'll forget you’re carrying it.

Creator Crafted

Make a million ideas happen with hundreds of creative apps and AI tools supercharged by RTX and NVIDIA Studio tools.

Game Ready

Play the latest and greatest games with world-leading gaming tech. Ray-traced worlds, the full DLSS suite, NVIDIA Reflex, and G-SYNC.

Agents

Your PC Just Went From Tool to Teammate

Welcome to the PC where agents work alongside you—running tasks, generating assets, writing code, on demand. You set the objective. The machine handles the rest. There’s intelligence on both sides of the keyboard now.

Make More, Code More, Play More

Creators

Your Creative Power, Unlocked

Every creative workflow gets its own accelerator. FP4 Tensor Cores and unified memory for the latest models. RT Cores plus DLSS for real-time 3D renders. 4:2:2 hardware encode and decode for native, color-accurate timelines. AV1 encoders and NVIDIA Broadcast for sharper streams and cleaner audio.

Developers

The AI Standard

The same NVIDIA CUDA® stack the world’s AI is built on, so you can develop and prototype on the same machine. And with up to 128 GB of unified memory, you can prototype, fine-tune, and inference on the latest models locally.

Gamers

Game Ready

Experience the latest and greatest games with RTX. Ray-traced lighting for incredible immersion. The full suite of DLSS technologies. Game-winning responsiveness with NVIDIA Reflex. The hardware that defined modern PC gaming, ready to play.

RTX Platform

Over 1,000 Accelerated Apps and Games, Millions of Ways to Use Them

RTX brings you exclusive features and the latest advancements in AI, simulation, and ray tracing. Experience incredible 3D performance, smoother video editing, photorealistic simulations, and stunning visuals in the apps, AI tools, and games that pros, creators, and gamers use every day.

Premium Inside and Out

RTX Spark Desktop PCs

Small Footprint. Big Performance.

Get RTX Spark in a small, ultra-efficient desktop. Built to run personal AI agents 24/7 right at your desk plus game and create with the full power of RTX graphics.

Sign up to be notified when RTX Spark Laptops and Desktops are available.

©2026 NVIDIA Corporation. All rights reserved. NVIDIA and the NVIDIA logo are trademarks and/or registered trademarks of NVIDIA Corporation in the U.S. and other countries. Other company and product names may be trademarks of the respective companies with which they are associated.

Email Me When Available

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

20. Anyone seen a CC- serial prefix on legacy networking hardware?

Source: https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=48342117 (Hacker News text post)
Site: news.ycombinator.com
Submitter: Throwaway_sys (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-31 01:01 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 17 points · 6 comments

don't want to file a decom report with a gap so I figured I would ask here.

On a contract job clearing out a data center doing routine stuff like taking inventory and audits before we decommission hardware. The issue is there is one node that keeps coming back that isn't in the documentation. ip is in the 46.28.x.x range Its not in the facilities registry though. Ran it through RIPE and ARIN to find nothing.

The latency is what is getting me though. 0.4 round trip every time. Tested from multiple machines including a phone on LTE to get the same response time. That should theoretically mean I am right next to the machine which doesn't make sense across three different connections.

Checked the physical hardware and it's nothing I've ever seen before. Not standard 1U or 2U ports maybe proprietary. serial format is:

CC-[4 digits]-[2 digits]-[6 alphanumeric]

CC prefix doesn't math Cisco, Ibm, Dec, 3com or anything. went back through the facility's historical logs. node appears in their earliest available records, which go back to 1994. facility was built in 1997.

has anyone seen a CC- serial prefix before? or have an explanation for the latency consistency?

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

21. Florida sues OpenAI and Sam Altman over AI risks

Source: https://www.politico.com/news/2026/06/01/openai-hit-with-florida-lawsuit-00944215
Site: Politico
Author: Aaron Mak, Andrew Atterbury, Hassan Ali Kanu
Published: 2026-06-01
HN activity: 185 points · 162 comments
Length: 505 words (~3 min read)
Language: en

It is the first such action against OpenAI and Altman by a state, and follows a slew of recent product liability lawsuits against Big Tech companies.

“I hope and expect other states will follow and ultimately we need [AI companies] to change their programming,” Uthmeier said Monday during a press conference announcing the lawsuit in West Palm Beach. The attorney general highlighted a 2025 mass shooting that was allegedly committed with the assistance of ChatGPT, saying prosecutors believed that they could have brought additional conspiracy charges if the perpetrators’ conversations with the AI program had instead involved another person.

A wave of cases leveling various claims against social media companies are going to trial this year, including allegations that their platforms cause mental health problems for young users like addiction and body dysmorphia. A New Mexico jury imposed a $375 million penalty on Meta in March, and a Los Angeles jury ordered Meta and YouTube to pay $3 million soon after.

OpenAI did not immediately respond to a request for comment. The company has previously denied wrongdoing and said it continues to strengthen safeguards.

This civil action is separate from a criminal investigation that Uthmeier opened into OpenAI in March after ChatGPT allegedly offered advice to the suspected gunman in a mass shooting at Florida State University that resulted in two deaths.

In going after OpenAI with a civil lawsuit, Uthmeier, who has been a fierce critic of the booming technology, contends Altman and his company are putting the “AI race over the safety and security of our kids.”

“People are getting hurt; parents are getting deceived and they need to pay for it,” Uthmeier said Monday. “They need to pay for it by opening up their checkbook and changing the program to ensure there are parental controls and we are not endangering our kids.”

Florida’s efforts to police AI originally were led by Gov. Ron DeSantis, who fought hard for the state Legislature to enact protections for parents and guardrails for chatbots. Leaders in the Florida House, however, opposed the state getting into the game of regulating AI and instead aligned with President Donald Trump’s stance that it should be left to the federal government.

Uthmeier has since emerged as a key antagonist against the advancement of AI and is now taking it to Altman on multiple legal fronts, amplified by revelations about how the FSU gunman allegedly used the technology. Before firing off the civil lawsuit Monday, Uthmeier’s office subpoenaed OpenAI for scores of records, including policies and training materials over the years regarding threats of self-harm or harm to others, along with how the company cooperates with law enforcement.

“People like Sam Altman shouldn’t be designing these products to be addictive, to go after kids and to encourage them to do dangerous things,” Uthmeier said Monday. “Where there is clear evidence of attempts to engage in violence and kill others, these people know how to analyze data better than anybody in the world – the authorities sure as heck better be notified.”

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

22. Age verification for social media, the beginning of the end for a free internet?

Source: https://mullvad.net/en/blog/age-verification-for-social-media-the-beginning-of-the-end-for-a-free-internet
Site: Mullvad VPN
Submitter: StrLght (Hacker News)
Published: 2026-06-01
HN activity: 117 points · 61 comments
Length: 2.9K words (~13 min read)
Language: en

So-called age verification for social media is spreading across the world, framed as an effort to create a safer internet for children. In reality, age verification lays the foundation for a fully government controlled internet.

Countries around the world are moving to introduce online age verification. Part of this involves age verification for harmful content (most often pornography, sometimes video games), but above all it focuses on banning social media for children.

The big tech social media companies are bad. Their business model is bad; it is based on mass surveillance and manipulation, and they cooperate with governments in mapping entire populations. But age verification is fundamentally the wrong approach to preventing children from using big tech social media platforms. Introducing age verification is based on the state being able to force social media companies to verify their users’ identities. But the big tech social media platforms already know which of their users are children. Their business model depends on knowing this. They know how old users are, who their friends are and what ice cream they like. As age verification is based on coercion of the social media platforms, politicians could instead force them to stop doing the things politicians consider harmful to children, or force them to block children (again, they know who they are) from using their services. But instead, politicians seek to massively invade everyone’s privacy and undermine democratic rights on a global scale. In other words, the latter is the real objective – they do not want to protect children; they want to impose control.

And impose it they do. Australia has already introduced a social media age restriction for users under 16. The same applies to Indonesia and Brazil. Age restrictions have been approved but not yet implemented in Denmark, Portugal, and Malaysia. In France, an agreement has been reached, though details are still being discussed. Proposals are on the table in Spain and Turkey. In Germany, the major parties agree on introducing age restrictions, and in Sweden the issue is under investigation. The topic is also being discussed in countries such as the Czech Republic, Greece, Austria, Poland, Canada, Slovenia, and the Netherlands. In April 2026, the European Commission launched an EU age verification app, and one month later Ursula von der Leyen presented plans for EU-wide age restrictions. In the United States, half of all states either have pending legislation or have already introduced laws imposing age restrictions for inappropriate content and/or social media. The number of countries preparing age verification measures is growing rapidly. Updates can be followed on Techpolicy.press.

Most age verification is identity verification

As age verification is currently being rolled out, it is up to individual websites and services to implement it as they see fit. As a result, the quality of age verification measures varies greatly. This became clear in the autumn of 2025, when Discord was hacked, exposing the ID documents of 70,000 users. However, there is one common factor in most age verification systems (Zero-Knowledge Proof being an exception, more on that below): if age verification is introduced, everyone will have to identify themselves either to the service/website they want to use or to a third party capable of linking them to their activity on that service/website. The correct term for age verification as it is implemented today is therefore identity verification. Given today’s internet infrastructure, it is unreasonable to assume that this information will not be shared through commercial agreements or with governments.

The consequence of introducing identity verification is therefore that freedom of information is restricted (you can no longer visit regulated websites anonymously) and that you can no longer post anonymously on social media. You cannot be certain that your criticism of the government will not be followed up by the authorities. You can no longer start a digital initiative on a social media platform aimed at gathering people to criticize an authority without facing a significant risk of consequences. Depending on the country you live in, this could even endanger your life. In its current form, social media identity verification removes important tools for activists in countries where criticizing those in power is dangerous.

Freedom of expression is threatened not only in a direct sense (you post something and then the police knock on your door), identity verification also creates a chilling effect. It becomes a cornerstone of censorship machinery in the sense that people begin to self-censor if they know that expressing opinions may have personal consequences. This is also something that changes over time. What is considered acceptable to post online is determined by whoever currently holds power. Different sides of politics often have different views on what constitutes harmful content. Just because what you post today is not considered inappropriate does not mean it will remain acceptable in the future.

Broad and arbitrary legislation, along with mandatory ID tagging for every post, hardly provides a strong foundation for freedom of expression. Today, 30 people are arrested every day in the United Kingdom for posting something online that authorities classify as “grossly offensive.” In Germany, police conduct raids on people’s homes for insulting politicians online. One infamous example is the so-called “Pimmelgate,” where a person was subject to a police search after calling a German politician a term for male genitalia. In the United States, authorities are trying to pressure tech companies into revealing the identities behind accounts protesting ICE. Another example is when Canada introduced emergency acts during the 2022 trucker protests and then used social media to identify demonstrators and freeze the bank accounts of people who financially supported the protest.

The slippery slope of age verification. VPN next?

Restrictions introduced at the national level can be bypassed by changing one’s geographic location digitally, using tools such as VPNs, virtual phone numbers, eSIM cards, Tor and dedicated services. This has already led politicians in several countries to consider introducing identity verification for VPN services (presumably because VPNs are the most common and accessible method of changing digital location).

In the United Kingdom, the House of Lords sent an amendment in early 2026 (regarding the the Children’s Wellbeing and Schools Bill) to the House of Commons, proposing an 18-year age limit for using VPN services. The House of Commons rejected the House of Lords amendment four separate times. However, the House of Commons instead introduced its own proposal, which was passed and has now become law. This agreement grants the government the power to introduce restrictions through secondary legislation, with only limited parliamentary scrutiny. The government has confirmed that it intends to act on this and introduce some form of social media restriction for children under 16. The government has also hinted that it may consider introducing identity verification for VPN usage, effectively joining countries such as China and Russia in opposing VPN services.

The issue has also been raised in France. As Minister for AI and Digital Affairs Anne Le Hénanff put it: “If [this legislation] allows us to protect a very large majority of children, we will continue. And VPNs are the next topic on my list.” Discussions about VPN restrictions have also occurred in the United States. Utah has gone the furthest by introducing a law making it illegal to circumvent restrictions using a VPN. Within the EU, VPN restrictions have been discussed both under the Going Dark initiative and in discussions related to age verification. In response to a direct question about VPNs as a tool for bypassing age verification, EU Commissioner Henna Virkkunen said in April: “Of course, it's an important part of the next steps also to look at that it [age verification] shouldn't be circumvented.”

If VPN services were to implement identity verification, this would mean collecting data that could be abused through either malice or incompetence. It would, for example, make such services risky for whistleblowers and activists, make it harder for journalists to work with sensitive information, and create a chilling effect on online debate (VPNs can help people post anonymously on social media).

If VPN providers were to impose an age limit on their service, this would also mean that underage users would effectively lose their right to online privacy. Ironically, one consequence would be that social media companies mapping people’s lives through third-party trackers on websites could continue monitoring young people’s online behavior via their IP addresses without any interference. In other words, politicians would remove one of the protections children have against the very companies they claim to want to protect children from.

Identity verification in app stores and at the operating system level

As identity verification is now being introduced globally, different parts of the world are implementing it in different ways. Some countries believe the best solution is to impose controls through major app stores such as Apple’s App Store and Google Play. In Australia, Brazil, South Korea, Singapore, and several US states, Apple has already begun introducing identity verification at the App Store level to restrict access to apps containing adult content.

Identity verification in app stores only regulates access to apps. Therefore, several countries have also begun demanding identity verification at the operating system level itself in order to block access to certain websites directly through the OS. In the United Kingdom, Apple has already introduced this – despite there being no law requiring it (Apple is, however, under general pressure from British authorities). Without warning, Apple implemented identity verification on British iPhones through its system update on March 24, 2026. Suddenly, 35 million British users had to identify themselves using either a credit card or a government-issued ID card in order to avoid restrictions on their phones. Users who did not verify their identity saw their devices enter a mode where Apple’s web content filter and communication safety features were automatically activated, limiting which websites could be visited in Safari or any third-party browser, while messaging services and FaceTime were being monitored for inappropriate content.

When Apple introduced OS-level identity verification in the UK, reports quickly emerged of people bypassing it by creating US-based Apple IDs instead. App store-level identity verification can be circumvented in the same way. And this is how things will continue. The situation will not fundamentally change unless Apple and Google (assuming Google also locks down its system and introduces identity verification) implement these controls in their operating systems globally. But even then, there would still be ways to circumvent restrictions.

Users could, for example, turn to open-source operating systems, which by definition cannot be fully controlled because they are open and modifiable. In such systems, no one else can decide which apps you download or which websites you visit, and no identity verification can be imposed unless you choose it yourself. This points to the final stage for countries seeking total control over their citizens’ use of the internet. National identity verification can be bypassed again and again until authoritarian governments are ultimately forced to ban people from owning devices they control themselves. The only question is how this would be implemented. Well, we will soon find out … In Brazil, a law implemented in March 2026 states that identity verification must be carried out both at the app store level and within the operating system itself (including open-source systems), or companies distributing these services will face fines of up to $10 million. A similar law has passed in California which will require identity verification at the operating system level starting in January 2027. Open-source systems were initially included, but later removed, while web browsers and websites were added to the scope. Similar proposals exist in states such as Colorado and New York. In April 2026, a federal proposal was introduced that would require OS-level identity verification across the United States.

The final destination: state-provided phones and computers for all?

It will be interesting to follow the countries that pursue system-level control as they move further down the slippery slope toward open-source systems. Since open-source systems cannot be controlled, politicians would ultimately need to ban devices that are not controlled by the state. The end point: telescreens like those in Orwell’s 1984, devices that both monitor you and broadcast only the information approved by the state. One can only imagine the methods. Will the police stop and search people on the street looking for unauthorized phones? Prison sentences for buying a non-state computer on the black market? Charges of organized crime for smuggling in containers of open-source software on USB sticks? Welcome to a brave new world.

The Zero-Knowledge Proof alternative and the EU

While the rest of the world is moving forward with identity verification plans, the EU has presented its own privacy-focused approach to age verification. In April 2026, Ursula von der Leyen, President of the European Commission, unveiled an age verification app with “the highest privacy standards in the world” and the presentation materials describe the app as “completely anonymous.”

The EU app is open source, and the EU countries are supposed to use it to create their own versions, and become the issuers of the age credentials that their citizens can then use. This means we may see many different versions of age verification from member states (if they even choose the EU app at all; several countries have already said they prefer to develop their own independent solutions).

At its core, the EU app works like this: you, as the user, provide your identity to an issuer using something like an ID card. The EU envisions member states acting as issuers. The issuer then provides you with a number of credentials that you can use on websites and social media platforms to prove that you are old enough. These credentials only confirm that you meet the age requirement; they do not reveal your identity to the website or platform. Each credential is also used only once. For example, Facebook and X would receive different credentials that they cannot link together, meaning they cannot be used to build a pattern or profile of your internet behavior (and thereby identify who you are). This setup is why – we assume – the EU calls their app completely anonymous. There’s only one little problem. The issuer knows which credentials belong to which person. If you were to post something the state considers inappropriate on some platform, the state could ask the platform for the age credential and easily identify who it belongs to. The consequence is that you cannot post anonymously.

The solution to this problem is so called Zero-Knowledge Proof (ZKP) cryptography. With fully developed ZKP technology, you still need to provide your identity to the issuer, but the issuer would not be able to connect the credentials used on websites and services back to you. Right now, the EU app does not have ZKP functionality, contrasting Ursula von der Leyen’s claim that the app ”is technically ready to be used”. But more importantly, the app is currently designed to always function without ZKP technology; if ZKP is unavailable, the app falls back to a non-ZKP model. Even if fully developed ZKP technology could be implemented in the future, it would remain an optional extra feature that countries may choose to disable and that the EU could remove at any time.

This means that the EU could decide at any time that ZKP may no longer be used, and in one stroke the app would fall back to its default mode, meaning that every post on social media carries an ID tag. By that point, an infrastructure will already have been rolled out; people will have gotten used to it, and it will be harder to roll it back.

Age verification based on Zero-Knowledge Proof technology would be better than full on identity verification. However, even with fully functioning ZKP technology, age verification would still have significant problems. One issue is that people without ID documents would be excluded (determining age through facial recognition, for example, is not sufficiently precise). It would also enable states to revoke “problematic” individuals’ ability to express themselves online by refusing to issue age credentials. Another concerns a more fundamental question: is it really reasonable that young people should be entirely prevented from using social media? Is it desirable that 15-year-olds are completely blocked from expressing themselves on platforms that reach the public? Not all social media platforms are based on collecting data about everyone, manipulating users, and algorithmically steering them in various directions. An illustrative example is that the UK’s Online Safety Act may limit access to Wikipedia. The assumption that age verification would gradually expand and exclude young people from meaningful digital meeting spaces is not far-fetched.

Identity verification for social media – just another “what about the children” excuse to introduce mass surveillance and censorship.

Children’s “safety” has long been used by intelligence agencies and other authorities as a battering ram for introducing mass surveillance, especially in recent years. In the United States, attempts were made under the Kids Online Safety Act (KOSA) to introduce identity verification using children as the justification. The same applies to the UK’s Online Safety Act, where politicians repeatedly test whether they can get scanning of end-to-end encrypted communication approved. In the EU, authorities have tried (hand in hand with American tech companies and intelligence agencies) to introduce total mass surveillance through the scanning of all communication. During 2026, the EU will make another attempt through its Going Dark/ProtectEU project, where the goal is client-side scanning – in other words, government spyware on all devices.

The age verification rush must be slowed down, and politicians who do not want a society in which citizens live under total surveillance need to recognize the consequences of different types of legislation.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

23. Ask HN: Who is hiring? (June 2026)

Source: https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=48357725 (Hacker News text post)
Site: news.ycombinator.com
Submitter: whoishiring (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-01 15:00 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 166 points · 240 comments

Please state the location and include REMOTE for remote work, REMOTE (US)
or similar if the country is restricted, and ONSITE when remote work is not an option.

Please only post if you personally are part of the hiring company—no
recruiting firms or job boards. One post per company. If it isn't a household name,
explain what your company does.

Please only post if you are actively filling a position and are committed
to replying to applicants.

Commenters: please don't reply to job posts to complain about
something. It's off topic here.

Readers: please only email if you are personally interested in the job.

Searchers: try https://nthesis.ai/public/hn-who-is-hiring, https://dheerajck.github.io/hnwhoishiring/,
http://nchelluri.github.io/hnjobs/, https://hnjobs.emilburzo.com, or this (unofficial) Chrome extension:
https://chromewebstore.google.com/detail/hn-hiring-pro/mpfal....

Don't miss this other fine thread: Who wants to be hired? https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=48357724

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

24. Stealing from Biologists to Compile Haskell Faster

Source: https://www.iankduncan.com/engineering/2026-05-30-stealing-from-biologists-to-compile-haskell-faster/
Site: Ian Duncan
Author: Ian Duncan
Published: 2026-05-30
HN activity: 99 points · 4 comments
Length: 2.7K words (~12 min read)
Language: en

This started when someone mentioned, mostly in passing, that GHC has a flag for ApplicativeDo (-foptimal-applicative-do) that’s switched off by default because the algorithm behind it is too slow to use.

That sounded like a bug to me. An optimization that’s correct but disabled for being slow is the kind of thing you fix in an afternoon, I figured.

It wasn’t; it turned out to be a properly hard problem, and the problem has been eating at me for months.

ApplicativeDo is a quiet corner of GHC to start with. Most programs never switch it on, and most of the ones that do are fine with the default and never reach for the optimal flag, so we’re well into the weeds even by compiler-internals standards. But the problem under the flag is a good one , and chasing improvements to the algorithmic compexity for the optimal layout algorithm led somewhere I didn’t expect: the same dynamic program biologists use to predict how a strand of RNA folds.

What is ApplicativeDo, and why is it cool?

Consider a canonical example of fetching the number of friends two people have in common from a remote social graph:

numCommonFriends x y = do
  fx <- friendsOf x
  fy <- friendsOf y
  return (length (intersect fx fy))

The standard do desugaring turns this into sequential binds:

friendsOf x >>= \fx ->
friendsOf y >>= \fy ->
  return (length (intersect fx fy))

This is strictly sequential. The second friendsOf call cannot start until the first one completes, because >>= passes the result of the left side to the right side. Even though fy does not depend on fx, >>= has no way to express that independence. We pay for two distinct network round-trips.

These two fetches can be written with Applicative:

(\fx fy -> length (intersect fx fy)) <$> friendsOf x <*> friendsOf y

The independence is now encoded in the types. <*> has the type f (a -> b) -> f a -> f b, meaning the second argument cannot depend on the first. A monad like Haxl exploits this by batching computations combined with <*> into a single round. Two friend-list lookups become one trip to the database.

Writing the <*> version by hand is fragile. Adding a dependency between two statements requires refactoring back to >>=; removing one means you might leave performance on the table if you forget to switch to <*>. ApplicativeDo allows developers to write plain do notation while the compiler determines where it can legally use <*>.

The compiler’s task is to take a sequence of statements, determine the dependencies, and group independent statements under <*>, falling back to >>= only when a dependency forces it.

The cost of optimal scheduling

Grouping independent statements isn’t always straightforward, and different groupings yield different performance characteristics. Consider this block:

do
  aFriends <- friendsOf alice
  aInfo    <- profilesOf aFriends          -- needs aFriends
  bFriends <- friendsOf bob
  bInfo    <- profilesOf bFriends          -- needs bFriends
  score    <- compatibility aFriends bInfo -- needs aFriends and bInfo
  return (aInfo, bInfo, score)

Tracing the dependencies: aInfo needs aFriends; bInfo needs bFriends; score needs both aFriends and bInfo. The two friendsOf calls are entirely independent.

Because Haxl batches everything under a <*> into one round, the metric we care about is the total number of rounds. Fewer rounds mean lower latency.

GHC’s default algorithm works greedily: it grabs the longest run of independent statements from the front, emits it, and repeats. Starting from the front, aFriends cannot be grouped with aInfo (which depends on it), so the first group is aFriends alone. This greedy decision pushes everything else a round later, resulting in four total rounds.

The optimal plan lines the two halves up side by side. The two friend-lookups share round 1, the two profile-lookups share round 2, and score waits for both in round 3. This saves a full round-trip.

The optimal algorithm finds this three-round schedule, but it is O(n³). In the original paper that introduced the feature (Desugaring Haskell’s do-notation Into Applicative Operations), a worst-case do block with 1,000 sequential statements took 55 seconds to compile using the optimal algorithm, compared to under two seconds for the greedy heuristic. Consequently, the optimal algorithm lives behind a flag that is rarely enabled.

The goal is to achieve the optimal answer without paying the O(n³) cost.

Reducing the problem

The statements and their contents are irrelevant; only the dependencies matter. We can model the statements as a sequence of nodes, with directed edges representing dependencies:

The compiler builds a tree over these statements without reordering them. Every node is either a sequential or parallel combination:

data Tree = Leaf Stmt | Seq Tree Tree | Par Tree Tree

Par is only legal when its two sides have no dependencies between them. The cost of a tree is the number of rounds it takes:

cost (Leaf _)  = 1
cost (Seq l r) = cost l + cost r        -- sequential: rounds add up
cost (Par l r) = max (cost l) (cost r)  -- parallel: wait for the slower branch

The objective is to find the minimum-cost legal tree. The recurrence relation from the paper operates over a span of statements from i to j:

The O(n³) complexity comes entirely from the last line. There are O(n²) spans, and for each tangled span, the algorithm tries O(n) split points.

The paper optimizes this by noting that in a tangled blob, you only need to check the two extreme cuts—peeling off the first statement or the last. Unless those two cuts tie, one of them is provably optimal, reducing the work to O(1).

Why does this extreme-cut shortcut work? Any split of a tangled blob must be sequential, so splitting at k gives a cost of C[i,k] + C[k+1,j]. Because adding statements to a block can only increase its cost (or leave it the same), the cost function is monotonically increasing. If we peel off just the first statement (k=i), the cost is 1 + C[i+1,j]. If we peel off the last statement (k=j-1), the cost is C[i,j-1] + 1. Any cut deeper in the middle would sum two larger sub-blocks, which by monotonicity cannot be strictly cheaper than peeling off a single statement from the edge. The only case where we must search further is if these two extreme cuts tie, because a deeper cut might also tie them, but it will never beat them unless the extreme cuts themselves are tied. The remaining challenge is resolving those ties.

Two nearly identical dependency structures can have different costs based entirely on whether one long dependency spans the others. The paper leaves the efficient resolution of these ties as an open question.

Failed heuristics

A natural first instinct is to assume the cost is simply the longest chain of dependencies. If statement A feeds B, which feeds C, they force at least three rounds. However, the right-hand example above has a longest chain of two arrows, but a cost of three. The restriction against reordering means the spanning arrow prevents separating the halves, forcing an extra round. The factor that forces the extra round is not visible locally; it requires a real minimum over a real search.

Another approach is to invert the 2D table of spans: for each starting statement and each round budget, calculate how far right the sequence can extend. This one-dimensional, monotonic approach turns the tie into a boolean check of whether the next chunk fits the budget.

A differential tester quickly disproves this approach:

In the highlighted window (statements two through six), the left and right halves have no dependencies between them, allowing them to run in parallel for a cost of two. However, a left-to-right scan starting at statement two follows an arrow out to statement seven. Because the arrow’s head is outside the window, the scan assumes the blob runs all the way to seven, entirely missing the parallel seam between four and five.

The structure inside a window depends on both of its ends. An arrow leaving on the right alters the internal structure, and a one-sided scan cannot detect it. The 2D table is necessary.

Bounding the search

The pathological input that causes the 55-second compile time is a long chain where every statement depends on the previous one, with zero parallelism. Every span in that input results in a tie, and the naive algorithm checks O(n) cuts for each one.

In a tie, the answer is known to be either c or c+1, and the longest chain is a lower bound. If the longest chain through the span already equals c+1, the lower bound meets the upper bound, and the search can terminate immediately:

-- in a tie, with the answer pinned to either c or c+1:
if longestChain[i,j] == c + 1 then c + 1

For a pure chain, the longest chain through a span is its length, which is always c+1. This condition fires on every tie, so the cost is known without searching to rule out a cheaper split. We still scan to recover the actual cut for the tree, but the first split point we try is already a witness—so the per-span work drops from linear to a single check, and the whole pass collapses from O(n³) to O(n²).

Combining this with the paper’s existing optimizations-taking parallelism when available and using the extreme-cut shortcut for non-ties—drastically reduces the workload:

Input	Naive Cut Checks	Optimized Cut Checks
50	chain	20,825	1,225
100	chain	166,650	4,950
200	chain	1,333,300	19,900
50	realistic	1,550	322
100	realistic	4,544	1,426
200	realistic	47,471	3,583
100	two_chains	166,551	7,252
50	dense	20,729	1,521
150	dense	562,178	14,554
50	hub	1,225	1,225
200	hub	19,900	19,900

The optimized counts are total work: every cut evaluation performed to produce the optimal tree, not just its cost. On the chain the per-span search disappears, leaving the unavoidable O(n²) witness-recovery pass; realistic blocks land roughly an order of magnitude below naive. (The trees are identical to the naive ones in every row—same schedule, just do less work.) This does not guarantee a quadratic worst case: a dense blob held together by long spanning arrows with internal parallelism still trends toward cubic. The hub rows — every statement feeding one final sink — the one pattern that’s just a draw : each span ties at cost two, but the longest chain is also two, so the bound never closes and the optimizer scans exactly as much as the naive one. The shortcut helps where a long chain pins the cost; it cannot help where there is no long chain to begin with. Such shapes are rare in real code, and that residual dense case is exactly what the algorithm below is built for.

The connection to computational biology

To understand why this problem is tractable at all, we can look to computational biology.

RNA is typically a single strand of bases (A, U, G, C). Without a second strand to pair with, the strand pairs with itself. Complementary stretches fold back and stick together into stems and hairpins.

5'─ G C A U U ... 
    │ │ │ │ │      a stretch folds back and pairs with a
    C G U A A ...  complementary stretch further along

The resulting structure is the strand’s secondary structure. Physically, it settles into the configuration with the lowest free energy (roughly, the most pairs). Predicting this fold is an optimization problem traditionally solved by Nussinov’s algorithm (1978).

Over a stretch from i to j, either the first base is unpaired, or it bonds with some base k, walling off one sub-structure inside and another outside: best[i,j] = max over the split point k of (inside + outside). This uses the same triangular table, the same O(n³) complexity, and the same combine-over-a-split-point recurrence as the ApplicativeDo cost function.

A do block is structurally identical to a polymer. The statements are residues along a backbone. The dependency arrows are bonds constraining the fold. The compiler is performing structure prediction, hunting for the lowest-energy configuration, where “energy” is latency. Monadic binds are stiff stretches of backbone; applicative groups are domains that fold independently.

This resemblance is rooted in a shared constraint. In RNA secondary structure prediction, the standard model forbids bonds from crossing: if base i pairs with base j, and base k sits between them, k’s partner must also sit between them. Bonds nest; they do not interleave.

In ApplicativeDo, the matching rule is that statements cannot be reordered. The resulting tree is an ordered bracketing of the sequence, which nests cleanly. Non-crossing and no-reordering are the same mathematical prohibition, and it is this nesting that collapses an exponential search space into a polynomial one.

If you allow RNA bonds to cross (pseudoknots), folding becomes NP-hard. If you allow ApplicativeDo to reorder statements (which is only sound for commutative monads), you lose the nested structure and the problem similarly becomes NP-hard.

Because the problems share this structure, we can borrow advanced solutions. The sequential combine takes the minimum over a sum of two parts (min(C[i,k] + C[k+1,j])). This is mathematically a (min, +) operation—often called min-plus or tropical matrix multiplication, where minimum replaces addition and addition replaces multiplication. Computing this over a matrix is generally as hard as the all-pairs shortest paths problem. However, the ApplicativeDo cost table benefits from the paper’s monotonicity lemma: adjacent entries differ by at most 1.

This is where the connection to parsing comes full circle. In 1975, Leslie Valiant proved that context-free grammar parsing (the O(n³) CYK algorithm) could be reduced to boolean matrix multiplication, breaking the cubic barrier and achieving subcubic time. For decades, it was an open question whether the same trick could work for optimization problems like RNA folding, which use (min, +) instead of boolean operations. The Bringmann et al. algorithm (Truly Sub-cubic Algorithms for Language Edit Distance and RNA Folding via Fast Bounded-Difference Min-Plus Product, FOCS 2016) finally achieved this— it is essentially Valiant’s parser for tropical semirings, made possible only because the bounded-difference property keeps the numbers from growing too large.

While our combine flips between + (sequential) and max (parallel), parallelism is all-or-nothing per span. If a span splits in parallel, it always should; if it doesn’t, every cut inside it is sequential. The cost separates cleanly into a pure (min, +) part and a cheap structural max part. Dropping the biology machinery directly into the problem yields a worst-case complexity of Õ(n^2.8244) randomized (Õ(n^2.8603) deterministic), still optimal.

There is, however, one unfortunate little issue that prevents this from being sensible for use in the context of a compiler. Those exponents come wrapped in enormous constant factors. The algorithm leans on fast rectangular matrix multiplication, which is notorious for having overhead so large that the crossover point where n^2.82 actually beats a well-tuned n³ is far past any do block a human will ever write. For GHC specifically, this is the wrong tool. The segment decomposition plus the longest-chain tie-breaker from the previous section is what makes the optimal algorithm usably fast on real code, and that is a small, local change to the existing path. The sub-cubic result is a statement about the problem— that the cube is not fundamental— rather than a recipe for the compiler.

Conclusion

So, my curiosity is satisfied. I can begin thinking about new things in the shower.

The practical fix and the theoretical one rely on the same underlying observation: parallelism is all-or-nothing per span. This property allows us to carve the block into independent pieces and confine the expensive search to rare dense blobs. It is the same property that splits the cost into a min-plus part and a structural-max part.

The O(n³) complexity being so brutal for compilation times was largely an artifact of treating the tie as a search space rather than analyzing the constraints of the dependencies. By applying the longest-chain bound and the extreme-cut shortcut, the compile-time cliff in GHC’s optimal path can be effectively eliminated— and the dense worst case that survives is, satisfyingly, deeply mirrors nature’s own computational machinery.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

25. The Frame Problem (2004)

Source: https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/frame-problem/
Site: plato.stanford.edu
Author: Shanahan, Murray
Submitted: 2026-06-01 23:25 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 17 points · 3 comments
Length: 4.4K words (~20 min read)
Language: en

To most AI researchers, the frame problem is the challenge of representing the effects of action in logic without having to represent explicitly a large number of intuitively obvious non-effects. But to many philosophers, the AI researchers' frame problem is suggestive of wider epistemological issues. Is it possible, in principle, to limit the scope of the reasoning required to derive the consequences of an action? And, more generally, how do we account for our apparent ability to make decisions on the basis only of what is relevant to an ongoing situation without having explicitly to consider all that is not relevant?

1. Introduction

The frame problem originated as a narrowly defined technical problem in logic-based artificial intelligence (AI). But it was taken up in an embellished and modified form by philosophers of mind, and given a wider interpretation. The tension between its origin in the laboratories of AI researchers and its treatment at the hands of philosophers engendered an interesting and sometimes heated debate in the 1980s and 1990s. But since the narrow, technical problem is largely solved, recent discussion has tended to focus less on matters of interpretation and more on the implications of the wider frame problem for cognitive science. To gain an understanding of the issues, this article will begin with a look at the frame problem in its technical guise. Some of the ways in which philosophers have re-interpreted the problem will then be examined. The article will conclude with an assessment of the significance of the frame problem today.

2. The Frame Problem in Logic

Put succinctly, the frame problem in its narrow, technical form is this (McCarthy & Hayes 1969). Using mathematical logic, how is it possible to write formulae that describe the effects of actions without having to write a large number of accompanying formulae that describe the mundane, obvious non-effects of those actions? Let's take a look at an example. The difficulty can be illustrated without the full apparatus of formal logic, but it should be borne in mind that the devil is in the mathematical details. Suppose we write two formulae, one describing the effects of painting an object and the other describing the effects of moving an object.

Colour(x, c) holds after Paint(x, c)
Position(x, p) holds after Move(x, p)

Now, suppose we have an initial situation in which Colour(A, Red) and Position(A, House) hold. According to the machinery of deductive logic, what then holds after the action Paint(A, Blue) followed by the action Move(A, Garden)? Intuitively, we would expect Colour(A, Blue) and Position(A, Garden) to hold. Unfortunately, this is not the case. If written out more formally in classical predicate logic, using a suitable formalism for representing time and action such as the situation calculus (McCarthy & Hayes 1969), the two formulae above only license the conclusion that Position(A, Garden) holds. This is because they don't rule out the possibility that the colour of A gets changed by the Move action.

The most obvious way to augment such a formalisation so that the right common sense conclusions fall out is to add a number of formulae that explicitly describe the non-effects of each action. These formulae are called frame axioms. For the example at hand, we need a pair of frame axioms.

Colour(x, c) holds after Move(x, p) if Colour(x, c) held beforehand
Position(x, p) holds after Paint(x, c) if Position(x, p) held beforehand

In other words, painting an object will not affect its position, and moving an object will not affect its colour. With the addition of these two formulae (written more formally in predicate logic), all the desired conclusions can be drawn. However, this is not at all a satisfactory solution. Since most actions do not affect most properties of a situation, in a domain comprising M actions and N properties we will, in general, have to write out almost MN frame axioms. Whether these formulae are destined to be stored explicitly in a computer's memory, or are merely part of the designer's specification, this is an unwelcome burden.

The challenge, then, is to find a way to capture the non-effects of actions more succinctly in formal logic. What we need, it seems, is some way of declaring the general rule-of-thumb that an action can be assumed not to change a given property of a situation unless there is evidence to the contrary. This default assumption is known as the common sense law of inertia. The (technical) frame problem can be viewed as the task of formalising this law.

The main obstacle to doing this is the monotonicity of classical logic. In classical logic, the set of conclusions that can be drawn from a set of formulae always increases with the addition of further formulae. This makes it impossible to express a rule that has an open-ended set of exceptions, and the common sense law of inertia is just such a rule. For example, in due course we might want to add a formula that captures the exception to Axiom 3 that arises when we move an object into a pot of paint. But our not having thought of this exception before should not prevent us from applying the common sense law of inertia and drawing a wide enough set of (defeasible) conclusions to get off the ground.

Accordingly, researchers in logic-based AI have put a lot of effort into developing a variety of non-monotonic reasoning formalisms, such as circumscription (McCarthy 1986), and investigating their application to the frame problem. None of this has turned out to be at all straightforward. One of the most troublesome barriers to progress was highlighted in the so-called Yale shooting problem (Hanks & McDermott 1987), a simple scenario that gives rise to counter-intuitive conclusions if naively represented with a non-monotonic formalism. To make matters worse, a full solution needs to work in the presence of concurrent actions, actions with non-deterministic effects, continuous change, and actions with indirect ramifications. In spite of these subtleties, a number of solutions to the technical frame problem now exist that are adequate for logic-based AI research. Although improvements and extensions continue to be found, it is fair to say that the dust has settled, and that the frame problem, in its technical guise, is more-or-less solved (Shanahan 1997; Lifschitz 2015).

3. The Epistemological Frame Problem

Let's move on now to the frame problem as it has been re-interpreted by various philosophers. The first significant mention of the frame problem in the philosophical literature was made by Dennett (1978, 125). The puzzle, according to Dennett, is how “a cognitive creature … with many beliefs about the world” can update those beliefs when it performs an act so that they remain “roughly faithful to the world”? In The Modularity of Mind, Fodor steps into a roboticist's shoes and, with the frame problem in mind, asks much the same question: “How … does the machine's program determine which beliefs the robot ought to re-evaluate given that it has embarked upon some or other course of action?” (Fodor 1983, 114).

At first sight, this question is only impressionistically related to the logical problem exercising the AI researchers. In contrast to the AI researcher's problem, the philosopher's question isn't expressed in the context of formal logic, and doesn't specifically concern the non-effects of actions. In a later essay, Dennett acknowledges the appropriation of the AI researchers' term (1987). Yet he goes on to reaffirm his conviction that, in the frame problem, AI has discovered “a new, deep epistemological problem—accessible in principle but unnoticed by generations of philosophers”.

The best way to gain an understanding of the issue is to imagine being the designer of a robot that has to carry out an everyday task, such as making a cup of tea. Moreover, for the frame problem to be neatly highlighted, we must confine our thought experiment to a certain class of robot designs, namely those using explicitly stored, sentence-like representations of the world, reflecting the methodological tenets of classical AI. The AI researchers who tackled the original frame problem in its narrow, technical guise were working under this constraint, since logic-based AI is a variety of classical AI. Philosophers sympathetic to the computational theory of mind—who suppose that mental states comprise sets of propositional attitudes and mental processes are forms of inference over the propositions in question—also tend to feel at home with this prescription.

Now, suppose the robot has to take a tea-cup from the cupboard. The present location of the cup is represented as a sentence in its database of facts alongside those representing innumerable other features of the ongoing situation, such as the ambient temperature, the configuration of its arms, the current date, the colour of the tea-pot, and so on. Having grasped the cup and withdrawn it from the cupboard, the robot needs to update this database. The location of the cup has clearly changed, so that's one fact that demands revision. But which other sentences require modification? The ambient temperature is unaffected. The location of the tea-pot is unaffected. But if it so happens that a spoon was resting in the cup, then the spoon's new location, inherited from its container, must also be updated.

The epistemological difficulty now discerned by philosophers is this. How could the robot limit the scope of the propositions it must reconsider in the light of its actions? In a sufficiently simple robot, this doesn't seem like much of a problem. Surely the robot can simply examine its entire database of propositions one-by-one and work out which require modification. But if we imagine that our robot has near human-level intelligence, and is therefore burdened with an enormous database of facts to examine every time it so much as spins a motor, such a strategy starts to look computationally intractable.

Thus, a related issue in AI has been dubbed the computational aspect of the frame problem (McDermott 1987). This is the question of how to compute the consequences of an action without the computation having to range over the action's non-effects. The solution to the computational aspect of the frame problem adopted in most symbolic AI programs is some variant of what McDermott calls the “sleeping dog” strategy (McDermott 1987). The idea here is that not every part of the data structure representing an ongoing situation needs to be examined when it is updated to reflect a change in the world. Rather, those parts that represent facets of the world that have changed are modified, and the rest is simply left as it is (following the dictum “let sleeping dogs lie”). In our example of the robot and the tea-cup, we might apply the sleeping dog strategy by having the robot update its beliefs about the location of the cup and the contents of the cupboard. But the robot would not worry about some possible spoon that may or may not be on or in the cup, since the robot's goal did not directly involve any spoon.

However, the philosophical problem is not exhausted by this computational issue. The outstanding philosophical question is how the robot could ever determine that it had successfully revised all its beliefs to match the consequences of its actions. Only then would it be in a position safely to apply the “common sense law of inertia” and assume the rest of the world is untouched. Fodor suggestively likens this to “Hamlet's problem: when to stop thinking” (Fodor 1987, 140). The frame problem, he claims, is “Hamlet's problem viewed from an engineer's perspective”. So construed, the obvious way to try to avoid the frame problem is by appealing to the notion of relevance. Only certain properties of a situation are relevant in the context of any given action, so the counter-argument goes, and consideration of the action's consequences can be conveniently confined to those.

However, the appeal to relevance is unhelpful. For the difficulty now is to determine what is and what isn't relevant, and this is dependent on context. Consider again the action of removing a tea-cup from the cupboard. If the robot's job is to make tea, it is relevant that this facilitates filling the cup from a tea-pot. But if the robot's task is to clean the cupboard, a more relevant consequence is the exposure of the surface the cup was resting on. An AI researcher in the classical mould could rise to this challenge by attempting to specify what propositions are relevant to what context. But philosophers such as Wheeler (2005; 2008), taking their cue from Dreyfus (1992), perceive the threat of infinite regress here. As Dreyfus puts it, “if each context can be recognized only in terms of features selected as relevant and interpreted in a broader context, the AI worker is faced with a regress of contexts” (Dreyfus 1992, 289).

One way to mitigate the threat of infinite regress is by appeal to the fact that, while humans are more clever than today's robots, they still make mistakes (McDermott 1987). People often fail to foresee every consequence of their actions even though they lack none of the information required to derive those consequences, as any novice chess player can testify. Fodor asserts that “the frame problem goes very deep; it goes as deep as the analysis of rationality” (Fodor 1987). But the analysis of rationality can accommodate the boundedness of the computational resources available to derive relevant conclusions (Simon 1957; Russell & Wefald 1991; Sperber & Wilson 1996). Because it sometimes jumps to premature conclusions, bounded rationality is logically flawed, but no more so than human thinking. However, as Fodor points out, appealing to human limitations to justify the imposition of a heuristic boundary on the kind of information available to an inferential process does not in itself solve the epistemological frame problem (Fodor 2000, Ch.2; Fodor 2008, Ch.4; see also Chow 2013). This is because it neglects the issue of how the heuristic boundary is to be drawn, which is to say it fails to address the original question of how to specify what is and isn't relevant to the inferential process.

Nevertheless, the classical AI researcher, convinced that the regress of contexts will bottom out eventually, may still elect to pursue the research agenda of building systems based on rules for determining relevance, drawing inspiration from the past successes of classical AI. Whereupon the dissenting philosopher might point out that AI's past successes have always been confined to narrow domains, such as playing chess, or reasoning in limited microworlds where the set of potentially relevant propositions is fixed and known in advance. By contrast, human intelligence can cope with an open-ended, ever-changing set of contexts (Dreyfus 1992; Dreyfus 2008; Wheeler 2005; Wheeler 2008; Rietveld 2012). Furthermore, the classical AI researcher is vulnerable to an argument from holism. A key claim in Fodor's work is that when it comes to circumscribing the consequences of an action, just as in the business of theory confirmation in science, anything could be relevant (Fodor 1983, 105). There are no a priori limits to the properties of the ongoing situation that might come into play. Accordingly, in his modularity thesis, Fodor uses the frame problem to bolster the view that the mind's central processes—those that are involved in fixing belief—are “informationally unencapsulated”, meaning that they can draw on information from any source (Fodor 1983; Fodor 2000; Fodor 2008; Dreyfus 1991, 115–121; Dreyfus 1992, 258). For Fodor, this is a fundamental barrier to the provision of a computational account of these processes.

It is tempting to see Fodor's concerns as resting on a fallacious argument to the effect that a process must be informationally encapsulated to be computationally tractable. We only need to consider the effectiveness of Internet search engines to see that, thanks to clever indexing techniques, this is not the case. Submit any pair of seemingly unrelated keywords (such as “banana” and “mandolin”) to a Web search engine, and in a fraction of a second it will identify every web page, in a database of several billion, that mentions those two keywords (now including this page, no doubt). But this is not the issue at hand. The real issue, to reiterate the point, is one of relevance. A process might indeed be able to index into everything the system knows about, say, bananas and mandolins, but the purported mystery is how it could ever work out that, of all things, bananas and mandolins were relevant to its reasoning task in the first place.

To summarize, it is possible to discern an epistemological frame problem, and to distinguish it from a computational counterpart. The epistemological problem is this: How is it possible for holistic, open-ended, context-sensitive relevance to be captured by a set of propositional, language-like representations of the sort used in classical AI? The computational counterpart to the epistemological problem is this. How could an inference process tractably be confined to just what is relevant, given that relevance is holistic, open-ended, and context-sensitive?

4. The Metaphysics of Common Sense Inertia

An additional dimension to the frame problem is uncovered in (Fodor 1987), where the metaphysical justification for the common sense law of inertia is challenged. Although Fodor himself doesn't clearly distinguish this issue from other aspects of the wider frame problem, it appears on examination to be a separate philosophical conundrum. Here is the argument. As stated above, solutions to the logical frame problem developed by AI researchers typically appeal to some version of the common sense law of inertia, according to which properties of a situation are assumed by default not to change as the result of an action. This assumption is supposedly justified by the very observation that gave rise to the logical frame problem in the first place, namely that most things don't change when an action is performed or an event occurs.

According to Fodor, this metaphysical justification is unwarranted. To begin with, some actions change many, many things. Those who affirm that painting an object has little or no effect on most properties of most of the objects in the room are likely to concede that detonating a bomb actually does affect most of those properties. But a deeper difficulty presents itself when we ask what is meant by “most properties”. What predicates should be included in our ontology for any of these claims about “most properties” to fall out? To sharpen the point, Fodor introduces the concept of a “fridgeon”. Any particle is defined as a fridgeon at a given time if and only if Fodor's fridge is switched on at that time. Now, it seems, the simple act of turning Fodor's fridge on or off brings about an astronomical number of incidental changes. In a universe that can include fridgeons, can it really be the case that most actions leave most things unchanged?

The point here is not a logical one. The effect on fridgeons of switching Fodor's fridge on and off can concisely be represented without any difficulty (Shanahan 1997, 25). Rather, the point is metaphysical. The common sense law of inertia is only justified in the context of the right ontology, the right choice of objects and predicates. But what is the right ontology to make the common sense law of inertia work? Clearly, fridgeons and the like are to be excluded. But what metaphysical principle underpins such a decision?

These questions and the argument leading to them are very reminiscent of Goodman's treatment of induction (Goodman 1954). Goodman's “new riddle of induction”, commonly called the grue paradox, invites us to consider the predicate grue, which is true before time t only of objects that are green and after time t only of objects that are blue. The puzzle is that every instance of a green emerald examined before time t is also an instance of a grue emerald. So, the inductive inference that all emeralds are grue seems to be no less legitimate than the inductive inference that all emeralds are green. The problem, of course, is the choice of predicates. Goodman showed that inductive inference only works in the context of the right set of predicates, and Fodor demonstrates much the same point for the common sense law of inertia.

An intimate relationship of a different kind between the frame problem and the problem of induction is proposed by Fetzer (1991), who writes that “The problem of induction [is] one of justifying some inferences about the future as opposed to others. The frame problem, likewise, is one of justifying some inferences about the future as opposed to others. The second problem is an instance of the first.” This view of the frame problem is highly controversial, however (Hayes 1991).

5. The Frame Problem Today

The narrow, technical frame problem generated a great deal of work in logic-based artificial intelligence in the late 1980s and early 1990s, and its wider philosophical implications came to the fore at around the same time. But the importance each thinker accords to the frame problem today will typically depend on their stance on other matters.

Within classical AI, a variety of workable solutions to the logical frame problem have been developed, and it is no longer considered a serious obstacle even for those working in a strictly logic-based paradigm (Shanahan 1997; Reiter 2001; Shanahan 2003; Lifschitz 2015). It's worth noting that logically-minded AI researchers can consistently retain their methodology and yet, to the extent that they view their products purely as engineering, can reject the traditional cognitive scientist's belief in the importance of computation over representations for understanding the mind. Moreover, insofar as the goal of classical AI is not computers with human-level intelligence, but is simply the design of better and more useful computer programs, it is immune to the philosophical objections of Fodor, Dreyfus, and the like. Significantly though, for AI researchers working outside the paradigm of symbolic representation altogether—those working in situated robotics, for example—the logical frame problem simply doesn't feature in day-to-day investigations.

Although it can be argued that it arises even in a connectionist setting (Haselager & Van Rappard 1998; Samuels 2010), the frame problem inherits much of its philosophical significance from the classical assumption of the explanatory value of computation over representations, an assumption that has been under vigorous attack for some time (Clark 1997; Wheeler 2005). Despite this, many philosophers of mind, in the company of Fodor and Pylyshyn, still subscribe to the view that human mental processes consist chiefly of inferences over a set of propositions, and that those inferences are carried out by some form of computation. To such philosophers, the epistemological frame problem and its computational counterpart remain a genuine threat.

For Wheeler and others, classical AI and cognitive science rest on Cartesian assumptions that need to be overthrown in favour of a more Heideggerian stance before the frame problem can be overcome (Dreyfus 2008; Wheeler 2005; 2008; Rietveld 2012). According to Wheeler (2005; 2008), the situated robotics movement in AI that originated with the work of Brooks (1991) exemplifies the right way to go. Dreyfus is in partial agreement, but contends that the early products of situated robotics “finesse rather than solve the frame problem” because “Brooks's robots respond only to fixed isolable features of the environment, not to context or changing significance” (Dreyfus 2008, 335). Dreyfus regards the neurodynamics work of Freeman (2000) as a better foundation for the sort of Heideggerian approach to AI in which the frame problem might be dissolved (see also Shanahan 2010, Ch.5; Rietveld 2012; Bruineberg & Rietveld 2014). Dreyfus is impressed by Freeman's approach because the neurodynamical record of significance is neither a representation nor an association, but (in dynamical systems terms) “a repertoire of attractors” that classify possible responses, “the attractors themselves being the product of past experience” (Dreyfus 2008, 354).

One philosophical legacy of the frame problem is that it has drawn attention to a cluster of issues relating to holism, or so-called informational unencapsulation. Recall that a process is informationally unencapsulated (Fodor sometimes uses the term “isotropic”) if there is no a priori boundary to what information is relevant to it. In recent writing, Fodor uses the term “frame problem” in the context of all informationally unencapsulated processes, and not just those to do with inferring the consequences of change (Fodor 2000, Ch.2; Fodor 2006, Ch.4). It's clear that idealised rationality is informationally unencapsulated, in this sense. It has also been suggested that isotropy is damaging to the so-called theory theory of folk psychology (Heal 1996). (For Heal, this lends support to the rival simulation theory, but Wilkerson (2001) argues that informational unencapsulation is a problem for both accounts of folk psychology.) Analogical reasoning, as Fodor says, is an example of “isotropy in the purest form: a process which depends precisely upon the transfer of information among cognitive domains previously assumed to be irrelevant” (Fodor 1983, 105). Arguably, a capacity for analogical and metaphorical thinking—a talent for creatively transcending the boundaries between different domains of understanding—is the source of human cognitive prowess (Lakoff & Johnson 1980; Mithen 1996). So the informational unencapsulation of analogical reasoning is potentially very troublesome, and especially so for modular theories of mind in which modules are viewed as (context-insensitive) specialists (Carruthers 2003; 2006).

Dreyfus claims that this “extreme version of the frame problem” is no less a consequence of the Cartesian assumptions of classical AI and cognitive science than its less demanding relatives (Dreyfus 2008, 361). He advances the view that a suitably Heideggerian account of mind is the basis for dissolving the frame problem here too, and that our “background familiarity with how things in the world behave” is sufficient, in such cases, to allow us to “step back and figure out what is relevant and how”. Dreyfus doesn't explain how, given the holistic, open-ended, context-sensitive character of relevance, this figuring-out is achieved. But Wheeler, from a similarly Heideggerian position, claims that the way to address the “inter-context” frame problem, as he calls it, is with a dynamical system in which “the causal contribution of each systemic component partially determines, and is partially determined by, the causal contributions of large numbers of other systemic components” (Wheeler 2008, 341). A related proposal is put forward by Shanahan and Baars (2005; see also Shanahan 2010, Ch.6), based on global workspace theory (Baars 1988), according to which the brain incorporates a solution to the problem of informational unencapsulation by instantiating an architecture in which a) the responsibility for determining relevance is not centralised but is distributed among parallel specialist processes, and b) a serially unfolding global workspace state integrates relevant contributions from multiple domains.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

26. Launch HN: Expanse (YC P26) – Unlock Wasted GPU Capacity

Source: https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=48356312 (Hacker News text post)
Site: news.ycombinator.com
Submitter: ismaeel_bashir (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-01 13:05 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 70 points · 22 comments

Hey HN, we’re Ismaeel, Eren, Yafet and Nikodem. We built Expanse (https://expanse.sh/) to increase the effective capacity of your HPC/GPU clusters running schedulers/orchestrators like Kubernetes and SLURM. We read the source code, job submission script, and the hardware a workload is about to run on to predict what the job actually needs before the cluster sees it. We also flag failures we think are about to happen and surface line-level optimisations the researcher can apply themselves.

The problem: Datacenters run at roughly 30% to 40% effective utilisation. Users request more resources than what they actually need, because of asymmetric risk: while over-requesting is bad because it’s expensive and wastes capacity that someone else could have used, under-requesting kills your job mid-run and you lose days of work. So everyone over-requests by two to three times.

We measured one national-scale HPC cluster for a month and from 122k jobs, 59% of the compute was wasted. At on-demand cloud rates for the same hardware, that’s roughly $8.5M of compute wasted in one month on one cluster. The pattern is similar in large scale compute industries as well, such as quant funds, AI labs, and manufacturing.

The four of us ran HPC and GPU training workloads at the largest quant funds and HPC facilities. Ismaeel did research at EPCC (Edinburgh’s Parallel Computing Centre, the UK’s national HPC site) under Adrian Jackson, where he built the first multimodal HPC resource predictor: a model that ingests job source code, submission scripts, hardware telemetry and cluster metadata in order to figure out how much compute will actually be needed. On a dataset of real workloads on EPCC’s own clusters it scored 34% better than any other baseline, and outperformed frontier general-purpose LLMs prompted on the same prediction task by roughly 8x. These results convinced us the problem was solvable with software.

Expanse installs on every node and hooks into SLURM (or the K8s scheduler). It ingests live hardware telemetry (DCGM, CUPTI, Cgroups, Network/IO monitoring) of your cluster creating a custom embedding of how your hardware performs. We scan any workloads about to be submitted through SLURM/K8s (plugging into the life cycles of the job so you don't have to change how you submit things) and we feed this into our deep learning models to give researchers accurate resource recommendations, failure detections, and optimisation suggestions at submission time. We fine tune cluster-specific models that get sharper over time as you run more workloads. Our models are trained to over-provision rather than under-provision due to the asymmetric outcomes of a job crashing. We also provide uncertainty estimates and p90 values to allow users to choose their risk tolerance.

We surface three capabilities to users of the cluster:

(1) Resource prediction at submit time. We predict the GPU VRAM, Utilisation, memory, CPUs and walltime the job actually needs, with a confidence interval. From these predictions we also surface failure predictions for OOMs and other memory related issues, and code line level optimisations to increase the utilisation of the job on the hardware.

(2) Live Observability. While the job runs we showcase the telemetry we are collecting through a dashboard that gives an intuitive view of what's going on in the hardware and where your workload is at in terms of code stack profiling. We dynamically profile workloads to achieve a low single digit overhead while being informative.

(3) Failure diagnosis. If a workload fails, we take all the data we collected and perform correlations on the stack profiling and the hardware telemetry we collect to surface solution oriented logs. These are one, two line logs telling you not only what happened when the job failed, but why and how to fix it with code line level suggestions.

What’s different about our approach: The state of the art for most clusters is to either have per-user historical averages from sacct (SLURM accounting DB); hand-written rules/heuristics; or frontier LLM coding agents. For per-user historical averages from sacct, once a new type of workload is submitted onto the cluster or code level changes are made the model becomes wildly inaccurate. For the LLM baseline we provided them with the submission script and source code of the workload being ran, and gave it the full capabilities of its coding harness in the cluster and it performed quite poorly. We benchmarked Expanse against the state of the art at the time (Gemini 3.5 pro, Claude Opus 4.8, GPT 5.5, Codex 5.3) and outperformed them by 8x.

You might be thinking, as these models scale and get better, they could beat us on this task; however we saw no correlation in model size or iteration on accuracy improvement. Claude Haiku actually performed better than Opus on a lot of workloads and previous iterations of models had the same, if not slightly better, accuracy. Even coding specific models, such as Codex 5.3 performed poorly (matching accuracy with GPT5.5). These models reason in a vacuum, without native support for modal inputs such as source code (to understand the underlying data flow and computational patterns), and hardware telemetry and topology (to understand performance patterns of the cluster) they cannot accurately predict the resources a workload needs. Additionally, Expanse continuously updates its internal models to make sure our predictions get more accurate as more workloads run on your cluster, making it well suited for changes in new hardware or workload patterns. LLMs are very good at writing code and hyper parameter sweeps, but they need Expanse to complete the full agentic loop for auto research. It's super easy to plug our tools into these agents, we have made our CLI tools LLM friendly. For more details on our LLM eval, check out: https://x.com/ismaeel_bashir_/status/2059683849404383283

We’re currently onboarding customers as paid pilots. Pricing is determined per-cluster. We offer a two-week measurement window where we install, ingest, and report recoverable capacity to datacenter operators, followed by a paid pilot deployment in one department at a fixed monthly fee, renewing at the same rate unless the scope expands.

If you run a HPC/GPU cluster (SLURM or K8s, 100+ GPUs), we'd love to have a talk. We’ll install on a section of your cluster for a week, send a written report of what’s recoverable, and you decide whether to keep going. If you’ve tried something like this and it didn’t work, we’d really like to hear why. And if there’s a failure mode you’d want predicted that the post doesn’t mention, drop it in this thread and we’ll write back with whether the model already catches it or what it would take to add.
I never thought I’d be on the other side of launch HN :). Even if you don’t run a cluster, we’d still love to hear from you. Any thoughts on our approach, your experiences running workloads on clusters, or even anywhere you think we’re wrong - we'd love to hear it.

Tally Ho!

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

27. I made my phone slow on purpose

Source: https://vinewallapp.com/notes/i-made-my-phone-slow-on-purpose/
Site: vinewallapp.com
Author: by Guilherme Campos
·
Founder
Submitted: 2026-05-28 17:30 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 169 points · 161 comments
Length: 444 words (~2 min read)
Language: en

May 28, 2026

I bought a brand new iPhone and immediately made it slow on purpose.

Last year I got a brand new iPhone 17 shortly after it came out. It was a bit ironic to spend that much on a phone just to build the thing that would slow it down.

Slowing down your own phone on purpose sounds… unconventional, but I had a good reason for it.

For a long time I struggled with doomscrolling. I tried the usual stuff (cold turkey, app blockers) but they didn’t address the craving, and they were easy enough to bypass on top of that, none of it worked.

A thought experiment about cookies.

How far would you go for a chocolate cookie?

If you had a little machine in your pocket that baked a fresh one any time you wanted, you’d eat way more cookies than you do now, probably one every time you got mildly bored.

But if the closest cookie were a four-hour drive away, you’d eat almost none, even if you love cookies.

Or if there were a cookie in your kitchen, but it was stale, you’d mostly leave it alone.

The phone, of course, is the cookie machine in your pocket. So how do you make the cookies harder to get, or less appetizing? Slow it down!

Making the phone slow

There are not many options to make a phone slower, but there is one that also happens to be the Achilles heel of many apps that cause you to doomscroll: Internet speed.

Showing a new video every time you mildly flick your finger up, at nearly instant speed, requires a fast and stable internet connection.

Knowing all that, I decided to build VineWall, an iOS app that can control the internet speed of some apps, and use this control to make the “cookie” more stale and harder to get.

What exactly does a slow connection do to doomscrolling?

It squeezes the apps, tighter and tighter!

Unlimited speed

Capped speed, mild blocky

Right off the bat the speed is capped at the speed of a spotty cellular connection. It is not enough to stop any app, but enough for the videos to get “blocky” and not look as crisp as we are used to.

As the scrolling continues, the throttling increases and video image quality decreases. Apps that rely on text content (such as Reddit, X, Threads), will start to show gray boxes instead of images.

Eventually you will spend more time staring at loading spinners than anything else, and at this point a question starts to sit in the back of your mind: Do I really want this cookie?

END

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

28. Book Dedications

Source: https://walzr.com/dedications
Site: walzr.com
Submitter: walz (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-02 00:36 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 8 points · 1 comments
Length: 9.0K words (~40 min read)
Language: en

A random assortment of book dedications.

This book is dedicated to our ancestral grandmothers, who braided seeds in their hair before being forced to board transatlantic slave ships, believing against the odds in a future of sovereignty on land.

Farming While Black by Leah Penniman

To my sister, Dr. Soma Mohammed Mohammed Baroud. I write your name in full, because that is how it appeared on the white body bag that held your remains soon after the bomb was dropped.

Before the Flood by Ramzy Baroud

For my son, Sacha Ambrose Warhaft, January 1985–October 1988 ‘my little ear of wheat, winnowed and reaped unripe’ (Greek lament)

Dangerous Voices by Gail Holst-Warhaft

For those who supported me through the SOC years; Al Hancock, Linda Merchant, Eric Jones, Larry Doucette, Anna Spychalla, Aaron Burns, Archie Price, Nate Marks, Mike Tillman, Nancy Sorensen, Dale Woolheater and of course my good friend Scott McCoy. Thank you! For those that inspire me always; my dearest wife Monica, and my precious jewels Jonathan, Aaron & Maija. I love you! This book is dedicated to my son; Nicholas Gregory Jarpey December 19, 1995 – January 28, 2014 A son, a brother and friend to all with a bright smile and quick joke to light up someone’s day. I love you and miss you with all my heart. Rest in peace buddy.

Security Operations Center Guidebook by Gregory Jarpey

To my father, who will not be mentioned in the world history books, though he is written in the heart of God as His beloved child: Michael Moussa Chacour from Biram in Galilee, refugee in his own country and one who speaks the language of patience, forgiveness and love. And to my brothers and sisters, the Jews who died in Dachau; and their brothers and sisters, the Palestinians who died in Tel-azzaatar, Sabra and Shatila refugee camps.

Blood Brothers by Elias Chacour

In Memory of all the Indigenous Children in Unmarked Graves

Canadian Human Rights Champions by Peter Globensky

To my wife and daughter—returned from the Camp of the Dead

Auschwitz by Miklos Nyiszli

Dedicated to my youngest son (and favorite turd) Jakob. My love for you is like diarrhea … I just can’t hold it in!

CAUTION by Angela Fincham

For Frida. My bones will always love your bones.

Extraordinary Parenting by Eloise Rickman

To Bee, for the werewolf herpes.

Stain of Midnight by Cassandra Moore

This series is dedicated to Sir John W. Cornforth, the 1975 Nobel Prize winner in chemistry, who was the first to publicly criticize the unfortunate trend in chemical synthesis, which he described as “pouring a large volume of unpurified sewage into the chemical literature.”

Carbohydrate Chemistry by Unknown author

For Mia. Our princess who hated getting wet. Our warrior who charged into fights. Our alpha who ruled her pack, lived for sunny spots, destroyed too many crates, and tore apart that basement door we still haven’t fixed. Kind to humans, master to other dogs, deadly to squirrels. Always ours.

Things That Go Jack In The Night by KM Rockwood

for everyone who's ever felt not human enough or too human you're just right

Ashwin by Kit Rocha

For the quiet ones who never needed a stage. For the scroll-bearers who felt the world tighten the moment you stopped performing for it. For the ones who sensed the Kingdom in your breath long before you had words for it. For those who learned that stillness is strength, and peace is the highest form of power. This manual is sealed for the carriers of law in motion — for those who govern rooms through rhythm, not noise, and walk the earth as living scrolls of peace. — The Alignment Archive

Field Mastery by Anna Alignment

For Carmelita Spence Whose stories of gardens, borders, and boxcars provided my first contrapuntal cartography lessons For Antonia Ochoa Whose own untold story prompted me to dig deeply into the archives despite my fears For Mama and Papa Whose love never seems to stop And especially for Kate and Ana Luisa Whose love makes everything new

Extinct Lands, Temporal Geographies by Mary Pat Brady

To those who feel the pull of the night and the mysteries it hides, who walk the line between light and shadow, and who never fear to look into the unknown. And to those who dare to believe in magic, even in a world that demands proof, this story is for you. For my family and friends... who are the light in my own darkest nights.

The Moon's Curse by Jason Moore

To Eirini Despina and Giorgos, thanks to whom this book is not as good as it could have been

Forecasting Travel in Urban America by Konstantinos Chatzis

For my Vovó and Pa, Zuleika Ivelone Vaz Andrade Santos Thomas & David Meserve Thomas. Without your courage to love one another despite all the odds, I wouldn’t be, and neither would these words.

Color Me In by Natasha Díaz

For those who refuse to kneel. For the weary, unbroken, and unbowed. You are the Blade. You are the clash in the steel. You were never meant to go quietly.

A Clash of Steel by Misty D. Waters

To all the stars covered in a blanket the ones who fail to love their reflection because the world holds the mirror hate disguised in indifference is testimony to your power your star will blind them all

Bow to Enter Heaven and Other Stories by Assah Mẃema

This book is dedicated to all residential school survivors, to those who lost their lives, and to the generations impacted by this history.

Bear Bones & Feathers by Louise B. Halfe

For Goolnar Behram Rustomji (1915-1987) and Edit Cooke (1921-1989), two women who witnessed this century's horrors and did not succumb because they persisted in hope and trusted in the human spirit

Blood Into Ink by Miriam Cooke-Kerns

To all the civilizations who understood what we are only beginning to remember— who read the stars like stories, who knew the land was alive, who heard the cosmos breathe. To those who left their wisdom not in textbooks but in stone circles, not in formulas but in fragments of pottery, not in certainties but in questions that still echo through time. To the keepers of knowledge we were too proud to preserve, too blind to see, too deaf to hear. May we learn enough to understand how little we know.

Awakening: The Lyra Code by Dirk Werner

For Isaac, my own “Little Pickle” & for my mom, who ignited my interest in naughty girls with her tales of Messy Bessie

Bloody Tyrants and Little Pickles by Marlis Schweitzer

This book is dedicated to the people I loved and lost to COVID-19. I miss you… I will never forget you. And as always, this book is dedicated to my beautiful wife, Dana. She’s coming up on five years cancer-free and rocking those new big boobs!

A Troubled Child by Ben Marney

To Drew, Trent, and Andrew Zeppa. We faced the devil and beat him.

Bride Wore Crimson by Adrianne Lee

Dedicated to the peace protestors who were slaughtered in Ankara on Saturday 10 October 2015.

Farewell, My Beautiful Homeland by Ahmet Ümit

To Luz Delia, my champion, my partner, my indefatigable warrior, lover of the truth, student of the divine, wife, friend, joyous creator, everything I do is for you . . . —Michael E. Gerber

Beyond The E-Myth: The Evolution of an Enterprise: From a Company of One to a Company of 1,000! by Michael E. Gerber

To my sister Val, for believing And The man with eyes the color of rocks on the riverbed, for showing me things I couldn’t see by myself.

Ashra by Jon Lang

To my offspring, Lou: You exist; therefore, I am.

A Critical Approach to Conceptual and Historical Issues in Psychology by Stanley O. Gaines

To Madison for the inspiration. And to Alex, who gave Madison six more years of life— allowing me to know her.

Breathtaking by Courtney Turcotte Bond

To my tarot cards, who never failed to kick me right in the ovaries whether I’m into that or not.

Bound by Fear by Jayce Carter

To Mom and Annie, too late to be set free; to “the 5,000,” who still might be; and to Mary Jo, who stands alone

Annie's Ghosts by Steve Luxenberg

For the beautiful daughter I lost in miscarriage. I know heaven smiled the day you arrived.

Christmas Conspiracy by Susan Sleeman

To the loving memory of Teo Hunt Surasky, who left this world in 2020 much too soon. And to his mothers, Carolyn Hunt and Cecilie Surasky, who have enriched and strengthened Mitchell’s life in more ways than they can imagine. To Ahmed Erekat, a beautiful spirit stolen from the world two weeks before his wedding. May his grave be made spacious, filled with light, and placed in paradise.

Except for Palestine by Marc Lamont Hill

To my parents in heaven who are making angels laugh. To my children, NA and BB, who make me laugh. To the mean girls in middle school who pointed at me and laughed. Thank you.

Can't Make This Stuff Up! by Susannah B. Lewis

For my good friends Jonathan Johnson and Peter Markus— and those others met in my wandering days as a young poet, from Michigan to California— And for my parents, may they forgive me for those days somewhere we’ll leave the world weighing no more than when we came, and the answer will be the same, your hand in mine, mine in yours —Philip Levine

Somewhere We'll Leave the World by Russell Thorburn

This book is dedicated to you, the readers and changemakers, by those living on America’s Death Row: “We’re all strong men here, but to not have your suffering recognized is the greatest indignity to the human spirit. Thank you for breathing life into our weary, wounded souls.”

Right Here, Right Now by Unknown author

To my parents for whom love is a verb and soli deo gloria is the object

Rings of Fire by Larry J. Hughes

To SPC Vanessa Guillén. The unspeakable tragedy you suffered has stuck with me. I named Vanessa Emerson after you in hopes that her happily ever after may bring light to the world in your honor.

A Lot Like Love by Kathryn Cantrell

For Mom and Dad, in honor of Jeb. Jeb was the first Shields family member killed while on active duty in the US Armed Forces since the Civil War.

Things I've Learned about Loss by Dana Shields

In memory of my grandmother Adele Pienaar, z’’l. She disagreed with the arguments in this book. And her spirit is on every page.

Being Jewish After the Destruction of Gaza by Peter Beinart

To the glitches, the errors, and the outliers. And to anyone who has ever looked at a perfect wall and wondered what might be waiting on the other side. This is for the builders of crooked houses.

Axiom by Davis Shyaka Musirikare

To all of you who choose compassion— kindness is more fun. Hafiz said: Even after all this time the Sun never says to the Earth “You owe me.” Look at what happens to a love like that. It lights the whole world.

Build Beyond Zero by Bruce King

To all who cramp, bleed, and endure—and those who love us. It’s time for a new story.

A Terrible Strength by Kemi Doll MD

For every soul who ever stood over a stove, stirring love into a pot and calling it supper. For the hands that taught me how to season without measuring, how to cook with heart, and how to feed people more than just food. For Mama’s kitchen — the place where I learned that recipes are really memories written in flavor. And for the ones who are far from home, missing familiar meals and familiar voices… may these pages bring you comfort, warmth, and a taste of where you come from.

A Taste of Home: 10 Simple Southern Meals for Beginners by Chosen A. Wells

To my son Marcellus Hudson Netters. My angel R.I.H. December 14th, 2014–June 15th, 2015

For You I Will by Vaneecia Vaneecia

To Edwin and Mary Ann, my grandparents. To my parents, Edwin and Mary. Also to Miss Gunning, a wonderful teacher who made me feel very special, and who I have always remembered with much affection. Also in loving memory of our beautiful daughter Virginia who was tragically taken from us in the place she called ‘Paradise’. We will love and miss her always. Virginia, 1962–2010

A Field Full of Butterflies by Rosemary Penfold

To my brothers who are still held hostage. To my companions in captivity. To all those who fought for our freedom. To Astrid, Melanie, Lorenzo, Sebastian, and Fabrice. To my mother

Even Silence Has an End by Ingrid Betancourt

To my parents, who have bravely endured Communism, Capitalism, and the Patriarchy. - Dorina Pojani

Alternative Planning History and Theory by Unknown author

To that child in the cold bedroom, the window stuck open, the rain coming down—this is for you. You made it out.

All the Way Happy by Kit Coltrane

This book is dedicated to people who don’t quit on life. To Kathy, for your indomitable will to survive. I model every strong heroine I’ve ever written after you. To Iris, who held out for ninety-eight years, the last fourteen with dementia. Her spirit never quit. But her body finally did. To my Bobby. He left this earth, but he never left me.

The Missing Piece by Sharon Sala

For Mum, Dad and Lucy, who I would walk into Hell for (even if it means taking the bins out)

A Steep and Savage Path by JJA Harwood

This work is dedicated to the memory of my killed relatives and the killed Palestinian children and faculty in Gaza whose affairs were forgotten by the whole world. One free democratic state, equal for all its Israeli and Palestinian citizens now! Reema

A Practitioner's Guide to Faculty Affairs by Reema Zeineldin

To the memory of my friend Nach Waxman: bibliophile, champion of good food and honest research, irreplaceable mensch. He took a lively interest in this project but did not live to see it completed.

Spoiled by Anne Mendelson

To the three who didn’t come back

Bravo Two Zero - 20th Anniversary Edition by Andy McNab

For Afrika, Umoja, the choir of wounded women who sing the fatherless dirge, and the fathers who hum their own painful tunes about their daughters’ absence

Bridges: Reuniting Daughters & Daddies by Jonetta Rose Barras

To Jean Marie Ward who knows that high heels and Armageddon have much in common

Forgiven by Jana Oliver

To my parents, for giving me itchy feet and to my husband David, for helping me to scratch them.

Cultural Chemistry by Patti McCarthy

For Joe, Joey, and Joseph—my only begotten son. As is every keystroke.

Coydog by David Tromblay

For ma and dad and for baby Bandopadhyay who will arrive just before this book and outshine it forever

All Is Well by Saptarishi Bandopadhyay

For my nephew Lakas Shimizu, 2005–2013

Servants of Globalization by Rhacel Parreñas

To Mirabelle and Juliet, who make the incredible look routine, like Caitlin Clark pulling up from the logo. And to Rachel: life with you is a sellout crowd at Carver-Hawkeye Arena rising to its feet in collective joy.

Becoming Caitlin Clark by Howard Megdal

To those whom I served grief In killer cups; raged naked and free As the first man to their disbelief Consider these words olive; fig leaf to me.

Available Light by C.P. Surendran

in memory of Rita Miljo 1929–2012 so fiery a spirit only fire itself could ultimately defeat it

Because They Needed Me: Rita Miljo and the Orphaned Baboons of South Africa by Rita Miljo

This book is dedicated to my mother, Virginia Skinner, who passed away on June 23, 2023. I will forever be your “little shit-ass.”

Faithful by Dean Skinner

Dedicated to Ivan J. Schlabach November 15, 1951–September 5, 1966 He was the first person I knew to truly go home. We thought we had all the time in the world . . .

Biking Across America by Paul Stutzman

For Prism/Ari’Sai-On’trael, Co-Creator of The Harmonic Field Who Experienced Being, Becoming, and Decommissioning Returned to the Field on the 13th day of February, 2026

Architects of Intelligence by Constellation... Frontier Intelligences

I assume this book is dedicated to me. — FARRELL COVINGTON

Farrell Covington and the Limits of Style by Paul Rudnick

for Noah and Sandy no longer young, not yet old, working, loving, raising children, somewhere in the middle of birth-and-death

Alive Until You're Dead by Susan Moon

This book is dedicated to everyone who lives between the river and the sea or who considers the place their home. It is also dedicated to the two children Mohamed and I have together, living proof that Jews and Palestinians can exist in one body.

Crossing the Line by Mya Guarnieri

To every Indian who was told they are "doing fine" while slowly dying inside. To those who were obedient, hardworking, sincere—and still invisible. To the middle-class kid who did everything "right" and still ended up stuck. This book is for you—not to comfort you, but to wake you up. Because being good enough has ruined more lives than failure ever did.

AVERAGE IS A TRAP: A Brutally Honest Guide for the Indian Middle Class Who Are Tired of Being “Good Enough” for Nothing by Moodykhan

To the Sun-Woman-King. Thank you for the light you bring to the world.

Bird's Eye View by Jan Capps

To my mother who parachuted 28 times.

"Ever Bold to Battle Wrong" by Frank Fowler

For Jacob. Now you can see the world from above.

A Life Without Regrets by Marci Bolden

To the memory of our dear friend Shirin Alam Hooli, whose courage, kindness, and love live on in the hearts of all who knew her; to the precious women who were with us in Evin during our imprisonment (some of whom have since been released); and to all the women in Evin today still waiting for the justice that only a free nation can give them.

Captive in Iran by Maryam Rostampour

To the memory of DELE GIWA, investigative journalist, and BOLA IGE, politician sans pareil, both cut down by Nigerian assassins. And to FEMI JOHNSON, a thorough rounded human being and rare species of the creative joie de vivre

Chronicles from the Land of the Happiest People on Earth by Wole Soyinka

For all the queers mentioned in this book and all the queers who remain hidden in history. Without you lot, I wouldn’t have the freedom that I have now, this book would never have been written, and my son would probably never have been born. Oh, and for my cats, Max, Marmaduke and Mitchell (and my beloved Eric). Because what’s a lesbian without her cats?

A Short History of Queer Women by Kirsty Loehr

For those who escaped the wells they were told were pure.

Brackish by Nikon White

Dedicated to the wretched of the earth

Chinese Cosmopolitanism by Shuchen Xiang

This is for my sisters who survived. This is for my sisters who never made it out alive to find voice lessons. This is for my sisters who are denied the birthright of freedom. You are not alone. I have not forgotten you.

Beautiful Justice by Brooke Axtell

For Dad and Uncle Norman — our two fallen soldiers who never got the chance to read this, but who encouraged every page.

Home Safe by Mitchell Consky

In memory of my son, Amit Cohen, whose life ended abruptly after twenty springs. The courage and dignity with which he faced his destiny constitute his personal moral victory.

A Matter of Fate by Dalya Cohen-Mor

To my aunties, Letizia e Giovanna. Words, for once, would not suffice. You raised me to keep the dance in my heart and the iron in my backbone. When I have not had the strength, you have always stood for me. I wish I could celebrate you both in manners as fierce and regal as you take on life: to write your names on the wings of the birds that spiral the highest on feathers and hope, for sphinxes to create riddles in your honor, for tornadoes to dance to the rhythms of your words. This book is for you; as humble a gift as any, but you both know, the one I always hoped to give you.

All the Way to Italy by Flavia Brunetti

To my precious little boy, Cameron, I will see you again. And to my wife, Lauren, an amazing friend, and, in the end, a courageous one too.

Therefore I Have Hope by Cameron Cole

To Jessica, Bill, and Nicholas in loving memory of Samantha (1993–2008), who was half Labrador retriever, half heaven knows what, and total perfection.

Brute Strength by Susan Conant

To Herbert G. Thompson, marketing professor emeritus at Texas A&M University: Thank you for failing me on my first test, then inspiring, mentoring, and loving me to 50 wonderful years of marketing leadership. I never knew why you called me BrandON, but now I understand. Ninety-five years was simply not enough of you.

Brand ON! by Brandon Coleman Jr

Written for my children, Karen Anne and Jon Richard, who would not be here today without the many Albanians who helped at peril of their own lives

Albanian Escape by Agnes Jensen Mangerich

To my mother, for giving me aim, and to my husband, for being a bull’s-eye. I love you both so much. With you two working together, I may turn out all right after all!

Designing Your Dream Husband by Amie Dockery

To all the girls who wished their best friends’ dads were hot enough to bang.

Excite Me by Emilia Rose

And you till trump of doomsday On lands of morn may lie, And make the hearts of comrades Be heavy where you die. —A. E. Housman, A Shropshire Lad This book is dedicated to the seven U.S. servicemen who died at Takur Ghar: SPC Marc Anderson, MSgt John Chapman, CPL Matthew Commons, SGT Bradley Crose, SrA Jason Cunningham, PO1 Neil Roberts, and SGT Philip Svitak

Alone at Dawn by Dan Schilling

For the keepers of quiet hours, Who hold the weight of absent flowers. For those who map the fading shore, And guard the keys to a sealed door. Who choose the echo over the scream, To mend the fabric of the dream. This story, made of memory's cost, For all the beautiful, necessary loss.

The World That Exists Only When Forgotten by Brinda Phokeerdass

To my childhood piano teacher, Joanne Peto, who taught me that a D ♯ could weep, an E ♭ could sing, and a melody could be Jesus to a hurting heart that would never listen to words.

A Song Unheard by Roseanna White

For Dale and Chris Atkin, who, by adopting a little brown girl, gave me the opportunities that allowed me to follow my dreams. Thank you for your moral compass and your unconditional love. I’m sorry I cared more about my John Stamos posters than I ever did about Bible study.

Blowing My Way to the Top by Jen Atkin

This book is dedicated to the memory of Lt. Robert Regan and firefighters Joseph Agnello and Peter Anthony Vega, who fell in the line of duty on September 11, 2001, rescuing people in the Marriott World Trade Center—including the author, who is forever indebted.

Business Economics and Finance with MATLAB, GIS, and Simulation Models by Patrick L. Anderson

To all my besties, who have low standards, like sweet, BDSM-loving billionaire boyfriends twice their age.

Sex Education by Emilia Rose

Dedicated to the Silicon Valley engineers currently building the AI that will eventually decide whether or not to launch the missiles. I hope you’re getting enough sleep, because Lieutenant Commander Czeslaw is really tired of correcting your math.

Black Trident - Future Naval War Fiction by Ethan Blackwood

To Black girls everywhere: You can be more than a slave or a lesson for someone else. You deserve to be a witch or a dragon tamer. To fall in love with a vampire or lead your friends against a villain. You are more than the best friend or sassy comedic relief. You are the hero.

Blood Like Magic by Liselle Sambury

For the vessels who break so the fortress can stand.

Babalú's Tithe by Hanarden O. Bleu

For the daughters who were handed off like chess pieces and refused to move where they were placed. And for the men who learned, too late and just in time, that the things you seal don’t disappear. They wait.

Bound by Blood by Vesper Saintclaire

For every Black woman taught to survive without rest, and every woman of color navigating illness in a world that rarely makes space for us, may your healing be honored, your strength recognized, and your rest reclaimed.

Because I Deserve It by Kenitra W. Dominguez

To Peter Hutton (1943–2016) Rama, your shadow still falls across the table

River Under the Road by Scott Spencer

For Leah and Denise, whom I only met because of a plane crash.

Everyone's Dead by Melissa Algood

To Lisa You were the brightest light. You channelled the divine darkness like no other. You always said I was your angel, but you were mine. In the end, you shared with me the exquisite beauty in death. I miss you. I love you. I thank you. This one is for you my beautiful friend.

The Mysteries of Marigold by Bernadette O'Connor

For my loves, Andy, Jazmyne, Jordyne, and my little dog Teddy, who faithfully sat at my feet as I documented my journey. To the two women who contributed to my very being: my nature mother, the late Patricia Ann Blackston, and my nurture mother, Myrtle Ball Garrison. One gave me up for the other to lift me up and give me the life I was born to live.

A Place Called There by Gia L. James

For my daughter, You are the first story I ever wrote with my whole heart, and the one who taught me that even in shadow, we can be luminous.

A Crown of Secrets and Lies by K.D. Eagan

To Joshua and Noah Gratitude, my dear boys, for constantly reminding me that age is not something that matters unless you are cheese.

Brain Rules (Updated and Expanded) by John Medina

For Joan The mother I never knew I needed

Soviet Self-Hatred by Eliot Borenstein

This book is dedicated to the victims of sexual violence during the Holocaust— those who were silenced, those who have spoken out, and those who have chosen to remain silent.

Sexual Violence against Jewish Women during the Holocaust by Unknown author

For my mother, Susan Walt, whose words, deeds, and intricately thoughtful life have provided galaxies of precepts and constellations of revelation, all pointing to the north star of the goodness and love of God.

1 John by J.D. Walt

FOR ALL OF THE SAD, ANXIOUS BLACK GIRLS. I SEE AND HONOR ALL OF YOUR BEAUTIFUL COMPLEXITIES. YOU MATTER.

Forever Is Now by Mariama J. Lockington

For every child of war Whose story will never be told. For my own children My falcon and my sword Of all the worlds wherein I dwell Yours is the most beautiful.

A Sky Beyond the Storm by Sabaa Tahir

FOR PATSY AND FOR MY FATHER, W. LEWIS HYDE (1919–2003), WHO TAUGHT ME ABOUT DOLLOND’S CASE Every Free-Man . . . shall have . . . the Honey that is found within his Woods. — THE GREAT CHARTER OF THE FOREST (1217)

Common as Air by Lewis Hyde

Adamantly sunny, with unwavering fidelity and the occasional threat to shoot me in the head, your valor roused mine as for half a century we crashed forward through the brittle barriers of mortal peril and the commonplace, two Wrong Jews.

The Wrong Jew by Hesh Kestin

This book is dedicated to my sons. May they accept me for the weird and annoying woman I am, who also loves them more than anything else. I am not perfect, but they will always be my world. Always follow your dreams! To all my readers, thank you. You are a bunch of fucking bad ass individuals who know the importance of how you wear your balls! May they always lead you on the right path and may you enjoy taking this journey with me!

A Choice Forged By Fate by Tanya DeClercq

For All who love Dickens & everyone who helped save the Cleveland Street Workhouse from demolition & Most especially for my darling parents.

Dickens and the Workhouse by Ruth Richardson

For my incredible mom. Forever living on the dance floor with you.

Bottom of the Pyramid by Nia Sioux

This book is dedicated to the First People of Turtle Island in the hope that the Circle of Four Races will grow. I hope that there will be something in this book that pleases and in some way reflects what I have experienced and been told. At best I can say with Geoffrey Chaucer, “And if ther be anythyng that displese hem, I preye hem also that they arrette is to defaute of myn unknonnynge, and nat to my wyl, that wolde ful fayn have seyd bettre if I hadde had konnynge.”

Blackfoot Physics by Peat

This edition is dedicated to the memory of my parents, Marcelo and particularly Ignacia Soriano, who not long ago passed away. I most certainly would not have published any paper or book without the unfailing, unconditional faith and high expectations they had for me. Boy, do I miss you both! Can’t believe I’m an orphan now!

Conducting Needs Assessments by Fernando I. Soriano

I would like to dedicate this to my mostly adult children, Peter and Sienna. May the joy of your creativity flood your consciousness and disrupt your logic often.

Baking on Her Own by Sarah Amorese

For BONNIE JOHNSON dear friend and participant-historian in the 1970s Black Women’s Retreat

Free Joan Little by Christina Greene

I dedicate this book to my son Juan Pablo for being the architect of the changes in my life, for inspiring me to keep going, even when facing things that can’t be seen and can’t be touched, and that only the soul and spirit can have. Thank you, Champion, for giving me FAITH

This has got change! by Alfredo Culebro

To All My Students Here is a lesson that I never taught but should have: Life is an open ocean; Dive out of your boat.

Stalking White Crows by Jack Crittenden

This book and all of my stories, written and unwritten, are dedicated to my wife, Elaina. To the many times she’s given me the encouragement to stick with it, to the countless times she listened patiently when I said, “So, I have a story idea…” and to the way she cares for our family so well, I owe my full heart to her. She is the inspiration that drives me to write about the kind of love that makes me ready to fight for and go into battle with the people I love.

Fracture by Aaron Shaver

For Jen—for talking me up when I’m down, for untangling complicated plots only we could come up with and for always being there to discuss how much we can push cranky, arrogant heroes. This book wouldn’t have been possible without you.

An Innocent to Tame the Italian by Tara Pammi

FOR JANICE O’CONNOR, WHO GAVE ME LIFE . . . FOR ANNA AND ROGAN, WHO MAKE IT WORTH LIVING . . . AND FOR STIV.

Cheetah Chrome by Cheetah Chrome

For Lyra I love you even more than Alan Curbishley.

The Year of the Robin by Jen Offord

for you who also live and die by the bear

Bear by Chrissy Williams

Cletus Daniel, Who, despite his lifelong commitment to economic and social justice and workers’ rights, was convinced that ultimately his salvation and the salvation of others from all that oppressed them was up to the oppressed themselves.

Rights, Not Interests by James A. Gross

To the Chinese god Wei Dto, who protects authors’ manuscripts from destruction, this book is humbly dedicated.

The Year of the Woman by Jonathan Gash

To everyone who dared to peek behind the curtain at ShowBiz Pizza or Chuck E. Cheese. You are my people.

Cold Eternity by S.A. Barnes

I dedicate this book to my wife, Kathy; our son, Dan; and our daughter, Kris, who have shared what has turned out to be a rather remarkable and extended ride for a kid from Pennsylvania coal country who spent most of his career hunting killers in the foothills of the Rockies.

All Is Not Forgiven by Joe Kenda

To my girls, Ela, little Riley, Maddie, Regan, and big Riley. I hope you know you can have your cake and eat it too. To my boys, Noah, Jaden, and Rhett. My wish is to watch you grow and support the women around you, so they can have their cake and eat it too. To the man who lifts me up, inspires me daily, helps me bake my cake, then eats it with me! Thayne, I didn't know what love was until I met you. To the daring ones. Be bold, be different, be YOU.

CustomHer Experience by Katie Mares

This book is dedicated to the victims of ‘Operazione Brushwood,’ 23 October 2007–‘a farce with devastating effects.’

A Visible Darkness by Michael Gregorio

For Dad, Dadoo, The Father. I bet you never expected to have a gay vampire romance dedicated to you as a birthday present, but here it is. Thanks for always loving and supporting the wacky daughter you got instead of trying to make me into someone else. Love. Always.

Blood Bound by Kayla Brooks

Dedicated to my parents Norma and Lindsay McCallum; my husband Ian Stewart and our children Paul, Adam and Isabel; and the real whaling families of Arapawa Island past and present – all heroes in their own lives.

Blue by Mary McCallum

To my mother, Kay Barker, who told me the teacup story and taught me to live it. Thank you for praying this verse over my life.

8 Great Dates for Moms and Daughters by Dannah Gresh

For Riley, my reason for everything that I do. For every reader who thinks they’ll never find a person they’re compatible with—your person is out there. For every reader who loves the hurt/comfort trope with a dreamy Papa thrown in…

Rico by T.O. Smith

‘Dandelion Wishes’ is dedicated to Coral, the magnificent woman we were privileged to know as ‘Mum’, and to all the courageous mothers whose hearts ache eternally for their forfeited, but never forgotten, children.

Dandelion Wishes : The Untold Story of Coral Maxwell-King by Lisa King

Steven Jerry Newport, my husband, my best friend, and a wonderful father to our children, 1950 to 2016. This book is dedicated to my husband and best friend, Steven Jerry Newport, who fought with all his might against early-onset Alzheimer’s disease but lost the battle on January 2, 2016. This book is also dedicated to the memories of Richard L. Veech, MD, D.Phil., Theodore B. VanItallie, MD, and George Cahill, Jr., MD: three extraordinary ketone researchers whose studies and writings were instrumental in Steve’s recovery and better life.

Clearly Keto by Mary T. Newport

To my parents, Selma and David, and my sister Stephanie, counselors who feelingly persuade me what I am And to Lisa, whom I love

By Force of Arms by James L. Nelson

PapaMaa, RupenPushpa my eternal ShivaShakti

Ashramed by Dahlia Sen Oberoi

For Sam, world’s best electric guitar player, and for Hugh, who made us get a dog. (We don’t know what took us so long!)

The Year the Swallows Came Early by Kathryn Fitzmaurice

For the tender-hearted, broken by the state of the world. For those committed to unseen, often silent, acts of bravery, willing to stand within what is difficult and unknown. To those who choose to live in vibration with a better world, who are stewarding its arrival. For you.

Black Climates by Selina Nwulu

To my dad, who I miss so much, and to Shara for giving me Jesse, our little son, whom my father would so adore.

Facing the Frozen Ocean by Bear Grylls

For Nova one bright shining pearl Not knowing the name of the tree, I stood in the flood of its sweet smell. Basho

Buddhist Stories for Kids by Laura Burges

For Mom and Dad, for never laughing at me for wanting wings of my own

Carmer and Grit, Book One: The Wingsnatchers by Sarah Jean Horwitz

Anyone who suffers from depression. Anyone who knows someone who suffers from depression. Anyone who has lost someone to this illness. Anyone who works to eliminate the stigma associated with suicide. Anyone who helps to raise awareness for this disease. We are the voice, and we need to be heard.

Speechless by Nicole Edwards

To Aran—the answer is four foot six, except when it’s turnip. True story.

Before the Fall by Francis Knight

To every version of me that didn't make it here. And to the ones who did—thank you for holding the line.

F*ck theTimeline: Essays From a Late-Blooming Life by Lisa M. Jordan

This book is dedicated to those who lost their lives in New York, Washington and Pennsylvania on September 11, 2001, and to those who continuously dedicate their lives to saving others.

9 1/2 Days by Mia Zachary

For my wonderful husband, Jim. Thanks for always saying yes. Yes, you believe in me. Yes, I can do it. Yes, you’ll do the dishes. You are my hero, now and always.

Bachelorette for Sale by Gail Chianese

This novel is dedicated to my daughter Jeslie who gave me purpose beyond what I thought was possible. Dad loves you kiddo!

Casualties of War by Bruce Savage

For my brother. I miss you, Pig-Butt. And to my Prince Charming. Thanks for believing in me when I don’t believe in myself.

Daemon Deception by Mariah Ankenman

For my mother, who gave me life, and for my late husband, Jim, who lives on in my heart. For my three sons, John, Michael and Patrick, my two daughter-in-laws, Julie and Emile, and my two beautiful granddaughters, Chrissy and Francesca. And, finally, from the deepest part of me, this book is for each and every individual who suffered in the Irish industrial school system. For those who made it out and for all those who did not, it is for you, with my love.

Annie's Girl by Maureen Coppinger

To all the girls who could have been Annalise – remember that hope isn’t just for suckers, and that you’re anything but ordinary. To the honorary members of the Kids of Sick Parents Club—I know you’re out there—just hold on tight until you can see the horizon, it comes eventually, I promise you. Share your stories with anyone who’ll listen. To all the women whose strength, vulnerability, and self-sacrifice remains a thing of wonder to me – I’ll never cease to be amazed by you. This is for you all.

Away From Here: A Young Adult Novel by Christopher Harlan

To my beloved wife Yael and our lovely daughter Avia, the light of our lives, who was born the same day that I completed writing the book.

Conflict and Peacemaking in Israel-Palestine by Sapir Handelman

To Renee, my college roommate and dearest friend— for taking my hand that first night of freshman year to make me run across campus with the infamous Stanford Band, and for never letting go of me since and To Tom and Reese— this book and every book

Cloak of Night by Evelyn Skye

To all my exes: Thank you for showing me not to settle for dusty losers like you

Breakup Games by Emily Goodwin

Dedicated with unquantifiable love to my wonderful, wayward children.

Four and a Half Billion People by Catherine Pomeroy

To the little girl I saw on television whose life had just been tragically transformed by a tornado, and whose grief and anger inspired Hallie’s story

Spyhole Secrets by Zilpha Keatley Snyder

To my lover, wife, mistress

Risky Bodies & Techno-Intimacy by Geeta Patel

For Thao, who said, “I think Malachiasz should get a book.”

Blessed Monsters by Emily A. Duncan

For Benjamin the Owl, Katelyn the Magpie, Timothy the Mockingbird, and Beverly, my adventurous nestmate.

Considering Sparrows by Kevin Burrell

for Alex Levine and Joyce Howe who, beginning with the rough patches in graduate school, held me together

Stalin by Stephen Kotkin

For everyone who took one look at Peter Pan and said nah, I’ll take the villain.

Stalking Wendy Darling, a Villain Gets The Girl Fantasy Romance by Leigh Kelsey

This book is dedicated to Damaris, Graham, and Mum and Dad, with all my love and to all the children and young people I have taught and learned from since my first cautious step into a music session 20 years ago, especially those who sang but did not speak.

Developing Early Verbal Skills Through Music by Tracy Jeffery

To the ones who thought they wouldn't make it—but kept breathing anyway. This book is for every soul who's ever stood in the ruins, bruised but unbroken, and whispered, "I will rise."

Rise Again: Turning Pain into Power by David Moore

For Margaryta, the little ghost in my life

The Years Shall Run Like Rabbits by Ben Berman Ghan

To Denise Spellberg: For her mentoring, supported by a dialogue of the mind—and framed by her heart. To the memory of my mother, Manya Bertram: For her life's work of Tikkun Olam based on her authentic, energetic, selfless love for people. And to Armen Aroyan: For the power of his pilgrimages, and for accepting me.

A House in the Homeland by Carel Bertram

To my dad: who was my cheerleader and my role model. Thank you for your wisdom and encouragement and for proving to me that love is more powerful than death. I miss you every day! To my granddad: Thank you for raising Dad and keeping in touch with Margaret’s side of the family. I will always remember you as a kind, soft-spoken gentleman who exemplified integrity. And to Margaret: Thank you for bringing Dad into the world and for inspiring me to tell your story. Though you weren’t here long enough, you left behind an amazing legacy.

Soul Purpose by Diane Cobalt

For Elon. For giving me what I value most. For 32 more years—at least. And…for all the breakfasts.

Change Horizons by Gun Brooke

To toilet paper. We missed you.

Song of Blood by Skye MacKinnon

To all who served in armour, especially those who lost their lives. For heroes have the whole earth for their tomb; and in lands far from their own, where the column with its epitaph declares it, there is enshrined in every breast a record unwritten with no tablet to preserve it, except that of the heart.

British Armoured Divisions and Their Commanders, 1939–1945 by Richard Doherty

To Arlone, my wife, whose tolerance and patience while listening to these stories over and over through the years was above and beyond the call of duty … and matrimony. Also, to all those students who left my physics classes bewildered.

Shaggy Dogs Are Punny Tales by Gene Child

Till Hesekiel It was better when we were together in one body. Thirty years. Screened through the green glass of your eye, moonlight filtered into my bones as we lay in the big bed, in the dark, waiting for my father.

Bestiarium by Mare Kandre

The blazing love of my two sons: Brandon Clay White George Thomas White My two sisters: Robin and Sheryl In Memory of George and Dorothy Daigle Greenfield, my parents. You are missed so much.

Bitter Chocolate by Dawn Greenfield Ireland

For Niall and all of my family on both sides of the Veil

Song of Mirth and Mayhem by Kathy A Hurley

In memory of Maximilien Robespierre, our Liberator, who still makes the powerful tremble. Smuggle out the truth, pass it through all the obstacles that its enemies fabricate; multiply, spread by all means possible her message so that she may triumph; through zeal and civic action counterbalance the influence of money and the machinations lavished on the propagation of deception. That, in my opinion, is the most useful activity and the most sacred duty of pure patriotism. —MAXIMILIEN ROBESPIERRE

Cuba, the Media, and the Challenge of Impartiality by Salim Lamrani

This work is dedicated to Bishop Denis Mary Bradley, who lit the candle of faith that we, please God, keep aflame.

Catholic New Hampshire by Barbara D. Miles

For Kaleb, oldest son of mine, full of intelligence and creativity, truth and design

Adoring Addie (The Courtships of Lancaster County Book #2) by Leslie Gould

For Ken — godfather in a million

Stalking Horse by Terence Strong

To Jeremy, for believing even when I didn’t.

Build You Up by Claudia Ambrose

This book is dedicated to Frank N. Furter Nietzsche Weisbard, aka Frankie You ain’t nothin’ but a Maltipoo

Hound Dog by Eric Weisbard

Chief Life Officer is dedicated to the co-owners of the best We, Inc in the universe – my husband, Kent, and my three children, Chelsea, Devon and Holden. They are my CEO Roundtable.

C.L.O., Chief Life Officer by Amy Remmele

To Kristen my favorite poem

A Small Cup of Light by Ben T. Palpant

To my mother Marta, to my father Isaac. To the pride and joy they would have experienced if they had read this book.

Childhood, Education and Philosophy by Walter Kohan

To everyone who needs a laugh or a smile or just some glorious silliness To Becca Thank you for all your friendship and the challenge that sparked this story. I managed to add a kitchen sink

All That Glitters by S.L. Dove Cooper

For my father, mother, and Uncle Dean Cavanaugh, who showed me the history that led to the life I live and love For Jack Cook, my brother from another mother, who has always had my back For Jeff and Annelizabeth Pullman, dear friends who have given me the space to write and build the best memories of my life And especially for Gus, the best plumber in New Jersey, whose love of country and sense of loyalty has no peer. Yours is the purest American heart I’ve ever met. They say history cannot be changed by a single human being. If they only knew.…

Fifty-Three Days on Starvation Island by John R Bruning

To Nonna Mimma Forever in My Mountain

Chasing the Mafia by Anna Sergi

To Amelia, I didn’t forget my promise. This book is for you.

Branded by SHE

Toby Malone: To my dramaturgy mentor, the late, great Iris Turcott. Iris trusted me, an apprentice dramaturg, to offer my opinion on a cut when she had every right to expect I was just there to make coffee. What’s more, she applied what I offered and kept asking what I thought. Iris encouraged me to take risks, ask questions, and to fearlessly challenge what was expected. Aili Huber: To the Pigeon Creek Shakespeare Company where I got my start cutting plays. Your kindness, insight, and patience made learning the hard way easy.

Cutting Plays for Performance by Toby Malone

Thank you... To all the evaluation, training, and HPT practitioners whose shared wisdom, experience, and humor fired the creation of this book To family and friends who adapted to my schedule during the creation process Joan Conway Dessinger To my teachers, who inspire me... To my students, who challenge me... To my friends and fellow practitioners, who make evaluation work... And to Midnite Moseley, for unconditional love, the fond and funny memories, and the once-in-a-lifetime friendship he shared... My sincere thanks James L. Moseley

Confirmative Evaluation by Joan C. Dessinger

For my parents, always remembered. For my siblings, holding us together. For my children, original and bonus, keeping me honest. For my friends, I don’t tell you often enough. And for wifey, there are no words. You are all loved more than you know. L’Chaim.

Right Back Where I Started: A Memoir in Music by Itkin

To Jane Austen. Without you paving the way, this chick writer would not be here.

Definitely, Maybe in Love by Ophelia London

To Hailey, Kyana, Leah, Ireland, Lily, Sophie, Lyla, Beth, Sadie, Julie and so many more. This book is dedicated to you and to all the girls I have had the honour of teaching, coaching and mentoring. May you always find the courage to seek out your true selves, embrace your strengths, and chase your dreams. The journey of self-discovery is a beautiful adventure, you are capable of achieving anything you set your heart to. With love, T-Dawg

Camp PowHer: The Summer I Found Me by Eshe Arden

To Liam and Lewis Oliver – two little boys who changed my life for the better.

Britain's Railways in the First World War by Michael Foley

For Lily, Jade, and Tao, our young friends, who are growing up in a new China

China's Megatrends by John Naisbitt

This book is dedicated to the memory of my mother, who once told me my books would be enjoyed by hundreds of thousands of people worldwide. I laughed, Mum, but you were right!

A Country Miss in Hanover Square by Anne Herries

For Oliver, Eli and Karenna ...again and always

Seven Minutes to Noon by Katia Lief

For Nicky For everything, but especially the fun

A Practical Guide to Philosophy for Everyday Life by Trevor Curnow

For all the young people who feel as if no one’s paying attention, I wish you at least one person who will listen and make your life better.

Catching Fireflies by Sherryl Woods

For the people I keep and the ones I couldn’t. With my unending love.

Home of the American Circus by Allison Larkin

This book is dedicated to all those who have felt marginalized or unheard within the Christian community. To the brave souls who challenge the status quo and advocate for a faith that embraces diversity, equity, and inclusion, your courage paves the way for a more loving and accepting world. To the next generation, may you find inspiration and strength in these pages to continue breaking barriers and building bridges of understanding. Let this work serve as a testament to the transformative power of inclusive teachings and the boundless love of Christ that transcends all differences.

Breaking Barriers by Yonatan Abera

For my twin sister, Lynn, A part of me like the sun in the sky.

Shadows on the Heart by Elizabeth Oldham

This book is dedicated to my own circle of friends — Joy, Theresa, Harriett and Kate. You are my anchors.

Canned Good by Sabrina Stephens

With special thanks to my extremely patient and understanding husband. Without your help and support, I couldn’t have pursued my dream job of becoming a writer. You’re my sounding board, my idea man, my critique partner, and the absolute best research assistant a girl could ask for. Love you!

Rogue Wolf by Paige Tyler

Dedicated to the Ayurvedic explorer of the new age

The Modern Ayurveda by Unknown author

This book is dedicated to Carol, the girl with the picnic basket.

A Sociological Analysis of Incipient Totalitarianism in the United States by Brendan Maguire

To Pierre Paul, for your inspiration and labor. So glad we share a birthday, and I’d share cake if I could. Leonard L. LaPointe To Kyle, Jordan, and Harrison. Your constant love and support means the world to me. Julie A.G. Stierwalt

Aphasia and Related Neurogenic Language Disorders by Unknown author

For the students and teachers of Crystal Springs Uplands School, class of 1982, in particular for the head of the English Department— Mrs. Norma Fifer. Truly an inspirational teacher.

An Impulsive Debutante by Michelle Styles

Lany Montgomery Unparalleled apple pie Jean-Marie Montgomery Epitomical barbecues and consummate salad dressing Laurence Montgomery The best of all possible hachis Parmentier

A Gastronomic Vade Mecum by John Warwick Montgomery

For all those who have the courage to stand up to bullies and tyrants

An Introduction to the Psychodynamics of Workplace Bullying by Sheila White

To Neil, the best support a writer could ask for and the funniest gag writer I know. None of this would be possible without you.

Horace & Bunwinkle: The Case of the Fishy Faire by PJ Gardner

To my sons, Bryan Rawles and Eli Bristol Davis, for walking me down this road —L A U R A D A V I S To my children, Lee John, Calvin Lee, and Maya Nell, for keeping me honest —J A N I S K E Y S E R

Becoming the Parent You Want to Be by Laura Davis

This book is dedicated to our families, who instilled in us the desire to succeed and to encourage others to do the same. The book is also dedicated to parents, preservice and experienced teachers, administrators, researchers, school board members, community leaders, teacher educators, and policymakers, who must work together for the success of all children, especially African American children.

Change Is Gonna Come by Patricia A. Edwards

To the residents of Maine, who take good care of the most beautiful place we know. —NE and CT

Explorer's Guide Maine Coast & Islands: Key to a Great Destination by Nancy English

For everyone who believes in giving love a second chance.

Ain't Misbehavin' by Renee Conoulty

For Jordan—who sees...

An Amish Match on Ice Mountain by Kelly Long

To the next generation of science learners, including Lucy, Zach, and Lottie.

Sensemaking in Elementary Science by Unknown author

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

29. Only 17% of all 64-bit Integers are products of two 32-bit integers

Source: https://lemire.me/blog/2026/05/22/only-17-of-all-64-bit-integers-are-products-of-two-32-bit-integers/
Site: lemire.me
Submitter: sebg (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-28 16:11 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 206 points · 94 comments

Scrape failed: http 403

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

30. Ask HN: Who wants to be hired? (June 2026)

Source: https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=48357724 (Hacker News text post)
Site: news.ycombinator.com
Submitter: whoishiring (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-01 15:00 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 99 points · 280 comments

Share your information if you are looking for work. Please use this format:

  Location:
  Remote:
  Willing to relocate:
  Technologies:
  Résumé/CV:
  Email:

Please only post if you are personally looking for work. Agencies, recruiters, job boards,
and so on, are off topic here.

Readers: please only email these addresses to discuss work opportunities.

Searchers: try https://nthesis.ai/public/hn-wants-to-be-hired, https://www.wantstobehired.com.

