Hacker News Top 30 — 2026-06-30

Generated on 2026-06-30 03:15 UTC

1. Qwen 3.6 27B is the sweet spot for local development

Source: https://quesma.com/blog/qwen-36-is-awesome/
Site: Quesma Inc.
Author: Piotr Migdał
Published: 2026-06-29
HN activity: 660 points · 529 comments
Length: 1.4K words (~7 min read)
Language: en

I’ve been disappointed by local models in the past. But then I checked Qwen 3.6, and I was in awe. For me it’s the first local model that actually makes sense as a general intelligence.

It comes in two variants, a mixture-of-experts model Qwen 3.6 35B A3B, and a dense Qwen 3.6 27B - slower, but more powerful. The one I recommend!

Let me share my impressions, and show that you can run it too.

It’s hot, literally. When my knees started to melt, I grabbed a phone-attached thermal camera and took a photo.

Qwen 3.6, rightfully, got a lot of coverage on Hacker News. The most common statement about Qwen 3.6 27B is that it punches above its weight - see Will it Mythos?. And I think it is a well-deserved sentiment. It will make your computer hot, but it’s worth it!

Testing the waters

Simon Willison uses “penguins on a bicycle” as a smoke test (see for Qwen 3.6 35B A3B and then Qwen 3.6 27B). I usually go with constrained writing.

A year ago these kinds of things were state of the art, needing a unique, and insanely expensive GPT-4.5, see vibe translating Quantum Flytrap.

I also asked it to write an 8 line poem about Zouk dance and quantum physics, see the transcript. The thought process made sense, both in terms of deliberation on quantum terms, and rhymes.

Then I asked in OpenCode to create a hexagonal minesweeper using pnpm. It worked:

It worked on the first go, from a single prompt, with a proper Node package. The mixture-of-experts Qwen 3.6 35B A3B was faster… but ignored my instruction to create a package, and did it in a single index.html.

Real work

Sure, creative writing about quantum mechanics, or yet another clone of a minesweeper, is rarely a day job. But Qwen 3.6 27B is decent at regular tasks as well.

Prompt by a friend, Maciej Cielecki, at AI Tinkerers Warsaw.

It worked for a few minutes and created this:

By standards of current frontier models, it’s unremarkable. But it is already a practical job. It worked, was reactive, defaults were nice - all from a single, short prompt.

Running Qwen 3.6 locally with llama.cpp

Running local models is easier than ever. A few CLI lines and you’re off.

I recommend llama.cpp - a direct, open source tool that allows running models on various devices. You don’t need Ollama, and frankly - I would recommend against using that on ethical grounds.

First, we go to Hugging Face, to get proper quantization, i.e. a model with reduced size - popular ones are by unsloth or bartowski, among others. Default models usually come with BF16 precision. A common 8-bit quantization saves half the space at almost no cost to quality. Going further down the road, models are smaller (and potentially - faster), but at the cost of quality, see this comparison for 27B and another one for 35B A3B.

We grab unsloth/Qwen3.6-27B-MTP-GGUF:Q8_0, an 8-bit quantization with support for multi-token prediction (MTP).

llama-server -hf unsloth/Qwen3.6-27B-MTP-GGUF:Q8_0 \
    --spec-type draft-mtp -ngl 999 -fa on -c 65536 --port 8080

What it does:

-hf unsloth/Qwen3.6-27B-MTP-GGUF:Q8_0 grabs from Hugging Face, on the next runs will reuse that
-m ~/models/Qwen3.6-27B-Q8_0.gguf use instead if you already have it
draft-mtp we use a fast model to predict subsequent tokens, speeds up things
-ngl 999 for putting all layers to GPU
-fa on flash attention is on
-c 65536 context size set to 64k tokens (this we can tweak, as Qwen 3.6 27B native context is 256k)
--port 8080 better to pin port, as it will be used by other configs

If you open http://127.0.0.1:8080, you can directly chat with it.

Precisely the same server can be used for vibe coding. Choice of agent depends both on one’s goal and subjective taste - for an all-around OpenCode, minimalistic Pi, and self-improving Hermes.

For OpenCode, it is as simple as adding to ~/.config/opencode/opencode.jsonc:

{
  "$schema": "https://opencode.ai/config.json",
  "provider": {
    "llama": {
      "name": "llama.cpp (local)",
      "npm": "@ai-sdk/openai-compatible",
      "options": {
        "baseURL": "http://127.0.0.1:8080/v1",
        "apiKey": "local"
      },
      "models": {
        "qwen3.6-27b": { "name": "Qwen3.6-27B Q8 +MTP" }
      }
    }
  },
  "model": "llama/qwen3.6-27b"
}

If you just want to chat and are a big fan of Terminal, instead of llama-server use llama-cli:

 llama-cli -hf unsloth/Qwen3.6-27B-MTP-GGUF:Q8_0 \
                -ngl 999 -fa on -c 65536

Measuring performance

Is it fast enough?

I ran a few tests (source is here) on my Macbook Max M5 128 GB, running it with and without multi-token prediction, and comparing both with the 35B A3B model, and also a quantized DeepSeek V4 Flash version DwarfStar4.

tokens / s

RAM

Qwen3.6-35B-A3B · 8-bit

MLX

85 tok/s 85

37 GB RAM 37 GB

llama.cpp

93 tok/s 93

44 GB RAM 44 GB

llama.cpp + MTP

105 tok/s 105

45 GB RAM 45 GB

Qwen3.6-27B · 8-bit

MLX

17 tok/s 17

28 GB RAM 28 GB

llama.cpp

18 tok/s 18

41 GB RAM 41 GB

llama.cpp + MTP

32 tok/s 32

42 GB RAM 42 GB

DeepSeek-V4-Flash · Q2–Q4

llama.cpp

33 tok/s 33

103 GB RAM 103 GB

30 tokens per second is not bad, well within typical frontier model API range. While mlx-lm is precisely targeted at Apple Silicon devices, and AI agents heavily recommend it, llama.cpp turned out to be faster. It was using 95% of GPU, which means it is efficiently using available resources.

Macbook Max M5 is a beast (at least for a laptop), but on other devices it should also work decently. As you can see, both Qwen 3.6 variants run within 48 GB of Apple Silicon’s shared RAM. On consumer Nvidia RTX cards, you need to quantize more aggressively — but inference runs even faster.

I set this up today on my 5090 at Q6_K quantization and Q4_0 KV, got 50 tokens/s consistently at 123k context, using ~28/32gb vram through LM Studio. - gfosco on the Hacker News

While 35B A3B is 3x faster, I prefer 27B. I’d rather generate a third as much code, but of higher quality.

How do they relate to previous state of the art models?

Manual inspection is great, but benchmarks help with grounding intuitions. Here is the score from Artificial Analysis, comparing it with frontier models:

Gemma 4 31B

29

≈ late 2024

o1 / Claude 3.5 Sonnet

Qwen3.6-35B-A3B

32

≈ early 2025

o3 / Claude 4 Sonnet

Qwen3.6-27B

37

≈ mid 2025

GPT-5 / Claude Sonnet 4.5

DeepSeek-V4-Flash

40

≈ late 2025

GPT-5.2 / Claude Opus 4.5

A few more benchmarks are in these notes, but the spirit is similar. Added here Gemma 4 31B, as a lot of people use this as the default for local coding. But both benchmarks and general sentiment online favour Qwen 3.6 27B by a large margin.

Here there is a caveat - 8-bit quantization likely does not affect results much, but DwarfStar4 uses much more aggressive ones for DeepSeek V4 Flash, 2-4 bit. For sure it is worse than the full model. My personal impression is that within these quantizations Qwen 3.6 27B is as good as (or maybe slightly better than) DwarfStar4. Though, I won’t be surprised if for longer context projects DS4 has an edge.

What’s next

I think we are entering a fascinating era, when it becomes feasible to run one’s own models.

The change will be propelled further by the state of proprietary frontier models. Claude Fable 5 was taken down. Other frontier models run at a massive subsidy, where paying $100 a month gives us thousands worth in tokens. Let’s use the discount while it lasts!

A locally set model can be fine-tuned to our needs, and cannot be taken away. Businesses can use them for proprietary and sensitive data. We can use them personally for offline projects, or when we don’t feel comfortable sharing our deepest secrets, or medical data, with the US or China.

With the release of frontier-level open-weight GLM 5.2, there is a new era. While Qwen 3.6 was the stepping stone, even frontier GLM 5.2 can be run locally. It won’t run on your Macbook or a single RTX 5090. But still, it is manageable with a company budget.

Moreover, I strongly believe that we will have models smarter than current state of the art, while runnable on local devices, maybe even smartphones. Current models combine both raw intelligence and factual knowledge in the same weights. Future models will likely separate that, offloading a lot of knowledge to tool calling.

Discuss on Hacker News, LinkedIn, or X.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

2. .self: A new top-level domain designed to support self-hosting

Source: https://hccf.onmy.cloud/2026/06/21/reclaiming-our-digital-selves-hccfs-vision-for-a-human-centered-top-level-domain/
Site: hccf.onmy.cloud
Submitter: HumanCCF (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-29 19:49 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 368 points · 203 comments
Length: 96 words (~1 min read)
Language: en-US

The Internet is the most powerful communication tool ever created, yet the infrastructure underpinning it has been leveraged by the tech industry to extract our data and exploit our attention. The Human-Centered Computing Foundation seeks to change this dynamic by creating an alternative architecture for the web. As an approved participant in ICANN’s Applicant Support Program (ASP), we are officially launching our campaign to secure a new Top-Level Domain (TLD) dedicated entirely to ethical, human-centered technology.

To explore our vision for how a human-centered TLD would function, read, download, and share our full initiative overview below:

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

3. Free the Icons

Source: https://weblog.rogueamoeba.com/2026/06/26/free-the-icons/
Site: weblog.rogueamoeba.com
Submitter: zdw (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-27 15:05 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 262 points · 67 comments
Length: 642 words (~3 min read)

Posted By Paul Kafasis on June 26th, 2026

With last year’s release of MacOS 26 (Tahoe), Apple made a mess of app icons. In the first betas of MacOS 27 (Golden Gate), however, there are signs of a turnaround. We’re urging Apple to continue making improvements, by restoring the ability for MacOS app icons to have distinct shapes.

Apple’s Liquid Glass App Icons

In Tahoe, Apple modified the icons for dozens of their first-party apps to give them a “Liquid Glass” appearance. The changes were a substantial regression, leading to blurry, dumbed-down icons.

With the recently unveiled Golden Gate, Apple has again updated their MacOS app icons. This time, however, the changes are genuine improvements. Here’s the refined Automator icon, for example:

The newer icon is sharper, with superfluous Liquid Glass removed. Dozens of Apple’s apps have seen similar updates. The result is that Golden Gate’s icons are superior to Tahoe’s, as this comparison from Basic Apple Guy shows. Seeing these improvements led me to think about another fix Apple should make in MacOS.

The Problem of Tahoe’s Dictated Squircles

With the Tahoe release, Apple didn’t just mess with their own icons. They also dictated the shape of every third-party app icon, forcing them to adopt the same prescribed squircle. Any icon that failed to do so found itself shrunk down and imprisoned in an ugly gray background, in order to fit Apple’s desired aesthetic.
Audio Hijack’s icon as it used to appear, and in Tahoe icon jail

To avoid this icon jail, developers were forced to redesign their icons to match Apple’s preferred form. After decades of beautiful, memorable Mac icons in varying shapes, Tahoe flattened personality to obtain bland uniformity. The platform is worse for it.

Past icons weren’t just more expressive. They were also more usable. Having distinct shapes provided a useful way to tell icons apart. Tahoe eliminates that cue by forcing everything into the same squircle, leaving color as the primary way to tell icons apart at a glance.

That falls down if you’ve got color vision deficiency, or even just multiple icons with similar color schemes.1 I’m looking at you, Slack and Photos. I have to look closely, because it’s so difficult to tell you apart now.

It Doesn’t Have to Be Like This

Apple’s prohibition on shapes is a step backward for both usability and creativity in app icons. Icons are now harder to distinguish because they’re no longer allowed to be distinctive. But there’s no technical reason for it. Apple could, and should, once again allow icons to take on a wide variety of shapes.

It’s clear that some people within Apple recognize that the transition to Liquid Glass introduced mistakes. They also appear to have the authority to fix those mistakes. Refinements to Apple’s own icons in Golden Gate are a welcome course correction, as is the much-celebrated Liquid Glass opacity slider. It’s time to correct the mistake of banning icon shapes as well.2

Apple should stop forcing every icon into the same squircle. Let’s return to a world of gorgeous app icons like these:

Free the icons.

With color now so critical to tell icons apart, it should be no surprise that the new “Clear” and “Tinted” icon styles added in Tahoe are seeing so little uptake. As Adam Engst noted, “[I]t’s nearly impossible to identify a particular app when they’re all clear or tinted squircles, as you can see below. My brain just shuts down when it sees them.”

I’m not sure this “Tinted” style would be a good idea even if these icons had distinct shapes, but I know it’s a very bad one given their uniformity. ↩︎

For folks within Apple, this was feedback filed as FB23388490 (“Third-Party App Icons Should Not Be Restricted to Apple’s Dictated Squircle Shape”). I imagine it is a duplicate many times over. ↩︎

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

4. Memory Safe Context Switching (longjmp, setjmp) in Fil-C

Source: https://fil-c.org/context_switches
Site: fil-c.org
Submitter: modeless (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-30 00:38 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 49 points · 19 comments
Length: 4.5K words (~20 min read)
Language: en

Support for ucontext APIs is new since release 0.680. If you want to play with setcontext, getcontext, makecontext, and swapcontext then you have to build from source.

This document describes how Fil-C supports longjmp, setjmp, setcontext, getcontext, makecontext, and swapcontext in a totally memory-safe way. In particular, no misuse of those APIs in Fil-C can lead to stack corruption or any other violation of Fil-C's capability model.

These APIs are widely used:

longjmp and setjmp are used in C programs to implement exception handling. It's especially common to use them to implement exceptions "thrown" from signal handlers.

getcontext, setcontext, makecontext, and swapcontext (aka the ucontext APIs) are used to implement coroutines and fibers. For example, Boost uses ucontext as part of its fiber implementation.

The ucontext APIs are less commonly used than longjmp/setjmp and some OSes (like Darwin) have deprecated them. However, they remain well supported in glibc.

Implementing these APIs in a way that preserves memory safety is hard since their misuse can result in restoring a dangling stack. For example, you could either setjmp or getcontext within some function, and then do any of the following things:

Return from that function. At this point, the context that was saved will attempt to restore a stack frame that no longer exists.

Exit from the thread. At this point, the context that was saved will attempt to restore execution on a stack that has been freed.

Even more friendly APIs like makecontext and swapcontext can be straightforwardly misused:

You can use makecontext to create a context that points to some stack, then free that stack, and then either swapcontext or setcontext to that context. In Yolo-C, this will result in running on a dangling stack. Fil-C makes this not an error.

You can call swapcontext with the second argument being the context that is currently executing. This might happen if you confuse the first and second arguments. In Yolo-C, in the best case, this will behave like a longjmp; in the worst case, it will result in executing on a dangling stack. In Fil-C, this is a safety error that panics your program.

In Yolo-C, execution on a dangling stack results in the most confusing kinds of crashes, since the debugger won't even be able to print a stack trace! Worse, if the program has subtle bugs in its handling of contexts, then an attacker could exploit those bugs to cause the program to do whatever the attacker likes. In Fil-C, execution on a dangling stack is not possible: all such cases are either panics at the point where you misused longjmp or one of the ucontext APIs, or they are reliably legal execution because of how Fil-C manages stacks.

Fil-C implements setjmp/longjmp and the ucontext APIs quite differently.

Making setjmp/longjmp Memory Safe

There is an impressive amount of depth to the depravity of setjmp. Before going into the details of how Fil-C implements setjmp/longjmp, we need to discuss exactly what makes this function so amazingly evil.

setjmp saves the context as it was at the moment when it was called so that when longjmp is called later, setjmp will return a second time. It is the fact that it returns twice that makes it so vile, and so we need to understand the implications precisely.

An Example

Consider this simple program:

#include <setjmp.h>
#include <stdio.h>

int main(int argc, char** argv)
{
    volatile int x = 42;
    jmp_buf jb;
    if (setjmp(jb)) {
        printf("x = %d\n", x);
        return 0;
    }
    x = 666;
    longjmp(jb, 1);
    printf("Should not get here.\n");
    return 1;
}


This program prints:

x = 666


And then exits. The flow is:

On the first call to setjmp, it returns 0 and saves its caller's context in jb.
Then we set x to 666 and longjmp to jb with the value 1.
setjmp returns 1, so we printf and exit.

Note that we have to mark x as volatile for the program to reliably print 666. Otherwise, the compiler is allowed to optimize the access to x and have it return 42 instead. This might happen in the following ways:

The compiler could constant fold x to 42. This will happen in the example if we remove volatile and use any optimization level above -O0. Then x = 42 gets printed.
Say that constant folding doesn't happen, maybe because we insert a asm("" : "+r"(x)) right after the definition of x. In that case, the compiler could register-allocate x in a callee-save register, in which case the register ends up saved by setjmp. This also leads to x = 42 being printed.
Say that we experience register pressure for some reason, and x doesn't make it into a callee-save register, but instead gets spilled. At any optimization level above -O0, the compiler will split x into two variables: one for x = 42 and one for x = 666, and the printf will reference the first one (since x = 42 dominates the printf). Those two variables will almost always get separate spill slots. Hence, when we come out of the setjmp the second time, reading x will still give 42.

Three things to reflect upon:

To get the property that x's value is observed to be 666 in the printf, we need to make sure that the compiler treats x as a stack allocation rather than a variable. Using volatile achieves this. Also, passing a pointer to x to anywhere is likely to accomplish this.
Spill slots are not the same as stack allocations. If a variable is stack-allocated, then it will get one stack allocation. If a variable is spilled, it may get multiple spills (often, a separate spill per assignment).
The compiler is allowed to analyze the lifetime of spill slots and stack allocations. It's allowed to reuse spill slots. How does the compiler know that the x = 42 spill slot should stay alive until the longjmp happens? How come it won't get reused, resulting in x having either 666 or any random garbage when we fall out of the setjmp a second time?

Here's a more diabolical version of the example that triggers spilling of x to two different spill slots (one for 42 and one for 666) in gcc, clang, and filcc.

#include <setjmp.h>
#include <stdio.h>

int main(int argc, char** argv)
{
    int x = 42;
    asm volatile("" : "+r"(x));
    jmp_buf jb;
    int a = 1, b = 2, c = 3, d = 4, e = 5, f = 6, g = 7, h = 9, i = 10;
    /* Force some spilling */
    asm volatile("" : "+r"(a), "+r"(b), "+r"(d), "+r"(e), "+r"(f), "+r"(g), "+r"(h), "+r"(i));
    if (setjmp(jb)) {
        asm volatile("" : "+r"(a), "+r"(b), "+r"(d), "+r"(e), "+r"(f), "+r"(g), "+r"(h), "+r"(i));
        printf("x = %d\n", x);
        return 0;
    }
    x = 666;
    void (*jump)(jmp_buf, int) = longjmp;
    asm volatile("" : "+r"(x));
    asm volatile("" : "+r"(jump), "+r"(a), "+r"(b), "+r"(d), "+r"(e), "+r"(f), "+r"(g), "+r"(h), "+r"(i));
    jump(jb, 1);
    asm volatile("" : "+r"(jump), "+r"(a), "+r"(b), "+r"(d), "+r"(e), "+r"(f), "+r"(g), "+r"(h), "+r"(i));
    asm volatile("" : "+r"(x));
    printf("Should not get here.\n");
    return 1;
}


This program will print x = 42 even though x is not constant folded or register-allocated.

Note that all of the examples so far work in Fil-C. Even the inline assembly that we're using to obfuscate variable values works in Fil-C, and has the desired effect.

What Is Even Happening

Let's take a look at how simple setjmp is by looking at the musl implementation on x86_64:

__setjmp:
_setjmp:
setjmp:
    mov %rbx,(%rdi)         /* rdi is jmp_buf, move registers onto it */
    mov %rbp,8(%rdi)
    mov %r12,16(%rdi)
    mov %r13,24(%rdi)
    mov %r14,32(%rdi)
    mov %r15,40(%rdi)
    lea 8(%rsp),%rdx        /* this is our rsp WITHOUT current ret addr */
    mov %rdx,48(%rdi)
    mov (%rsp),%rdx         /* save return addr ptr for new rip */
    mov %rdx,56(%rdi)
    xor %eax,%eax           /* always return 0 */
    ret


This is only saving the callee-save registers, plus the stack pointer and instruction pointer as they were at the callsite. It's not saving the stack itself.

Later, when longjmp is called, the register state is restored with only one difference: %eax (the return value register) will get the argument passed to longjmp.

Hence, the most basic safety issue with setjmp is that if we call it and then return from the function that had called it, the context saved by setjmp is not valid to longjmp to. Jumping to such a context will result in a torn machine state:

The callee-save registers, stack pointer, and instruction pointer will be exactly as they had been at the time that setjmp had been called.

The stack contents - in particular, the frame that the stack pointer is pointing at - will be whatever they were at the time that longjmp had been called.

longjmp is only safe if it's called at a time when the stack frame used by setjmp could not have possibly been overwritten, since that is the only way to guarantee that the register state restored by longjmp matches the stack frame that the stack pointer points to. The easiest way to guarantee this is to ensure that longjmp is only called from within the function that called setjmp, or from some function called by the function that called setjmp (transitively).

But that's not all!

The compiler has to know that setjmp returns twice to ensure that spill slots are not reused unsoundly. In fact, compilers detect calls to setjmp and treat the functions that call it specially by disabling any optimization that would lead to a reuse of spill slots. This is surfaced a bit to compiler users with the returns_twice attribute.

Let's consider our diabolical example, but with the setjmp call obfuscated:

#include <setjmp.h>
#include <stdio.h>

int main(int argc, char** argv)
{
    int x = 42;
    asm volatile("" : "+r"(x));
    jmp_buf jb;
    int a = 1, b = 2, c = 3, d = 4, e = 5, f = 6, g = 7, h = 9, i = 10;
    asm volatile("" : "+r"(a), "+r"(b), "+r"(d), "+r"(e), "+r"(f), "+r"(g), "+r"(h), "+r"(i));
    int (*setjump)(jmp_buf) = setjmp;
    asm volatile("" : "+r"(setjump));
    if (setjump(jb)) {
        asm volatile("" : "+r"(a), "+r"(b), "+r"(d), "+r"(e), "+r"(f), "+r"(g), "+r"(h), "+r"(i));
        printf("x = %d\n", x);
        return 0;
    }
    x = 666;
    void (*jump)(jmp_buf, int) = longjmp;
    asm volatile("" : "+r"(x));
    asm volatile("" : "+r"(jump), "+r"(a), "+r"(b), "+r"(d), "+r"(e), "+r"(f), "+r"(g), "+r"(h), "+r"(i));
    jump(jb, 1);
    asm volatile("" : "+r"(jump), "+r"(a), "+r"(b), "+r"(d), "+r"(e), "+r"(f), "+r"(g), "+r"(h), "+r"(i));
    asm volatile("" : "+r"(x));
    printf("Should not get here.\n");
    return 1;
}


Now, the results I see are:

With gcc version 11.4.0, the program prints x = 666.
With clang version 14.0.0, the program prints garbage like x = -291233296.
filcc refuses to compile the program. In fact, it ICEs. (Fil-C has a longstanding bug that it emits compile-time diagnostics with internal compiler errors instead of printing something useful.)

The unsafe thing that is happening (and that Fil-C prevents by refusing to compile this program) is that if the compiler compiles a call to setjmp without knowing that it's calling setjmp then the spill slot used by x = 42 might get reused by some other variable in the code after the if (setjmp) { ... }.

Putting It All Together

Fil-C makes longjmp/setjmp memory safe by ensuring that:

The jmp_buf just contains a pointer to an opaque zjmp_buf object. The contents of this object cannot be accessed from Fil-C. Only the Fil-C runtime can manipulate it. This works because most code never inspects the innards of jmp_buf (and code that does will not work in Fil-C). Note that if you do overwrite jmp_buf, then you'll most likely cause a Fil-C panic when you try to longjmp, because the internal implementation of longjmp will check that it can load a zjmp_buf from the jmp_buf. There is no way to spoof a zjmp_buf from Fil-C.
It's only possible to mention the setjmp symbol by calling it directly; anything else will ICE the compiler. (And in the future, it might even cause the compiler to emit a proper diagnostic.) This ensures that the compiler's machinery for recognizing setjmp (and inhibiting spill slot reuse) always works.
The setjmp call is compiled to allocate a new zjmp_buf opaque object and to register the zjmp_buf with the stack frame. Each stack frame can tell you the weak set of zjmp_bufs that are valid jump targets for that frame. (It's weak because if the zjmp_buf's are otherwise unreachable, they are removed from that set.)
longjmp panics unless it is called from a stack frame that is an ancestor of a stack frame that considers the zjmp_buf to be valid. This is accomplished by walking the stack and asking each stack frame: do you have my zjmp_buf in your set? Note that repeated setjmps on the same jmp_buf create new zjmp_bufs, and the zjmp_buf is immutable. Hence, membership in the weak set really means that the longjmp call is from an ancestor frame.
The Fil-C implementations of longjmp and setjmp save and restore a lot of internal runtime state, including the state needed to track GC roots. In particular, zjmp_buf holds a copy of the GC roots of the frame at the time that setjmp was called. So long as the zjmp_buf is live, we'll continue to mark those roots.

The sketchiest part of this is that the Fil-C runtime strongly assumes that if a pointer variable was materialized as an SSA value in LLVM IR at the time that the FilPizlonator runs, then longjmping restores that value to the state it had at the time of the setjmp, so long as the setjmp is flagged as returning twice. I have so far confirmed that this is the case, but it's extremely confusing - if there was a bug in my longjmp/setjmp, this is where it would be, and it would manifest as follows: after the longjmp, the GC's view of the stack frame's roots is as if all of the local pointers were restored to their values before the setjmp, but some pointer's value was not restored and has a new value from after the setjmp call but before the longjmp call. Note that you cannot trigger the bug with something like making a pointer volatile, since that causes the pointer to be a stack allocation, not an SSA value - and in that case, my transformation does the right thing (the "pointer" really ends up being an object in the heap, and the SSA value is a pointer to that pointer box).

Assuming my analysis of this hideous abomination is right, these rules are sufficient to allow almost all safe uses of longjmp/setjmp while prohibiting any possible use that corrupts the stack or causes any possible violation of the Fil-C capability model.

Making ucontext Memory Safe

It's almost possible to use setjmp/longjmp in to implement fibers in Yolo-C. But two problems arise if we try to do this:

Fibers need a context switch that simultaneously restores some state (the longjmp) while saving the the state (the setjmp). It's extremely confusing to write this in terms of setjmp/longjmp.
It's not obvious how to bootstrap when we start a new fiber. We want to allocate a stack and produce a jmp_buf that we can longjmp to so that we start running the main function of the newly created fiber.

It turns out you can do this with the sigaltstack hack, but as brilliant as this hack is, folks usually prefer to use the much nicer ucontext APIs:

getcontext snapshots the current state into a context. This is like setjmp, though it's rarely used that way; it's mostly used for prepopulating a ucontext_t before calling makecontext.

setcontext is a one-way context switch to a context (it does not save the state before switching). This is mostly just used for exiting a fiber.

makecontext creates a new context that is bootstrapped to call some main function. In a bizarre twist of history, this function's contract requires a prior call to getcontext even though it mostly overwrites all of the state snapshotted by getcontext. Most modern uses of getcontext are just due to this twist.

swapcontext is a context switch that simultaneously saves the current context to one ucontext_t and switches to another ucontext_t.

Here's an example of how to use this API from the Linux man pages (I made some small changes to reduce its size):

#include <ucontext.h>
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>

static ucontext_t uctx_main, uctx_func1, uctx_func2;

static void func1(void)
{
    printf("func1: swapcontext(&uctx_func1, &uctx_func2)\n");
    swapcontext(&uctx_func1, &uctx_func2);
    printf("func1: returning\n");
}

static void func2(void)
{
    printf("func2: swapcontext(&uctx_func2, &uctx_func1)\n");
    swapcontext(&uctx_func2, &uctx_func1);
    printf("func2: returning\n");
}

int main()
{
    char func1_stack[16384];
    char func2_stack[16384];

    getcontext(&uctx_func1);
    uctx_func1.uc_stack.ss_sp = func1_stack;
    uctx_func1.uc_stack.ss_size = sizeof(func1_stack);
    uctx_func1.uc_link = &uctx_main;
    makecontext(&uctx_func1, func1, 0);

    getcontext(&uctx_func2);
    uctx_func2.uc_stack.ss_sp = func2_stack;
    uctx_func2.uc_stack.ss_size = sizeof(func2_stack);
    uctx_func2.uc_link = &uctx_func1;
    makecontext(&uctx_func2, func2, 0);

    printf("main: swapcontext(&uctx_main, &uctx_func2)\n");
    swapcontext(&uctx_main, &uctx_func2);

    printf("main: exiting\n");
    return 0;
}


This program prints:

main: swapcontext(&uctx_main, &uctx_func2)
func2: swapcontext(&uctx_func2, &uctx_func1)
func1: swapcontext(&uctx_func1, &uctx_func2)
func2: returning
func1: returning
main: exiting


Some notes:

We aren't using setcontext. Lots of users of this API never use setcontext. setcontext is only useful if you're using getcontext/setcontext as replacements for longjmp/setjmp (which I've never seen any code do in the wild), or if you're doing a final context switch away from a context, and so you don't need to save your context.
getcontext only serves one purpose: to initialize those parts of the ucontext_t that makecontext doesn't initialize. The contract here is bizarre. If we don't call getcontext, then we would have to somehow initialize all of the parts of ucontext_t that we're not supposed to know about (fields that are defined in the system header, but that aren't part of the published API). Also, we'd have to remember to initialize uc_sigmask (getcontext initializes it to the current sigmask). On Linux/X86_64, the other fields that getcontext initializes are mostly to do with FPU exception state. The fact that this contract is so opaque is going to help us make this API memory-safe.
Once we start using func1_stack and func2_stack in the contexts, we aren't supposed to rely on their contents anymore. We could read it, but then we aren't guaranteed anything about what is in there. And if we write to it, then all bets are off. In this example, we aren't giving these any guard pages, so these stacks are strictly less secure than the normal kind of stack that a thread gets.
It's purely convention that the first argument of swapcontext is the context that we were running at the time we called it. We could have passed any context that is safe to overwrite. We can see this in the example with the initial swapcontext(&uctx_main, &uctx_func2) call. Here, uctx_main has not been initialized prior to that call, and we're picking it as the context to hold the main thread's context. This is fine.
Note the use of uc_link - this is the context to setcontext to when a context's main function returns.

For making this API memory-safe, we'll focus on the idiom above where getcontext is only for initializing ucontext before a call to makecontext.

Laws For Safe ucontext

Let's enumerate the laws we will enforce for ucontext. Note that these laws are more restrictive than what is strictly necessary to make ucontext memory-safe, but I wanted to start with the most conservative possible implementation that is useful to real users of the API.

Opaque state. We'll repeat the trick we used to make jmp_buf safe: inside the ucontext_t, we'll have a pointer to an opaque zfiber_context object. Fil-C code cannot access zfiber_context except by calling its API in pizlonated_runtime.h.

ss_sp doesn't matter. The implementation completely ignores the stack you provided in the ss_sp field. Internally, zfiber_context will allocate a stack that you cannot see. It will use your ss_size as the size of that stack (but it will add some padding that's necessary for Fil-C's stack overflow handling to work). The stack is allocated when you call makecontext.

zfiber_context has a restricted state machine. The states are:

uninitialized - this is the initial state after a zfiber_context is allocated. It's only legal to call zfiber_context_getcontext or use the context as the from argument (the first argument) to zfiber_context_swapcontext.
after_getcontext - this is the state after getcontext returns. In this state, it's only legal to call zfiber_context_makecontext or use the context as the from argument to zfiber_context_swapcontext.
runnable - these states are the result of calling makecontext or after you pass the context as the from argument to swapcontext. When in this state, it's only legal to call setcontext or use the context as the to argument to swapcontext.
running - this state happens after you start running the context using setcontext or swapcontext. It's only legal to pass the context as the from argument to swapcontext provided that this is the currently running context on the calling thread (each thread tracks the currently running context). Note that some context could be running but we switch away from it either using setcontext or swapcontext with the from argument being some other uninitialized context; in that case the context will remain in the running state forever, since the only thing you can do with a running context is swap from it and that only works if the running context is the currently running one according to the calling thread.

This state machine forbids using ucontext for longjmp/setjmp because you cannot switch to a after_getcontext context. You can only switch to a runnable context, and the only way to get one is to either makecontext a new one or to save the current context using swapcontext.

Thread affinity. The Fil-C ABI threads the filc_thread* through every function call and because the compiler is allowed to expect that no function call can ever change the filc_thread* that we're running on. This means that we cannot allow ucontext to cause a stack that had run on one thread to run on any other thread. Hence, zfiber_context tracks which zthread it was created on and disallows any calls into any zfiber_context API from other threads.

GC Integration

When the GC asks the zfiber_context object to mark its outgoing pointers during the mark phase and the context is runnable, the zfiber_context has to do the equivalent of what threads do when a stack scan is requested during a soft handshake.

But what if the following happens during a single GC mark phase:

The GC marks a runnable zfiber_context and puts it on the mark stack.
The GC pops the zfiber_context from the mark stack and marks its outgoing pointers. Let's say that the context is still runnable. So, we scan its stack.
Mutator switches to that zfiber_context using either setcontext or swapcontext. Now, the zfiber_context is running, so its stack is not visible to the GC. This is fine, since the stack is owned by a thread, and the GC uses grey stacks; i.e. it will always rescan the stacks before declaring termination.
Mutator switches away from that zfiber_context using swapcontext, making the zfiber_context runnable again.

Now we have a problem! The GC was expecting that whatever was on the stack doesn't need to be actively tracked by any barriers because we'll just rescan the grey stacks before termination. But now, that stack is no longer owned by any thread; instead it's owned by a runnable zfiber_context. Worse, that zfiber_context is black: we not only set its mark bit but we already popped it off the mark stack and marked its outgoing pointers - so the GC will not visit it again!

The way we solve this is by tracking grey zfiber_contexts. When we swapcontext from a context during marking, if the context is not already grey, then we add it to the current thread's grey_fibers list and set its grey bit. Whenever a thread is asked to rescan its stack, it reruns the stack walk of every grey fiber in its list, clears the grey bits of those fibers, and clears the list.

There's a fun almost-race at termination that may happen due to the use of soft handshakes. In an on-the-fly GC, we may have the following sequence of events:

The GC runs out of work, so it triggers a soft handshake to scan all stacks.
Thread 1 performs a stack scan, including walking and resetting its grey fibers, and finds no new objects.
Thread 1 swapcontexts to a different context, causing its grey fibers to be nonempty.
Thread 2 performs a stack scan and finds no new objects.
There are no other threads, and since none of the threads found any new objects, the GC declares termination even though thread 1 has a grey fiber.

Currently, we just reset the grey fiber lists after termination. Reason: if thread 1 found no new objects to mark in step 2, thread 2 also found no new live objects, and the GC was out of work in step 1, then there's no way that any other unmarked objects could have been introduced into the context before we swapped from it. This is true because:

Newly allocated objects are marked.
Objects stored into the heap are marked by the barrier at time of store.
The GC having run out of work means all objects that had been marked had all of their outgoing pointers marked.

There's simply no way that thread 1 could have loaded an unmarked pointer from the heap in this scenario!

That being said, if there was a bug in my ucontext implementation, this is where it would be.

Putting It All Together

We only support ucontext APIs in the glibc build of Fil-C. Hence, you get it in /opt/fil and Pizlix, but not in the pizfix. It's implemented as follows:

getcontext allocates a new zfiber_context with zfiber_context_new and calls zfiber_context_bind_sigset (to cause zfiber_context to replicate its internal sigmask with the user-visible uc_sigmask) and then zfiber_context_getcontext.

setcontext calls zfiber_context_setcontext.

makecontext creates its own trampoline that manages passing arguments to the user-passed main function. It also manages handling fiber exit (switching to uc_link or calling exit). Other than that, it just calls zfiber_context_makecontext.

swapcontext mostly just does a zfiber_context_swapcontext. If the from context (aka the oucp) was not initialized, then it allocates a zfiber_context for it using zfiber_context_new and calls zfiber_context_bind_sigset.

Note that Fil-C does not allow using longjmp/setjmp as an alternate context switch path for ucontext. Some software mixes ucontext with longjmp/setjmp, though all cases of this that I've found (OpenSSL, I'm looking at you) has flags to disable the mixing, because Fil-C isn't the only security technology that breaks if you do that.

Conclusion

Fil-C supports memory-safe context switches using either the longjmp/setjmp style and the ucontext style. The ucontext style is new since after version 0.680, so you'll need to build from source to play with it (and it's not yet thoroughly tested). The longjmp/setjmp implementation is older, and probably quite rugged by now.

As this document shows, it's possible to have memory-safe C even if you make the effort to support even the most depraved features!

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

5. Exploring PDP-1 Lisp (1960)

Source: https://obsolescence.dev/pdp1-lisp-introduction.html
Site: obsolescence.dev
Author: Oscar Vermeulen
Submitted: 2026-06-30 00:56 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 22 points · 14 comments
Length: 1.4K words (~7 min read)

WORK IN PROGRESS, THIS IS AMENDED AS I LEARN PDP-1 LISP MYSELF.
But hopefully, it will get you started. Feedback is very much solicited in the Google Group :-)
PDP-1 Lisp: Introduction
Lisp was developed in 1958 by John McCarthy at MIT. It pioneered a high-level, symbolic programming language designed for AI research. Early Lisp introduced key concepts such as recursion, symbolic expressions, and automatic storage management.
The PDP-1 version was implemented in 1960 by Peter Deutsch, the son of a MIT professor but at the time as a 14 year old, still at high school. It is a highly minimalist and efficient Lisp suitable for the tiny PDP-1. Notably, he invented the idea of a read–eval–print loop (REPL, famous to many of us from Python) along the way. In other words, this was the first-ever interactive programming environment — a major innovation and central to Lisp to this day. PDP-1 Lisp evolved Lisp from a theoretical, punch-card loaded language into a practical, interactive tool. A milestone in computing on its own!

This page only gives quick-start instructions for PDP-1 Lisp. Knowledge of Lisp is not required, this only shows how Lisp works on the PDP-1. Useful as a start into the Lisp world - and still interesting even if you do not want to learn more about Lisp itself.

Two manuals will be essential once you delve into more details. The first is the PDP-1 Lisp manual (link) and the second, the original, full-featured Lisp 1.5 Programmer's manual (link) for the IBM 7090, that Deutsch used as his target. The IBM Lisp 1.5 manual gives a good overview of Lisp 1.5 in general, the PDP-1 Lisp manual explains how to use the PDP-1 version - practical operation and language differences.
PDP-1 Lisp is much more tempting than I initially thought... But first, let us do a quick overview of PDP-1 Lisp in practice.
Bringing up Lisp

Set the Extend switch
Be sure to set Extend down again for other PDP-1 programs. READ IN will fail for regular PDP-1 programs with this switch set, a major cause of confusion if you forget.
Mount the lisp.rim tape. Press READ IN.
Set the TW switches to 7750 to define upper memory address for Lisp storage, Press CONTINUE,
Set the TW switches to 400 to define the length of the push down list, Press CONTINUE,
Set Sense Switch 5, to enable typewriter input. Press CONTINUE a third time.
If SS5 is left unset, input will come from a freshly inserted paper tape. So you could mount a paper tape with Lisp functions instead, and press Continue without SS5 being set. We'll come to that later.
You can now work in Basic Lisp for the PDP-1! Some things to know before you proceed:

Always set the Address Switches to 0004 at this point. Because after running a Lisp program you then just press START and CONTINUE to go back in to Lisp.
Also, typos and errors make Lisp come to a halt. That is normal. For instance, type 'nix[space]' instead of 'nil[space]'. In such situations, just press START, then CONTINUE. But make sure the Address switches point to the start location, 4, though.
Lines are not entered by hitting return, but by adding a closing space. So, to see what atomic symbols are defined, type oblist [Space].
Before you do any typing in, it is always useful to see if Lisp is still running! Enter 'nil', which you will always see typed out even if Lisp is not running. But Lisp should respond with a second 'nil' on a new line. If not: START, then CONTINUE. You will probably make a habit of quick 'nil' checks before you enter anything new in PDP-1 Lisp. It is also the best way to start on a new line...
Enter (plus 1 2) outputs 3. Note 'plus' rather than '+'! (times 4 4) correctly outputs 20. Because 20 octal is 16 decimal...
Now, let's enter a little program (use [Return] and [tab] keys when entering the program):

(prog (a b)
	(setq a 4)
	(setq b 4)
	(plus a b)
	(return (plus a b))) 

...and close with a [space]. This will return 10. Because, indeed, 4+4=10 in octal :-)
Loading and saving
Paper Tape Input
Because the Lisp function to actually save your newly created code to paper tape is not built in to Basic Lisp, you will first need to load such a function from paper tape. This is also just the regular way of loading any code in Lisp:

Mount the alphanumeric tape lisp-defs.pt
Set SS5 to down, and straight away the tape gets read in
You will see the newly loaded functions come by in the typewriter output:

zerop 
pdef 
count

Set SS5 to up again for typewriter input
Press START, then CONTINUE. And make sure the Address switches are indeed set to 4.
This is how loading any Lisp code will work. Mount the alphanumeric tape with your functions, set SS5, and see them loaded in. Make a test tape to read in your own functions
First, prepare a little test tape. Paste this in a file called test.lisp on your laptop:


(rplacd (quote tt)  (quote
	(expr (lambda ()
	(prog ()
	(print (quote hello))
	(terpri)
	(return 5))))))
[space] 

Make sure the last line of code has a space at the end of it to terminate the function.
Now make a paper tape image out of this text file, to read in to the PDP-1: encode_fiodec test.lisp test.pt

Mount the alphanumeric tape test.pt
Set SS5 to down, the tape gets read in
You will see the output:

tt 

hello

5

Set SS5 to up again, to revert to typewriter input
Press START, then CONTINUE. And make sure the Address switches are indeed set to 4.
Now, to see the program that was just loaded: (print (cdr (quote tt)))

Contents of the lisp-defs paper tape:

(rplacd (quote zerop) (quote (expr (lambda (n) (eq n 0)))))

(rplacd (quote pdef) (quote (fexpr (lambda (x a) (list (quote r placd) (list (quote quote) (car x)) (list (quote quote) (cdr (ca r x))))))))

(rplacd (quote count) (quote (expr (lambda (n) (prog (u) (setq u n) (cond ((zerop u) (return nil))) (print u) (setq u (plus u ( minus 1))) (go a)))))) Paper Tape Output
(print (cdr (quote tt))) shows the body of the program, but it does not output the function definition! In other words, (rplacd (quote tt) (quote is not printed out. But you want to save the actual program definition on paper tape, so you can load it next time, punching (print (cdr (quote tt))) is not enough.

The solution is the function pdef that we loaded from the lisp-pdefs tape.

Turn up Sense Switch 3 to send output to the punch instead of the typewriter
Type (pdef tt), end with the trailing space character as always, and you see your function punched out to tape.
Turn down Sense Switch 3 to return to typewriter output, and save the paper tape for future use
Closing remark...
Of course, a PDP-1 uses core memory, and core memory is non-volatile. So if you shut down the P(i)DP-1, next time you power up, everything is still in memory. No need to bring up Lisp agin from paper tape. Just set the address switches to 4 and press START, then CONTINUE.

Footnote: a more extensive lispFunctions file is https://bitsavers.org/bits/DEC/pdp1/papertapeImages/20031216/lisp/lispFunctions.bin . As yet untested, many useful functions.
Loading DDT & mixing assembly in Lisp programs
For this, please refer to the PDP-1 Lisp manual (link). By setting a lower top address for Lisp, there is room at the top for DDT to live in. And you can jump from Lisp to DDT using the front panel START switch.
An AI tutor for PDP-1 Lisp
We have created some .md text files that you can literally paste into ChatGPT, Claude Code or any other AI, telling the AI to learn about PDP-1 Lisp and to become your programming aide. Try this! It gives you a very smart side-kick, even if it is not perfect. Just paste one or more of the .md files into the AI, let it process the information, then start asking questions or giving tasks.

PDP1.md: the text you want to paste into your AI as the base PDP-1 expertise.
lisp.md: teach the AI about PDP-1 Lisp
lisp1_5.md: teach the AI about the Lisp 1.5 Programmer's manual

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

6. Why Won't Europe Build AI Data Centers in Iceland?

Source: https://mrkt30.com/why-wont-europe-build-ai-data-centers-in-iceland/
Site: MRKT3.0
Author: Grace Sharp
Published: 2026-06-04
HN activity: 23 points · 16 comments
Length: 1.0K words (~5 min read)
Language: en-US

June 3, Brussels unveiled its grand plan to triple the continent’s data centers and wean itself off American clouds. Yet, roughly 1,800 miles north, an island runs its servers on volcanoes and waterfalls, cools them for free, and hosts 80-150 megawatts of Europe’s AI. Perhaps Europe has less of a power problem, and more of a nerve one.

The Tech Sovereignty Package has been years in the making. The plan works to beef up the Chips Act 2.0, deploy a brand-new Cloud and AI Development Act, name an open-source strategy and (finally) provide Europe’s first ever legal definition of “digital sovereignty.” As Europe continues to lean on non-European suppliers (Amazon, Microsoft and Google run roughly 70% of its cloud), Brussels’ mission now is to decrease this dependency.

So Brussels is reaching for the levers. The revised Chips Act would let the Commission override chipmakers’ supply contracts in a shortage and fine firms up to €300,000 for withholding data. The cloud law would bar US platforms from holding sensitive government information, the kind of move the Netherlands already made when it blocked an American takeover of the company behind its national login system.

It’s bold, and it’s overdue. However, this all rests on one unglamorous thing nobody wants to talk about: electricity, and somewhere to put the servers.

Big Targets, No Sockets

The Cloud and AI Development Act sets a genuinely enormous target. Triple the EU’s data centre capacity within five to seven years with a focus on AI gigafactories and hyperscale sites. This idea sounds fantastic – right up until you ask where the power and the planning permission are coming from.

Because the track record is not encouraging. The EU’s flagship plan for five AI gigafactories is already stumbling. The bidding round slipped from May to July and only two of the five sites can be funded before the next budget cycle in 2028. That’s not looking too promising for Brussels.

Meanwhile the actual money, went somewhere else entirely. SoftBank just committed €75 billion to data centers in France. That means Europe’s largest single AI infrastructure is now tied explicitly to France because the country offered a low carbon grid, cheap land and engineering talent. SoftBank’s deal now dwarfs the entire EU gigafactory program, and both China and the US are still outspending the bloc by a great distance.

So the ambition is real and the appetite is real. The problem is that everyone is hunting for the same thing. Somewhere with a lot of clean cheap power and a climate cold enough to stop the machines melting.

The Answer Could be Up North

Iceland is, on paper, the single best place on Earth to run an AI data centre. The entire country runs on almost 100% renewable energy from geothermal heat straight out of the ground and hydropower. Its naturally cold air means operators get their cooling the single biggest operational headache for AI hardware essentially for nothing. This means no carbon guilt, plus no cooling bill, plus no reason to apologise to anyone’s climate target.

This idea is also not just theoretical, it’s already been happening, just quietly.

Nordic operator Verne and AI hyperscaler Nscale are rolling out around 4,600 Nvidia Blackwell Ultra GPUs across an Icelandic campus, one of the largest liquid cooled installations in Europe. Up in the north a separate venture has signed up to build a 50 megawatt geothermal powered site at Húsavík complete with district heating aiming to become one of Iceland’s first true hyperscale facilities. Operators reckon they can build a bespoke centre in twelve months partly because Nordic governments actually want them there.

$NVDA CEO Jensen Huang says Europe could become a major AI market.

FYI: $NBIS major AI market target is in EU. They have 4 data centers in 4 differencet EU countries: UK, France, Finland, Iceland.pic.twitter.com/7CNtUqDYuS— Parkash Heerani (@HeeraniPK) July 13, 2025

In simple terms… the power is green, the cooling is free, the GPUs work, and the locals are willing. Is Iceland the secret to Europe’s AI sovereignty?

So Why Is Iceland Still a Rounding Error?

For all that natural advantage one industry tracker counts just one tracked AI data centre facility and around 80-150 megawatts of known capacity in the entire country.

In fairness, the island was never going to power all of Europe’s AI by itself. It is small. Its grid is finite, the subsea cables linking it to the mainland are limited, and Icelanders are entitled to ask how much of their cheap clean power should feed foreign server farms rather than homes and industry. So, Iceland alone is not a magic fix for Europe’s energy problem.

But that is not really the argument. The argument is that Iceland is the clearest example of a continent wide pattern. Europe is sitting on a belt of exactly this kind of advantage (Iceland and Norway’s geothermal and hydro the volcanic energy under parts of Italy and Hungary) but treating it as an afterthought instead of a strategic asset.

Europe Has the Power, But It’s Missing the Spine.

The thing slowing Europe down is not a shortage of clean megawatts or clever engineers. It is permitting that drags on for years, transmission lines that never get built, and a reflexive local instinct best summed up by the acronym BANANA (Build Absolutely Nothing Anywhere Near Anything).

You can pass the most ambitious Cloud and AI Development Act in the world. But if it still takes half a decade to approve a power line to a geothermal field you have not created sovereignty. A genuinely serious version of this strategy would treat Iceland, Norway and Europe’s geothermal pockets like the national assets they are.

Instead, Europe is doing the thing it does best… Writing rules.

The technology is not the bottleneck. The geology is not the bottleneck. Europe is the bottleneck. And until that changes sovereign AI will keep meaning what it has always quietly meant on this continent. A brilliant idea, a beautiful document, and somebody else’s data centre doing the actual work.

Grace Sharp

See Also:

Gaia AI Factory: Why EuroHPC Chose Krakow for Europe’s Most Strategic Supercomputer

How Denmark Quietly Became Europe’s AI Powerhouse in 2026

What Is Estonia’s X-Road and Is It Key to Europe’s AI Sovereignty?

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

7. LongCat-2.0, a large-scale MoE model with 1.6T total and 48B Active

Source: https://longcat.chat/blog/longcat-2.0/
Site: longcat.chat
Submitter: benjiro29 (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-30 00:30 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 40 points · 11 comments
Language: en

No extractable content.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

8. Rocketlab acquires Iridium

Source: https://investors.rocketlabcorp.com/news-releases/news-release-details/rocket-lab-acquire-iridium-historic-deal-creating-fully
Site: Rocket Lab Corporation
Submitter: everfrustrated (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-29 14:09 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 379 points · 236 comments
Length: 3.0K words (~14 min read)
Language: en

Unites Rocket Lab's leading launch and satellite manufacturing capabilities with Iridium's global network, spectrum, and experience to unlock critical space applications.

Adds material revenue scale and is significantly accretive to Rocket Lab's cash flow generation and profitability.

LONG BEACH, Calif. and MCLEAN, Va., June 29, 2026 (GLOBE NEWSWIRE) -- Rocket Lab Corporation (Nasdaq: RKLB) (“Rocket Lab”), a global leader in launch and space systems and Iridium Communications Inc. (Nasdaq: IRDM) (“Iridium”), a leading provider of global voice, data, and positioning, navigation, and timing (PNT) satellite services, today announced they have entered into a definitive agreement under which Rocket Lab will acquire Iridium. Rocket Lab will acquire all the outstanding shares of Iridium common stock for $54 per share in a cash and stock transaction. This represents an enterprise value for Iridium of approximately $8.0 billion.

The acquisition will be one of the most transformative deals in the space industry, joining together two innovative American companies to play a leading role in the U.S. space economy. It merges Rocket Lab's leading launch capabilities and satellite manufacturing with Iridium's global satellite communications network, spectrum, and 500-plus strong partner ecosystem to create a competitive, vertically-integrated space company that designs, builds, launches, and operates its own constellations, delivering critical communications capability to millions of users worldwide.

The transaction will give Rocket Lab an immediate foothold in space-based applications, including both proprietary and standards-based satellite Internet of Things (IoT) and direct-to-device (D2D), PNT, and critical safety-of-life services, creating a formidable challenger in the global telecom market. Rather than simply continuing the Iridium network, Rocket Lab will build upon it to scale into untapped markets and pioneer new space-based services to the benefit of global customers.

Iridium’s globally harmonized L-band spectrum and low Earth orbit (LEO) satellite network provide a secure, resilient foundation for reliable satellite communications and PNT services across government, defense, aviation, maritime, and commercial markets. Supporting more than 2.55 million active subscribers worldwide, Iridium delivers highly reliable, weather-resilient connectivity and an alternative PNT architecture for applications where Global Positioning Systema (GPS) and other Global Navigation Satellite Systema (GNSS) are degraded or unavailable. Combining Rocket Lab's launch, spacecraft manufacturing, and space systems expertise with Iridium's global network and L-band spectrum will accelerate innovation, positioning the combined company to support the development and deployment of Iridium's next-generation constellation. This includes direct-to-device (D2D/Iridium NTN DirectSM) services, which will grow into an important new capability for U.S. national security and emergency response, helping to ensure reliable, resilient communications when and where they are needed most, particularly where traditional networks are unavailable or compromised.

"This is a defining moment for the space industry and the start of a new era of strategic, accelerated growth for Rocket Lab and Iridium," said Sir Peter Beck, founder and CEO of Rocket Lab. "Iridium has built the gold standard in secure, safety critical global satellite connectivity. It is relied upon by maritime fleets, the aviation industry, governments, and heavy industrial organizations who operate in the most remote off-the-grid locations. By marrying Iridium's deep heritage, trusted infrastructure, and highly sought-after spectrum with Rocket Lab's extensive and proven launch and manufacturing capabilities, we have the capability to unlock entirely new markets. We will go far beyond maintaining a legacy; we are going to build upon it to pioneer next-generation space applications and deliver sought-after capabilities to existing and new customers."

“As the worlds of space and terrestrial communications continue to converge, more critical services will depend on space-based capabilities,” said Matt Desch, CEO, Iridium. “Success will come from those who can bring new innovations to space quickly and sustain them over time as efficiently as possible. We’re excited about being able to accelerate the next generation of IoT, aviation, maritime, PNT, and national security capabilities, and pursue new innovative applications as part of Rocket Lab - a fully integrated, end-to-end space company. That’s an incredible opportunity for our customers, partners, employees, and stockholders.”

Transaction Highlights:

Strengthens Rocket Lab’s Strategic Vertical Integration: Creates an end-to-end space company spanning launch, spacecraft, spectrum, and on-orbit communications services through a proprietary network. Expected to eliminate third-party launch costs for constellation deployment and replenishment and captures launch margin internally while guaranteeing orbital access as launch capacity tightens, ensuring continuity of service to customers.
Unlocks Entry to Space Applications Market: Provides Rocket Lab with immediate access to a proven constellation of LEO satellites and an established global communications customer base, realizing the company’s long-term strategic vision to expand beyond launch services and spacecraft manufacturing into a vertically-integrated space applications company with recurring revenue from satellite services.
Provides Access to Globally-Coordinated Spectrum: Adds globally-coordinated L-band spectrum that enables reliable user communications.
Unifies Two Trusted Government Partners: The transaction combines two deeply trusted, long-standing defense partners, combining their specialized strengths to deliver highly resilient, next-generation capabilities directly to the warfighter across denied, degraded, and disadvantaged environments.
Accelerates Growth and New Market Opportunities: Positions the combined entity to deliver next-generation satellite communications, resilient PNT, and emerging defense and commercial space services.
Diversifies Financial Profile with Recurring Cash Flow Streams: In 2025, Iridium delivered $871.7M revenue1, $495M OEBITDA1 or 57% OEBITDA margin1, providing substantial recurring cash flow to fund growth.

Transaction Details
Under the terms of the transaction, Iridium stockholders will receive $27.00 in cash and a number of shares of Rocket Lab common stock calculated pursuant to an exchange ratio (subject to a collar) for each share of Iridium common stock outstanding at the closing. The collar is banded from $67.50 to $112.50. The transaction has a notional value of $54.00 per share of Iridium common stock, implying an enterprise value for Iridium of approximately $8.0 billion.

Complete details on the calculation of the exchange ratio will be in the transaction agreement, which will be filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission.

The transaction is expected to be completed in mid-2027, subject to the satisfaction of customary closing conditions, including approval of Iridium stockholders and required regulatory approvals.

The transaction has been unanimously approved by the boards of directors of Iridium and Rocket Lab. Moreover, each director of Iridium holding shares of Iridium common stock has entered into a voting agreement to support the transaction.

As part of the transaction, Rocket Lab has received commitments for a $3.6 billion 364-day senior secured bridge term loan facility from Deutsche Bank and Wells Fargo. Rocket Lab intends to fund the cash component of the transaction through a combination of cash from its balance sheet and other debt and equity financing sources.

Advisors

Deutsche Bank Securities is serving as lead financial advisor and Wells Fargo and PJT Partners as financial advisors, Wilson Sonsini Goodrich & Rosati, P.C. is serving as legal counsel, Goodwin Procter LLP as financing counsel and DLA Piper LLP as regulatory counsel to Rocket Lab. Evercore is serving as exclusive financial advisor, Davis Polk & Wardwell LLP is serving as legal counsel, Wilkinson Barker Knauer LLP is serving as regulatory counsel, and Joele Frank, Wilkinson Brimmer Katcher is serving as strategic communications advisor to Iridium.

Investor Presentation
An investor presentation discussing the transaction is hosted on Rocket Lab’s investor relations website at https://investors.rocketlabcorp.com/

Contacts

Rocket Lab:

Media
Morgan Connaughton
media@rocketlabusa.com

Investor Relations
Patrick Vorenkamp
investors@rocketlabusa.com

Iridium:

Media
Jordan Hassin
Jordan.Hassin@Iridium.com
+1 (703) 287-7421

Investor Relations
Kenneth Levy
Ken.Levy@Iridium.com
+1 (703) 287-7570

About Rocket Lab
Rocket Lab is a leading space company that provides launch services, spacecraft, payloads and satellite components serving commercial, government, and national security markets. Rocket Lab’s Electron rocket is the world’s most frequently launched orbital small rocket; its HASTE rocket provides hypersonic test launch capability for the U.S. government and allied nations; and its Neutron launch vehicle in development will unlock medium launch for constellation deployment, national security and exploration missions. Rocket Lab’s spacecraft and satellite components have enabled more than 1,700 missions spanning commercial, defense and national security missions including GPS, constellations, and exploration missions to the Moon, Mars, and Venus. Rocket Lab is a publicly listed company on the Nasdaq stock exchange (RKLB). Learn more at www.rocketlabcorp.com.

About Iridium Communications Inc.
Iridium Communications Inc. (Nasdaq: IRDM) operates the world's only truly global mobile satellite network, delivering reliable voice, data, and positioning, navigation, and timing (PNT) services anywhere on Earth. Iridium supports safety- and mission-critical operations for diverse markets such as aviation, maritime, government, emergency services, critical infrastructure, autonomous systems, and remote monitoring applications, where connectivity is essential.

Headquartered in McLean, Virginia, Iridium provides its products and services through an ecosystem of 500-plus partner companies around the world. For more information, visit www.iridium.com.

Additional Information and Where to Find It

This communication is being made in respect of a proposed transaction involving Rocket Lab Corporation (“Rocket Lab”) and Iridium Communications Inc. (“Iridium”). In connection with the proposed transaction, Rocket Lab will file with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) a Registration Statement on Form S-4 that includes the proxy statement of Iridium that will also constitute a prospectus of Rocket Lab. When the proxy statement/prospectus is finalized, it will be sent to the stockholders of Iridium seeking their approval of certain transaction-related proposals. This communication is not a substitute for the proxy statement/prospectus or any other documents which Rocket Lab or Iridium may file with the SEC in connection with the proposed transaction.

Rocket Lab may not sell the common stock referenced in the proxy statement/prospectus until the Registration Statement on Form S-4 filed with the SEC becomes effective. The preliminary proxy statement/prospectus and this communication are not offers to sell any securities, are not soliciting an offer to buy any securities in any state where the offer and sale is not permitted and are not a solicitation of any vote or approval.

ROCKET LAB AND IRIDIUM URGE INVESTORS AND SECURITY HOLDERS TO READ THE REGISTRATION STATEMENT ON FORM S-4, THE RELATED PROXY STATEMENT/PROSPECTUS INCLUDED THEREIN AND OTHER DOCUMENTS FILED WITH THE SEC CAREFULLY AND IN THEIR ENTIRETY WHEN THEY BECOME AVAILABLE BECAUSE THEY WILL CONTAIN IMPORTANT INFORMATION ABOUT THE PROPOSED TRANSACTION.

Investors and security holders will be able to obtain these materials (when they are available and filed) free of charge at the SEC’s website, www.sec.gov. Copies of documents filed with the SEC by Rocket Lab (when they become available) may be obtained free of charge on Rocket Lab’s website at https://investors.rocketlabcorp.com/financial-information/sec-filings or by contacting Rocket Lab’s Investor Relations Department at investors@rocketlabusa.com. Copies of documents filed with the SEC by Iridium (when they become available) may be obtained free of charge on Iridium’s website at https://investor.iridium.com/sec-filings by contacting Iridium’s Investor Relations Department at investor.relations@iridium.com.

Participants in the Solicitation

Robert H. Niehaus, Louis M. Alterman, Thomas C. Canfield, Matthew J. Desch, Thomas J. Fitzpatrick, L. Anthony Frazier, Suzanne E. McBride, Eric T. Olson, Kay N. Sears, Monique S. Shivanandan and Jacqueline E. Yeaney, all of whom are members of Iridium’s board of directors, and Vincent J. O’Neill, Iridium’s chief financial officer, may be considered participants in Iridium’s solicitation. Information regarding such participants, including their direct or indirect interests, by security holdings or otherwise, will be included in the proxy statement/prospectus and other relevant documents to be filed with the SEC in connection with the transaction. Additional information about such participants is available under the captions “Proposal 1 – Election of Directors,” “Director Compensation” and “Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management” in Iridium’s definitive proxy statement in connection with its 2026 Annual Meeting of Stockholders (the “2026 Proxy Statement”), which was filed with the SEC on April 2, 2026 (which is available at https://www.sec.gov/ix?doc=/Archives/edgar/data/0001418819/000141881926000022/irdm-20260402.htm), as well as on Iridium’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2025, which was filed with the SEC on February 12, 2026 (the “2025 10-K”) and certain of Iridium’s Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q and Current Reports on Form 8-K. To the extent that holdings of Iridium’s securities have changed since the amounts printed in the 2026 Proxy Statement, such changes have been or will be reflected on Statements of Change in Ownership on Form 4 filed with the SEC (which are available at https://www.sec.gov/cgi-bin/own-disp?action=getissuer&CIK=0001418819). Information regarding Iridium’s transactions with related persons is set forth in the 2026 Proxy Statement under the caption “Transactions with Related Parties,” as well as on the 2025 10-K and certain of Iridium’s Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q and Current Reports on Form 8-K. Certain illustrative information regarding the payments to that may be owed, and the circumstances in which they may be owed, by Iridium to its named executive officers in a change of control of Iridium is set forth in the 2026 Proxy Statement under the caption “Severance and Change in Control-Related Benefits,” as well as on the 2025 10-K and certain of Iridium’s Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q and Current Reports on Form 8-K. Rocket Lab may also be deemed to be a participant in Iridium’s solicitation; information regarding Rocket Lab will be included in the proxy statement/prospectus and other relevant documents to be filed with the SEC in connection with the transaction. Copies of these documents may be obtained, free of charge, from the SEC or Iridium as described in the preceding paragraph.

Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements

This communication contains “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the federal securities laws. These forward-looking statements are based on Rocket Lab’s and Iridium’s current expectations, estimates and projections about the expected date of closing of the proposed transaction and the potential benefits thereof, its business and industry, management’s beliefs and certain assumptions made by Rocket Lab and Iridium, all of which are subject to change. In this context, forward-looking statements often address expected future events, including future business and financial performance and financial condition. All forward-looking statements by their nature address matters that involve risks and uncertainties, many of which are beyond our control, and are not guarantees of future results, such as statements about the consummation of the proposed transaction and the anticipated benefits thereof. These and other forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future results and are subject to risks, uncertainties and assumptions that could cause actual results to differ materially from those expressed or implied in any forward-looking statements. Accordingly, there are or will be important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those indicated in such statements and, therefore, you should not place undue reliance on any such statements and caution must be exercised in relying on forward-looking statements. Important risk factors that may cause such a difference include, but are not limited to: (i) the completion of the proposed transaction on anticipated terms and timing, or at all, including obtaining stockholder and regulatory approvals and satisfying other conditions to the completion of the transaction; (ii) the occurrence of any event, change or other circumstances that could give rise to the termination of the merger agreement, including the receipt by Iridium of an unsolicited proposal from a third party; (iii) failure to realize the anticipated benefits of the proposed transaction on a timely basis or at all, including anticipated tax treatment, unforeseen liabilities, future capital expenditures, revenues, expenses, earnings, the integration of the businesses of Rocket Lab and Iridium, synergies, economic performance, indebtedness, financial condition, losses, future prospects, business and management strategies for the management, expansion and growth of Rocket Lab’s and Iridium’s businesses; (iv) Rocket Lab’s and Iridium’s ability to implement their business strategies; (v) potential litigation relating to the proposed transaction that could be instituted against Rocket Lab, Iridium or their respective directors, managers, or officers, including the effects of any outcomes related thereto; (vi) the risk that disruptions from the proposed transaction will harm Rocket Lab’s or Iridium’s businesses, including current plans and operations, or will otherwise divert management time from ongoing business operations on transaction-related issues; (vii) the ability of Rocket Lab or Iridium to retain and hire key personnel; (viii) potential adverse reactions or changes to business relationships resulting from the announcement or completion of the proposed transaction; (ix) fluctuations in, and uncertainty as to the long-term value of, Rocket Lab or Iridium common stock (including as relating to the risk that any announcements related to the proposed transaction could have adverse effects on the market price of such stock); (x) legislative, regulatory and economic developments affecting Rocket Lab’s and Iridium’s businesses, including actions by government agencies and third parties; (xi) general economic and market developments and conditions, potential changes to international trade relations, geopolitical conflicts and effects from global pandemics, epidemics, or other public health crises; (xii) the evolving legal, regulatory and tax regimes under which Rocket Lab and Iridium operate; (xiii) restrictions during the pendency of the proposed transaction that may impact Rocket Lab’s or Iridium’s ability to pursue certain business opportunities or strategic transactions; (xiv) unexpected costs, charges or expenses resulting from the proposed transaction; (xv) risks that any debt or other financing anticipated in connection with the proposed transaction is not obtained or that such financing cannot be obtained on the anticipated timing or terms or unexpected costs or expenses in connection therewith; and (xvi) the other risks and uncertainties, as described in the periodic reports that Rocket Lab and Iridium file with the SEC. These risks, as well as other risks associated with the proposed transaction, are more fully discussed in the proxy statement/prospectus to be filed with the SEC in connection with the proposed transaction. Neither Rocket Lab nor Iridium assumes any obligation to publicly provide revisions or updates to any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future developments or otherwise, should circumstances change, except as otherwise required by securities and other applicable laws. Forward-looking statements included in this communication are made as of the date of this communication.

A photo accompanying this announcement is available at https://www.globenewswire.com/NewsRoom/AttachmentNg/61b71a82-4d43-4858-bd6f-d653afb3b35d

__________________
1 Based on Iridium’s publicly reported 2025 results. Iridium Operational EBITDA, or OEBITDA, is defined as earnings before interest, income taxes, depreciation and amortization, gain (loss) on equity method investments, transaction related expenses, and share-based compensation expenses. Iridium Gross Margin has been calculated as Total revenue less Cost of services (exclusive of depreciation and amortization) and Cost of subscriber equipment, divided by Total revenue. For more information see Iridium’s Investor Relations webpage at www.iridium.com

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

9. Scientists find molecular-level evidence for two structures in liquid water

Source: https://phys.org/news/2026-06-scientists-molecular-evidence-liquid.html
Site: phys.org
Submitter: wglb (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-29 22:18 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 75 points · 25 comments

Scrape failed: http 403

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

10. Ornith-1.0: self-improving open-source models for agentic coding

Source: https://github.com/deepreinforce-ai/Ornith-1
Site: GitHub
Submitter: danboarder (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-29 17:16 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 165 points · 32 comments
Length: 1.7K words (~8 min read)
Language: en

Aloha! 🌺 Ornith-1.0 is a self-improving open-source models for agentic coding.

Highlights:

State-of-the-Art Coding Agents: Available in 9B-Dense, 31B-Dense, 35B-MoE, and 397B-MoE (post-trained on top of Gemma 4 and Qwen 3.5), achieving state-of-the-art performance among open-source models of comparable size on coding benchmarks such as Terminal-Bench 2.1, SWE-Bench, NL2Repo and OpenClaw.
Self-Improving Training Framework: Ornith-1.0 employs RL to learn to generate not only solution rollouts, but also the scallfold that drive those rollouts. By jointly optimizing the scaffold and the resulting solution, the model discovers better search trajectories and generates higher-quality solutions.
Licence: MIT licensed, globally accessible, and free from regional limitations.

Benchmarks

Each model is evaluated against its size-appropriate baselines. All three use the same harnesses and decoding setup (see the notes under the tables).

Ornith-1.0-9B

Ornith-1.0-9B Qwen3.5-9B Qwen3.5-35B Gemma4-12B Gemma4-31B
Agentic Coding
Terminal-Bench 2.1 (Terminus-2)	43.1	21.3	41.4	21	42.1
Terminal-Bench 2.1 (Claude Code)	40.6	18.9	38.9	-	-
SWE-bench Verified	69.4	53.2	70	44.2	52
SWE-bench Pro	42.9	31.3	44.6	27.6	35.7
SWE-bench Multilingual	52	39.7	60.3	32.5	51.7
NL2Repo	27.2	16.2	20.5	10.3	15.5
Claw-eval Avg	63.1	53.2	65.4	32.5	48.5
SWE Atlas - QnA	17.9	9.2	13.2	-	-
SWE Atlas - RF	16.6	4.3	10.2	-	-
SWE Atlas - TW	15.3	4.4	9.8	-	-

Ornith-1.0-35B

Ornith-1.0-35B Qwen3.5-35B Qwen3.6-35B Gemma4-31B Qwen3.5-397B
Agentic Coding
Terminal-Bench 2.1 (Terminus-2)	64.2	41.4	52.5	42.1	53.5
Terminal-Bench 2.1 (Claude Code)	62.8	38.9	49.2	-	48.6
SWE-bench Verified	75.6	70	73.4	52	76.4
SWE-bench Pro	50.4	44.6	49.5	35.7	51.6
SWE-bench Multilingual	69.3	60.3	67.2	51.7	69.3
NL2Repo	34.6	20.5	29.4	15.5	36.8
Claw-eval Avg	69.8	65.4	68.7	48.5	70.7
SWE Atlas - QnA	37.1	13.2	15.5	-	20.4
SWE Atlas - RF	29.7	10.2	11.4	-	18.4
SWE Atlas - TW	27.8	9.8	13.3	-	18.5

Ornith-1.0-397B

Ornith-1.0-397B Qwen3.5-397B Qwen3.7-Max GLM-5.2-744B Minimax-M3-428B DeepSeek-V4-Pro-1.6T Claude Opus 4.7 Claude Opus 4.8
Agentic Coding
Terminal-Bench 2.1 (Terminus-2)	77.5	53.5	73.5	81.0	64	64	70.3	85
Terminal-Bench 2.1 (Claude Code)	78.2	48.6	69.8	82.7	-	66.5	69.7	78.9
SWE-bench Verified	82.4	76.4	80.4	-	-	80.6	80.8	87.6
SWE-bench Pro	62.2	51.6	60.6	62.1	59	55.4	64.3	69.2
SWE-bench Multilingual	78.9	69.3	78.3	-	-	76.2	-	-
NL2Repo	48.2	36.8	47.2	48.9	42.1	-	-	69.7
Claw-eval Avg	77.1	70.7	65.2	-	-	75.8	78.2	-
SWE Atlas - QnA	41.2	20.4	-	-	37.9	27.2	40.3	48.8
SWE Atlas - RF	42.6	18.4	-	-	-	-	48.6	46.7
SWE Atlas - TW	39.1	18.5	-	-	30.8	-	38.5	-

* Terminal-Bench 2.1 (Terminus-2): evaluated with the Harbor/Terminus-2 framework, parser=json, temperature=1.0, top_p=1.0, 128K context window. Each run uses a 4-hour timeout with 32 CPU cores and 48GB RAM, averaged over 5 runs. We adjust the Qwen chat template to keep training and inference consistent and modify Harbor to align with vLLM's reasoning_content key.
* Terminal-Bench 2.1 (Claude Code): evaluated with Claude Code 2.1.126, parser=json, temperature=1.0, top_p=1.0, max_new_tokens=131072, averaged over 5 runs (Qwen chat template likewise modified).
* SWE-bench Verified / Pro / Multilingual: OpenHands harness, temp=1.0, top_p=0.95, 256K context window.
* SWE Atlas QnA / RF / TW: mini-SWE-agent harness, temp=1.0, top_p=0.95, 128K context window, averaged over 5 runs.
* NL2Repo: temperature=1.0, top_p=1.0, 400K context, 48K output, anti-hacking filters.
* ClawEval: an agentic code benchmark over real-user task distributions; temp=0.6, 256K context.

Quickstart

NOTE

Ornith-1.0 is a reasoning model: by default the assistant turn opens with a <think> … </think> block before the final answer. The serving recipes below enable a reasoning parser so the chain-of-thought is returned in a separate reasoning_content field, and a tool-call parser so the model's <tool_call> blocks are surfaced as OpenAI-style tool_calls.

Serving Ornith-1.0 requires recent runtimes:

Transformers ≥ 5.8.1
vLLM ≥ 0.19.1
SGLang ≥ 0.5.9

Recommended sampling parameters: temperature=0.6, top_p=0.95, top_k=20 (use temperature=1.0 to reproduce the reported benchmark setup).

Serving Ornith-1.0

Ornith-1.0 ships as a dense 9B model plus two Mixture-of-Experts models (35B, 397B). All checkpoints expose the same OpenAI-compatible interface and support a 256K (262,144-token) context window; the dense 9B fits on a single 80GB GPU, while the MoE checkpoints are sharded across a multi-GPU node with tensor parallelism. Each size is published in multiple precision / format variants:

Checkpoint Architecture Format Best for
Ornith-1.0-9B Dense (~9B) bf16 Single-GPU serving & fine-tuning
Ornith-1.0-9B-GGUF Dense (~9B) GGUF (quantized) Local inference via llama.cpp / Ollama
Ornith-1.0-35B MoE (35B) bf16 Full-precision multi-GPU serving
Ornith-1.0-35B-FP8 MoE (35B) FP8 ~Half the VRAM on FP8-capable GPUs
Ornith-1.0-35B-GGUF MoE (35B) GGUF (quantized) Local inference via llama.cpp / Ollama
Ornith-1.0-397B MoE (397B) bf16 Full-precision serving on a multi-GPU node
Ornith-1.0-397B-FP8 MoE (397B) FP8 Memory-efficient serving on FP8-capable GPUs

The recipes below stand up an OpenAI-compatible server under the shared alias Ornith-1.0. Set MODEL to the checkpoint you want, and match --tensor-parallel-size / --tp to your GPU count.

vLLM

# Pick a checkpoint — dense 9B, or MoE 35B / 397B (append -FP8 for lower-VRAM serving):
MODEL=deepreinforce-ai/Ornith-1.0-397B

# MoE checkpoints (35B / 397B): shard across the node with tensor parallelism.
# Dense checkpoint (9B): fits on a single 80GB GPU — drop --tensor-parallel-size.
vllm serve $MODEL \
    --served-model-name Ornith-1.0 \
    --tensor-parallel-size 8 \
    --host 0.0.0.0 --port 8000 \
    --max-model-len 262144 \
    --gpu-memory-utilization 0.90 \
    --enable-prefix-caching \
    --enable-auto-tool-choice --tool-call-parser qwen3_xml \
    --reasoning-parser qwen3 \
    --trust-remote-code

SGLang

# Pick a checkpoint — dense 9B, or MoE 35B / 397B (append -FP8 for lower-VRAM serving):
MODEL=deepreinforce-ai/Ornith-1.0-397B

# MoE checkpoints (35B / 397B): shard with --tp ; dense 9B: drop --tp for a single GPU.
python -m sglang.launch_server \
    --model-path $MODEL \
    --served-model-name Ornith-1.0 \
    --tp 8 \
    --host 0.0.0.0 --port 8000 \
    --context-length 262144 \
    --mem-fraction-static 0.85 \
    --tool-call-parser qwen3_coder \
    --reasoning-parser qwen3

Hugging Face Transformers

For a quick local test (or to script offline generation), load the model directly with Transformers. Make sure you have a recent release installed — see the Transformers installation guide; Ornith-1.0 requires transformers >= 5.8.1. The dense 9B checkpoint is the easiest to run locally.

from transformers import AutoModelForCausalLM, AutoTokenizer

model_name = "deepreinforce-ai/Ornith-1.0-9B"  # or -35B / -397B

tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained(model_name)
model = AutoModelForCausalLM.from_pretrained(
    model_name,
    dtype="auto",
    device_map="auto",
)

messages = [
    {"role": "user", "content": "Write a Python function is_prime(n). Keep it short."}
]
text = tokenizer.apply_chat_template(
    messages,
    tokenize=False,
    add_generation_prompt=True,
)

inputs = tokenizer(text, return_tensors="pt").to(model.device)
generated = model.generate(
    **inputs,
    max_new_tokens=512,
    do_sample=True,
    temperature=0.6,
    top_p=0.95,
    top_k=20,
)
output_ids = generated[0][inputs.input_ids.shape[1]:]

# The reply contains a <think> ... </think> reasoning block followed by the answer.
content = tokenizer.decode(output_ids, skip_special_tokens=True)
print(content)

To split the reasoning trace from the final answer, parse on the </think> marker:

text = tokenizer.decode(output_ids, skip_special_tokens=True)
if "</think>" in text:
    reasoning, answer = text.split("</think>", 1)
    reasoning = reasoning.replace("<think>", "").strip()
    answer = answer.strip()
else:
    reasoning, answer = "", text.strip()

Using Ornith-1.0 via the Chat Completions API

Once a vLLM or SGLang server is running, talk to it with any OpenAI-compatible client.

Basic Usage

from openai import OpenAI

client = OpenAI(
    base_url="http://localhost:8000/v1",
    api_key="EMPTY",  # any non-empty string works for a local server
)

response = client.chat.completions.create(
    model="Ornith-1.0",
    messages=[
        {"role": "user", "content": "Write a one-line Python lambda that squares a number."}
    ],
    temperature=0.6,
    top_p=0.95,
    max_tokens=1024,
)

message = response.choices[0].message
# reasoning_content holds the <think> trace; content holds the final answer.
print("reasoning:", getattr(message, "reasoning_content", None))
print("answer:", message.content)

You can also stream tokens, or hand the model tools — Ornith-1.0 emits well-formed function calls that the server parses into the standard tool_calls field:

tools = [
    {
        "type": "function",
        "function": {
            "name": "get_weather",
            "description": "Get the current weather for a city",
            "parameters": {
                "type": "object",
                "properties": {"city": {"type": "string"}},
                "required": ["city"],
            },
        },
    }
]

response = client.chat.completions.create(
    model="Ornith-1.0",
    messages=[{"role": "user", "content": "What is the weather in Paris right now?"}],
    tools=tools,
    tool_choice="auto",
    temperature=0.6,
    max_tokens=2048,
)

tool_call = response.choices[0].message.tool_calls[0]
print(tool_call.function.name, tool_call.function.arguments)
# -> get_weather {"city": "Paris"}

You can point any OpenAI-compatible SDK (Python, Node.js, etc.) or curl at the same /v1/chat/completions endpoint.

Agentic Usage

Ornith-1.0 excels in tool-calling and agentic coding capabilities.

Agent Frameworks

Because Ornith-1.0 exposes an OpenAI-compatible endpoint with tool calling, it works out of the box with standard agent frameworks. Below is a minimal example that connects Ornith-1.0 to tools through an MCP server.

import os
from openai import OpenAI

client = OpenAI(
    base_url=os.getenv("OPENAI_BASE_URL", "http://localhost:8000/v1"),
    api_key=os.getenv("OPENAI_API_KEY", "EMPTY"),
)

tools = [
    {
        "type": "function",
        "function": {
            "name": "run_shell",
            "description": "Run a shell command and return its output.",
            "parameters": {
                "type": "object",
                "properties": {
                    "command": {"type": "string", "description": "The command to run"}
                },
                "required": ["command"],
            },
        },
    }
]

messages = [{"role": "user", "content": "List the Python files in the current directory."}]

response = client.chat.completions.create(
    model="Ornith-1.0",
    messages=messages,
    tools=tools,
    temperature=0.6,
    top_p=0.95,
)
print(response.choices[0].message)

Examples of using Ornith with agent harness:

Hermes Agent

# Hermes talks to any OpenAI-compatible endpoint — point it at your Ornith server.
export OPENAI_BASE_URL="http://localhost:8000/v1"
export OPENAI_API_KEY="EMPTY"
export MODEL="Ornith-1.0"

OpenHands

pip install openhands-ai

# OpenHands routes through LiteLLM; the "openai/" prefix selects the OpenAI-compatible path.
export LLM_MODEL="openai/Ornith-1.0"
export LLM_BASE_URL="http://localhost:8000/v1"
export LLM_API_KEY="EMPTY"

# Launch the CLI (or run the official OpenHands Docker image with the same env vars).
openhands

llama.cpp / Ollama

# Both runtimes load a GGUF build — available for the 9B and 35B checkpoints (swap -9B for -35B).

# llama.cpp — serve an OpenAI-compatible API on port 8000.
llama-server -hf deepreinforce-ai/Ornith-1.0-9B-GGUF --port 8000 -c 262144

# Ollama — pull and chat with the same GGUF straight from Hugging Face.
ollama run hf.co/deepreinforce-ai/Ornith-1.0-9B-GGUF

Unsloth Studio

pip install unsloth

# Load Ornith for fast local inference or fine-tuning (Python):
#   from unsloth import FastLanguageModel
#   model, tokenizer = FastLanguageModel.from_pretrained(
#       "deepreinforce-ai/Ornith-1.0-9B",
#       max_seq_length=262144,
#       load_in_4bit=True,
#   )

OpenClaw

# OpenClaw talks to any OpenAI-compatible endpoint — point it at your Ornith server.
export OPENAI_BASE_URL="http://localhost:8000/v1"
export OPENAI_API_KEY="EMPTY"
export OPENAI_MODEL="Ornith-1.0"

Coding CLIs

Ornith-1.0 is optimized for terminal-based coding agents. Point any OpenAI-compatible coding CLI at your Ornith-1.0 endpoint (set OPENAI_BASE_URL and OPENAI_API_KEY) to understand large codebases, automate tedious work, and ship faster.

OpenCode

# Register your local Ornith endpoint as a provider in ~/.config/opencode/opencode.json:
#
# {
#   "$schema": "https://opencode.ai/config.json",
#   "provider": {
#     "ornith": {
#       "npm": "@ai-sdk/openai-compatible",
#       "name": "Ornith (local)",
#       "options": { "baseURL": "http://localhost:8000/v1", "apiKey": "EMPTY" },
#       "models": { "Ornith-1.0": { "name": "Ornith-1.0" } }
#     }
#   }
# }

opencode

Citation

If you find our work helpful, feel free to give us a cite.

@misc{ornith-1.0,
    title = {{Ornith-1.0}: Agentic Coding, Open to All},
    url = {https://deep-reinforce.com/ornith_1_0.html},
    author = {{DeepReinforce Team}},
    year = {2026}
}

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

11. US Supreme Court rules geofence warrants require constitutional protections

Source: https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2026/jun/29/supreme-court-geofence-warrants-case-decision
Site: The Guardian
Author: Sanya Mansoor
Published: 2026-06-29
HN activity: 471 points · 217 comments
Length: 949 words (~5 min read)
Language: en

The US supreme court has ruled that law enforcement’s use of sprawling warrants that sweep up smartphone location data requires privacy protections under the fourth amendment, in a boost to critics who view their use as an unconstitutional dragnet.

Justice Elena Kagan wrote the majority opinion, which held that the sensitive data scooped up by “geofence warrants” counts as a fourth amendment search, and offers individuals a “reasonable expectation of privacy”, even if they may be in a public area.

“An individual has a reasonable expectation of privacy in records about his cell phone’s location, and police intrude on that constitutionally protected interest when they demand the information – even though for only a limited time, and from a third-party tech company,” Kagan wrote.

The judges ruled 6-3 in Chatrie v US, against the government, in a case that has been widely viewed as a test of how privacy rights translate into a new digital era.

The use of geofence warrants is widespread, and gives law enforcement agencies the power to compel tech companies to hand over sensitive cell phone data from people at or near crime scenes. The warrants allow police and the FBI to collect this information from individuals within the radius of a virtual “fence” during a particular timeframe. But they are not restricted to requesting data for precise targets.

The Chatrie case focuses on local police’s pursuit of an armed bank robber in Richmond, Virginia. He fled with $195,000. Law enforcement tracked Okello Chatrie down through their use of geofence warrants. Chatrie had opted in to an optional Google “location history” feature that documented his location every few minutes. He was eventually sentenced to 12 years in prison, after pleading guilty.

Chatrie’s lawyers argued that this search was overly broad and violated his fourth amendment rights, which protects individuals from “unreasonable search and seizure”. Lawyers said that police’s use of geofence warrants amounted to an official “search” under the fourth amendment, and didn’t meet the constitution’s requirements for one.

The government had argued that accessing only a short amount of cellphone location information means this tactic does not count as a fourth amendment search and accordingly, should not be afforded the same privacy protections. But the judges in the majority disagreed.

The judges in the majority opinion also wrote that the government’s characterization of generating location history as a voluntary choice is “meritless”.

They suggested that people aren’t choosing to share private information with third parties and the government “just by doing the ordinary thing cellphone users do”. “The point of carrying smartphones is to use what is on them,” including the apps and services they provide – many of which use location data to customize a user’s experience, they said.

“That argument ignores how and why Google users turn on location history: Google repeatedly prompts users to turn on the service, often warning that devices will not ‘work correctly’ otherwise, while not disclosing in that prompt how frequently users’ location information would be recorded, how precise it would be, or how it might be given to the government,” they wrote.

Justice Sonia Sotomayor wrote that “even short-term monitoring” of a person’s physical movements can provide “a wealth of detail about [his] familial, political, professional, religious, and sexual associations”. She highlighted examples of a person’s trips to “the psychiatrist, the plastic surgeon, the abortion clinic, the Aids treatment center, the strip club, the criminal defense attorney, [or] the by-the hour motel”.

Privacy advocates share her concerns that geofence warrants can be overly broad in the area they target, as well as the length of time they cover. “If the government doesn’t need to … link something to a crime, it could monitor a protest or an abortion clinic or a gun range or a church or an AA meeting or a doctor’s office,” Matthew Tokson, a law professor at the University of Utah, said.

While the majority opinion noted that police conducted a fourth amendment search by accessing Chatrie’s location history data, they noted that the court of appeals will weigh in on whether the “search was reasonable, meaning that each of its steps was properly described with particularity and found to be supported by probable cause”.

Law enforcement has said they need geofence warrants to find suspects and witnesses – after reaching dead ends. The US government, for its part, has argued that people can’t have a “reasonable expectation of privacy” when they are in public and have allowed a third party company, such as Google, to collect and analyze phone location data.

The government noted in its legal filings that “only about one-third of active Google account holders actually opted into the location history service”; Chatrie’s lawyers noted in court documents that this amounted to more than 500 million Google users. Even Google has acknowledged in legal filings for the case that geofence searches “often run a high risk of sweeping in innocent users–sometimes thousands of them.” The tech company said that it’s common for these inquiries to cover private homes, apartment buildings, government buildings, hotels, places of worship, busy roads, and other locations that law enforcement hasn’t identified probable cause to search.

The ruling marks the first time the US supreme court is considering the scope of the fourth amendment since a landmark 2018 privacy ruling. At the time, judges decided in a 5-4 decision that the government generally needs a warrant to track a person’s cellphone location history.

Paul Ohm, a law professor at Georgetown University, said “today is a very good day for constitutional privacy.” He added: “The court reaffirmed that the police need a search warrant to turn private services like Google’s location tracking into a state surveillance tool.”

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

12. 30-year sentence for transporting zines is a five-alarm fire for free speech

Source: https://theintercept.com/2026/06/26/daniel-sanchez-estrada-zines-prairieland-free-speech/
Site: The Intercept
Author: Seth Stern, Jeremy Busby
Published: 2026-06-26
HN activity: 369 points · 201 comments
Length: 1.2K words (~6 min read)
Language: en-US

Supporters of the Prairieland defendants display pamphlets and artwork after their sentencing outside a Fort Worth, Texas, courthouse on June 23, 2026. Photo: Matt Sledge/The Intercept

Seth Stern is the director of advocacy for Freedom of the Press Foundation.

Jeremy Busby is a writer and activist incarcerated in Texas.

The Trump administration attacking the right to publish or report information is a given at this point. The president has threatened journalists for everything from questioning the wisdom of his failed war with Iran to touching the peeled lining of his renovated reflecting pool.

Tantrums like those may now feel routine, but this week marked a new front in Trump’s war on information: Daniel “Des” Sanchez Estrada was sentenced to 30 years in federal prison for transporting a box of zines he didn’t even write. He’s one of eight defendants sentenced on Tuesday to a combined 450 years — the first prison sentences against so-called “antifa” handed down under the framework of NSPM-7, President Donald Trump’s sweeping “counterterrorism” memorandum to clamp down on dissent from the left.

The prosecution’s theory was that Sanchez moved the zines, which discussed anarchism and other anti-government ideas, to conceal evidence in the case against his wife, Maricela Rueda. Rueda attended a July 4, 2025, protest at the Prairieland immigration jail in Texas where a police officer was shot. (She was not accused of shooting him or having anything to do with the shooting but was herself sentenced to 70 years.)

But that nuance is cold comfort: It assumes that simply possessing years-old political pamphlets that said nothing about the protest or shooting could somehow constitute evidence of a crime. Sharing the political ideology of the shooter, the government contended, meant Rueda and her co-defendants were culpable for the shooter’s actions — and by allegedly attempting to prevent officers from finding out about Rueda’s ideology, Sanchez shared in the blame as well.

We’ve reached the point in the erosion of the First Amendment where the government considers possession of anarchist zines and membership in a terrorist cell to be more or less the same thing. Once the box of zines was discovered, there was no need to prove Rueda planned or had any idea that anyone would be shot at the protest.

What’s worse is that this will likely only ramp up the administration’s efforts to criminalize being in possession of information. Whatever you may think of former CNN host Don Lemon, he’s no anarchist or extremist, and the content of his broadcasts bears little resemblance to the zines Sanchez was convicted of transporting. And yet, after indicting him and independent journalist Georgia Fort on frivolous charges relating to their livestreaming of a protest at a Minnesota church, the government sought a warrant to obtain the identities of subscribers to their YouTube channels.

This will likely only ramp up the administration’s efforts to criminalize being in possession of information.

Fortunately, a judge rejected that warrant. But it’s a chilling revelation of the administration’s modus operandi. Lemon and Fort’s YouTube subscribers would, of course, have no knowledge of what happened at the church protest beyond what was publicly broadcast. Their identities are as irrelevant to whether Lemon and Fort committed a crime as the box of zines was to Rueda’s case. The only conceivable reason the government might want a list of YouTube subscribers is to keep an eye on people who watch disfavored shows.

And let’s say someone who’d watched Lemon and Fort’s livestreams and then heard about their arrests had cleared their browser history because they (rightly) feared the administration might target them. Could they then be prosecuted for concealing evidence under the same logic applied to Sanchez? If they’d downloaded the video, could they be accused of possessing contraband? Would forwarding a link equate to trafficking?

It all sounds preposterous, but virtually nothing is too absurd for this Department of Justice. In fact, it’s already argued that documents investigative reporters receive from whistleblower sources can constitute contraband. (It’s worth pointing out that Joe Biden’s DOJ used this same logic when it pursued its own ridiculous “transporting” of information case against Project Veritas for moving Ashley Biden’s diary across state lines).

These frivolous actions create a catch-22 for all Americans. The more people are investigated for engaging with ideas the administration deems dangerously anti-government, the more likely others are to conceal evidence of their own controversial beliefs — not because they are evidence of any real crime but because prosecutors are out of control. But if they do so, they risk incriminating themselves.

NSPM-7, which was issued last September, tasks federal agencies with dismantling networks of “anti-fascist” actors, a purposely overly broad term since expanded to include those with “extreme viewpoints on immigration, radical gender ideology, and anti-American sentiment.”

Given that antifa, as a singular, cohesive organization, is a figment of the right’s imagination, agents cannot accomplish that task by uncovering a membership registry. They can only do so by identifying people with viewpoints they consider “extreme,” like anti-ICE protesters officers have told they’re being added to watchlists, or pro-Palestine opinion writers they’ve sought to deport.

In Chicago and other cities ICE invaded, activists and organizers packaged whistles and zines to distribute to residents. Under the logic of NSPM-7 and Sanchez Estrada’s conviction, that is a network of actors engaged in organized political violence. If you read one of their zines, you could be deemed a member of an illicit enterprise, and if you hide one, you’re covering for criminals.

The government argued that the Prairieland defendants are different. One prosecutor said: “People with that kind of extremist beliefs need extra time in prison. They believe violence is justified.” U.S. District Judge Reed O’Connor, in handing down the sentences, reportedly said he wanted to “send a message to anyone who shares a similar ideology.” But lots of people believe political violence is sometimes justified. If someone who believes punching Nazis is justified attends an anti-Nazi protest where someone else punches a Nazi, are they at risk of being convicted of assault alongside the actual assailant, particularly if they have some anti-Nazi literature on their bookshelf? The answer is far less obvious than it used to be.

The administration has vowed the Prairieland case “will not be the last” of its kind. We must take it at its word. The next one might also involve protesters from the political fringes rather than ordinary Americans reading, say, The Intercept, or watching Don Lemon on YouTube. But what about the one after that? We’re not as far away as you might think. Stephen Miller has called the whole Democratic Party a “domestic extremist organization” — clearly invoking the language of NSPM-7. Trump has labeled his political opponents “the enemy within” and the press “the enemy of the people.”

Whoever said slippery slopes are a fallacy never met Donald Trump. If Sanchez Estrada indeed moved the zines because he foresaw their being used to tie his wife to a nonexistent terrorist network and a shooting, he should be commended for his prescience. Maybe more of us should think like Sanchez Estrada.

Or would that be a crime?

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

13. A native graphical shell for SSH

Source: https://probablymarcus.com/blocks/2026/06/28/native-graphical-shell-for-SSH.html
Site: Marcus Lewis
Author: Marcus Lewis
Published: 2026-06-28
HN activity: 260 points · 124 comments
Length: 537 words (~3 min read)

With the web browser, we have really figured out a good flow for how one device (the “server”) can provide an experience on another device (the “client”).

This raises a fun idea: imagine if servers and edge devices could serve up a browser-based graphical “shell” so they can be used from other devices. The shell would provide a home screen of apps. In this shell, every app is a small HTTP server, serving up a web user interface. The shell would provide an API so that apps can look up each other’s URLs. For example, apps could register themselves as a text editor, so you can double-click text files in one app to open them in the editor app. These graphical apps would be an alternative to terminal-based apps.

These HTTP servers will typically be private, inaccessible to other devices on the network. Instead, you’ll use them over SSH, or locally. Unlike most existing web-based server tools, these HTTP servers won’t typically use localhost ports, but instead will use Unix domain socket files, which are similar to ports but live on the filesystem with explicit user permissions. Each HTTP server can be very simple, with no dependencies, because it doesn’t have to handle encryption, which instead happens at the SSH layer.

The apps can be conventional HTML-based web apps, but they can also be native outerframe apps.

I’ve built Outer Loop into an SSH browser for this type of graphical shell, and now I’m shipping an open-source Outer Shell.

Screencast: Outer Shell

Here I demo Outer Shell and how it works, and I try to give you a sense of how much low-hanging fruit there is in this space.

UPDATE: Here’s a YouTube mirror, for people who prefer that.

Documentation

Instead of writing an enormous blog post, I wrote a bunch of documentation:

How the browser works: https://outerloop.sh/
The Outer Shell API and how to add apps to it: https://outershell.org/
How these native apps work: https://outerframe.org/

Thoughts

Isn’t it weird that this doesn’t already exist? For browsers, capabilities like connecting to Unix sockets have been dismissed as extremely niche, but when you group it together with the right set of other capabilities (including SSH and sudo awareness), entire new branches of the tech tree become apparent. Instead of treating Linux (and other) servers as having conventional local graphical operating systems, we could focus on giving them “outer” graphical shells for remote devices. In an alternate timeline, we’d have been building out this ecosystem for decades, using conventional HTML / JavaScript apps. Many individual server-style web apps like Jupyter and Tensorboard did in fact appear, each with their own one-off security protocols, but nothing really arose to deliver them “correctly”.

And now, the opportunity is even bigger, because we can make the apps truly native. Now that we have AI that can help us write code, it is practical for each app to have a codebase for each target platform. I think this is becoming the natural architecture for the web: HTML for reading and casual apps, and native platform-tailored apps for getting work done. Why settle for less?

(Thanks to Rosanne Liu, Mirko Klukas, Adam Zethraeus, and Felix Andrews for reading/viewing drafts of this post and screencast.)

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

14. Kb – Prolog Knowledge Base

Source: https://github.com/mat-mgm/kb-prolog
Site: GitHub
Submitter: triska (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-27 12:16 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 37 points · 5 comments
Length: 456 words (~2 min read)
Language: en

A local-first, hyper-relational knowledge base with content-addressable storage (CAS). Built as a Master's thesis prototype.

What it is

Hyper-relational graph: Knowledge is stored as statement(Subject, Predicate, Object, Properties). Subjects and objects can themselves be statements (reification), enabling claims about claims.
Content-addressable storage: Files are staged, SHA-256 hashed, and committed atomically alongside their graph metadata. Deduplication is automatic.
Time-travel: Updates create new statement versions linked via replaces_id. pl history walks the version chain.
Prolog-first: Trealla Prolog is the main runtime. SQLite and Raylib are accessed via C shared libraries loaded through FFI.
Interactive GUI: A Raylib-based graph viewer with image previews, a query bar, and node search.

Build

Dependencies: Clang, X11 (Linux) or Xcode CLT (macOS). Trealla Prolog, Raylib, raygui, and SQLite are included as submodules.

git clone --recurse-submodules <repo-url>
cd kb
make

This builds libcas.so, libgui.so, and libsqlite3.so in the project root. Raylib is compiled from source during make.

To build Trealla from source:

cd vendor/trealla && make

Then ensure tpl is on your $PATH.

Usage

# Load a context into memory and open a REPL
tpl -l main.pl -- pl load concept(mathematics)

# Assert a new statement
tpl -l main.pl -- pl assert \
  "statement(concept(mathematics), foundation_of, concept(logic), [])"

# Full-text search
tpl -l main.pl -- pl search mathematics

# View version history of a term
tpl -l main.pl -- pl history concept(mathematics)

# Ingest a file into CAS
tpl -l main.pl -- cas add document.pdf

# List CAS objects
tpl -l main.pl -- cas list

# Launch the GUI
tpl -l main.pl -- gui

# Check database consistency
tpl -l main.pl -- pl verify

# Run garbage collection
tpl -l main.pl -- pl gc

Architecture

main.pl             CLI router and REPL
prolog/
  sync.pl           2-phase commit: marshal Prolog terms ↔ SQLite
  cas.pl            FFI bindings to libcas.so
  db.pl             SQLite queries
  gui.pl            Raylib frontend (yield-loop pattern)
  ontology.pl       In-memory knowledge graph
src/
  cas.c / cas.h     CAS: stage, SHA-256 hash, commit atomically, verify
  gui.c / gui.h     Raylib renderer and input handler
  graph.c / graph.h Graph layout
  util.c / util.h   SHA-256, MD5
sql/
  schema.sql        SQLite schema (WAL mode, FTS5, reification)
vendor/             Trealla, Raylib, raygui, SQLite (submodules)


Data model

Every piece of knowledge is a statement/4 term:

statement(Subject, Predicate, Object, Properties)

Subject and Object are Prolog terms or integer IDs pointing to other rows in the statement table, enabling arbitrary nesting. The SQLite schema mirrors this with ANY-typed columns and a replaces_id foreign key for versioning.

Example:

% Alice claims (with certainty 0.9) that Bob likes pizza
statement(
  person(alice),
  claims,
  statement(person(bob), likes, food(pizza), []),
  [certainty(0.9)]
)

Context loading uses bidirectional recursive CTEs to pull only the subgraph reachable from a seed term into Prolog's in-memory working set.

Nix

A kb.nix shell is provided for reproducible builds:

nix-shell kb.nix

License

GPL-3.0 — see LICENSE.md.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

15. South Korea to spend $1T on more memory chip production and humanoid robots

Source: https://arstechnica.com/ai/2026/06/south-korea-to-spend-1t-on-more-memory-chip-production-and-humanoid-robots/
Site: arstechnica.com
Submitter: jnord (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-29 22:21 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 142 points · 85 comments
Language: en

No extractable content.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

16. Apple Neural Engine: Architecture, Programming, and Performance

Source: https://arxiv.org/abs/2606.22283
Site: arXiv.org
Author: [Submitted on 21 Jun 2026]
Submitted: 2026-06-27 23:30 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 133 points · 18 comments
Length: 206 words (~1 min read)
Language: en

View PDF

Abstract:The Apple Neural Engine (ANE) is the fixed-function matrix accelerator that has shipped in Apple systems-on-chip since the A11-class iPhone and iPad chips and the M1-class Mac chips, exposed to applications only through the Core ML model framework. This guide reports a reverse-engineered account of the engine, based on direct measurement on Apple silicon and static analysis of the private runtime, compiler, kernel driver, and firmware. It documents the datapath and the roofline that bound the engine's throughput and energy, the dispatch route that reaches it below Core ML, the compiler and on-disk program format, the weight-compression scheme, and the kernel driver, firmware, and command protocol beneath them. The account covers the A11 through A18 and M1 through M5 families, with per-chip target tables and an operation-by-device matrix; the direct measurements are on the M1 and M5. Claims are labeled as measured, decompile-derived, or predicted, and the methodology and open questions are recorded. The direct route is callable from ordinary user space but remains undocumented, unsupported, and version-fragile; it is intended for measurement, research, and on-device work, not for shipping software, where Core ML remains the supported path.

Submission history

From: Spencer Bryngelson [view email]
[v1] Sun, 21 Jun 2026 00:17:34 UTC (407 KB)

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

17. Netflix Simplified Batch Compute with Kueue

Source: https://netflixtechblog.com/how-netflix-simplified-batch-compute-with-kueue-87860682629c
Redirected to: https://netflixtechblog.com/how-netflix-simplified-batch-compute-with-kueue-87860682629c?gi=eb2612f50377
Site: Netflix TechBlog
Author: Netflix Technology Blog
Published: 2026-06-22
HN activity: 25 points · 2 comments
Length: 1.4K words (~7 min read)
Language: en

6 min read

Jun 22, 2026

--

By Alvin Bao, Alex Petrov, Jennifer Lai, Aidan Sherr, and Samartha Chandrashekar

As a part of the journey to transition Netflix’s compute infrastructure to be more Kubernetes-native, we have leaned into incorporating components from the Kubernetes ecosystem into our container platform Titus. One example of this is our use of Kueue, a cloud-native job queueing system for batch workloads, which has largely replaced the custom queuing and scheduling logic in our homegrown managed batch solution Compute Managed Batch (CMB). In this post, we’ll give an overview of what motivated the migration, how we migrated millions of batch jobs to use Kueue, and what Kueue allows us to offer as a Compute platform.

Brief Overview of CMB and Titus

CMB is a managed batch solution that allows users and applications to execute and manage workloads that run to completion. Using a tenant hierarchy, workloads are managed and queued with ordered execution through priorities, and capacity is managed on a per-tenant basis. Workloads that are submitted to CMB are then run on Titus. The features of Titus relevant to CMB are workload federation across multiple cells (Kubernetes clusters) and federated capacity reservations. This means CMB can talk to a single Titus endpoint to get/submit workloads and update capacity reservations without having to worry about the underlying cell/cluster topology.

CMB Tenant Hierarchy

Tenants provide a grouping mechanism for jobs submitted on behalf of certain organizations, platforms, or applications. Users can create and organize tenants however best suits their organization or use case. For example, an organization may use a single tenant across several applications or a complex hierarchical structure that matches its team and application ownership structure.

Tenants are associated with a capacity configuration. The capacity configuration defines the amount of compute capacity available to the tenant and provides certain guarantees around isolation from other tenants. The capacity configuration contains weight (used for fair sharing) and resource dimensions.

There are two types of tenants in CMB:

Internal Tenants — meant to facilitate the creation of a tree of tenants. Internal tenants’ children can be both internal and leaf tenants. Internal tenants themselves do not accept work and thus do not have associated queues.
Leaf Tenants — can accept work and have queues associated with them. Leaf tenants cannot have any children.

With regards to capacity configuration, tenants can use 2 types of capacity:

Reserved Capacity

For internal tenants, if a user specifies reserved capacity, it is fair-shared across the subtree and usable by the leaf tenants under that internal tenant.

For leaf tenants, if a user specifies reserved capacity, it partitions capacity within the hierarchy so that other tenants cannot reserve the same resources. Those reserved resources are not shared with any other tenant, ensuring throughput for a given leaf tenant.

Shared Capacity

The Compute team maintains a global pool of shared capacity that any tenant can burst into, in addition to its reserved capacity. Reservations are not required to use CMB, so a tenant can run out of shared capacity entirely. The pool is fair-shared across tenants, but in CMB, this applied only at admission: CMB had no preemption, so once a job was admitted, it ran to completion regardless of shifts in fair-share demand.

Kueue changes the semantics for both types of capacity, which the fair sharing and preemption section covers.

Here is an example of what a tenant hierarchy looks like:

Press enter or click to view image in full size

CMB User/Application Workload Submission Flow

Press enter or click to view image in full size

CMB User/Application Tenant Management Flow

Press enter or click to view image in full size

Why Kueue?

CMB was created in 2018, before or alongside many of the open-source batch compute offerings available today. Over the years, as the Kubernetes ecosystem has evolved, many of the features that CMB offered or strived to offer have been included in these open source projects e.g., fair sharing, hierarchical tenants, capacity management, priority queuing. In addition, it became increasingly cumbersome to develop new features such as preemption when CMB was so far removed from the underlying Kubernetes cluster.

Get Netflix Technology Blog’s stories in your inbox

Join Medium for free to get updates from this writer.

Remember me for faster sign in

The team took a look at what it would take to modernize our batch abstraction and settled on Kueue for the following reasons:

Unlike other options such as YuniKorn or Volcano, Kueue does not replace pod scheduling by the kube-scheduler, allowing integration with existing Titus scheduling profiles. Replacing Titus scheduler profiles can fragment job placement, potentially harming efficiency.
Adoption momentum and pace of innovation.
Kueue supports multi-tenant quota management over heterogeneous hardware.
Kueue can operate on primitives such as v1.Pod and batch/v1.Job, and also supports higher-level abstractions such as RayJob / RayCluster for future extensibility.
Kueue has native features that the team would have liked to implement in CMB, such as preemption, all-or-nothing scheduling, topology aware scheduling.

Migrating to Kueue

This initiative of migrating CMB workloads to Kueue became known as Netflix Batch. The key tenets of our migration were the following:

Migration should require zero lift for CMB end users and be completely transparent to them
No regressions in container launch rate and overall max throughput
Replace CMB queuing and scheduling with Kueue

Netflix Batch User/Application Workload Submission Flow

Press enter or click to view image in full size

The key difference between the old and new flows is that we defer queuing and scheduling to Kueue, which is enabled in each Kueue-enabled Titus cell. Titus federation routes the job to Kueue cells using our custom Kueue router.

Netflix Batch User/Application Tenant Management Flow

Press enter or click to view image in full size

For us as operators, the migration was as simple as clicking a button on a tenant in our UI (as shown in the example above). This also allows us to easily rollback changes if there were issues.

Under the hood, this enrollment converts internal tenants to Cohorts and leaf tenants to a ClusterQueue + LocalQueue. The capacity configuration on a given tenant is converted into resource flavors and nominal quotas. The architecture for this looks as follows:

Press enter or click to view image in full size

Lessons Learned

Maintaining API parity with the existing system (vs exposing a new API surface) and migrating the underlying components as a first step derisked the project by unstacking bets while also ensuring we didn’t disrupt the customer experience.
Don’t wait until the end to migrate the most complex use case. We decided early on to migrate our largest and most complex customer first. This allowed us to build confidence that we could later migrate other customers to Netflix Batch without issues, and resulted in the production migration lasting only 4 weeks.
We had to run Kueue with much higher QPS, Burst, and groupKindConcurrency than the default configuration to meet our throughput needs. This was derisked early on by running load tests in a development environment that mimics Titus.

Current State of Kueue at Netflix

Kueue is fully rolled out in production, with it managing millions of batch workloads. In the future, we’re looking at options to enroll more of Titus batch workloads into this more managed experience. We have also productionized more fair sharing and preemptions to address better utilization of reserved capacity. In addition, our learnings are being leveraged by other internal teams, including those building Kubernetes-native training infrastructure, to inform their job scheduling and queuing configurations.

Fair Sharing and Preemption

With Kueue, Preemption-based Fair Sharing allows Netflix Batch to maintain reservation semantics while lending resources to other tenants when those reservations are not in use. In addition, preemption allows Netflix Batch to preempt lower-priority workloads for higher-priority workloads. For our customers, this means that tenants can use more idle capacity from reservations, submit more jobs without the risk of starvation, and have quicker turnaround times for business-critical workloads.

An example preemption configuration on a ClusterQueue that we would be using is as follows:

apiVersion: kueue.x-k8s.io/v1beta2
kind: ClusterQueue
metadata:
  name: "team-a-cq"
spec:
  preemption:
    reclaimWithinCohort: Any
    withinClusterQueue: LowerPriority

With these features deployed, Compute has seen a significant increase in average resource utilization.

Acknowledgement

This work would not have been possible without the great work of the entire Compute team at Netflix.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

18. One million passports leaked online

Source: https://cambridgeanalytica.org/data-breaches-scandals/passports-driver-licenses-exposed-public-internet-2026-51096/
Site: CA Privacy Watch
Author: Rivo Raphaël Chreçant
Published: 2026-06-10
HN activity: 170 points · 90 comments
Length: 914 words (~4 min read)
Language: en-GB

A journalist typing a few letters and numbers into a web browser pulled up the passport of a young woman from Germany. Then a Spanish man’s passport. Then another man’s driver’s license. All of it sitting on the public internet with no password, no encryption, no access control whatsoever.

How Did Nearly a Million Identity Documents End Up Unprotected?
What Happens When Identity Documents Are Stolen at Scale?
Why Can’t You Just “Change” Your Passport Like a Password?

Nearly a million passports and photo IDs from multiple countries were exposed across unprotected public URLs, accessible to anyone with a link. The documents remained discoverable this way for months, according to reporting by The Verge, before being taken offline. The exposure represents one of the largest identity document breaches in recent memory—and it happened because of a fundamental failure in data security practices.

Key Findings:

The Scale: Nearly one million passports and photo IDs from multiple European countries were left completely unprotected on public web servers.
The Access Method: No hacking was required—documents were accessible through direct URLs with zero authentication or encryption.
The Timeline: Identity documents remained publicly accessible for months before discovery, creating an unknown window of potential criminal exploitation.

The documents were hosted by systems used by cannabis clubs and a company called Nefos, which operates PuffPal, a platform that manages membership and age verification for cannabis retailers and clubs across Europe. The infrastructure storing these identity documents—full passport scans, driver’s licenses with photos, names, and identifying numbers—was left completely unprotected on publicly accessible web servers.

Sammy Azdoufal, a security researcher who discovered the exposure, told The Verge the urgency was acute: “We have to do something about it as fast as possible, because people will find this and resell it. It will do damage.” The concern was not theoretical. Identity documents at scale on the open internet are immediately valuable to criminals. According to guidance from the Federal Trade Commission, stolen passports and driver’s licenses fuel identity theft, document fraud, and account takeover attacks.

How Did Nearly a Million Identity Documents End Up Unprotected?

What makes this breach structurally significant is not just the volume of documents exposed, but the mechanism of exposure: a company collecting identity verification data—ostensibly for legitimate age-gating purposes—stored that data in a way that treated security as optional. No authentication layer. No rate limiting. No encryption. Just raw identity documents, URL-accessible to the entire internet.

The Security Failures:
• Zero password protection on document storage systems
• No encryption for sensitive identity verification data
• Public URL access with no authentication requirements
• No access logging or monitoring systems in place

This mirrors a pattern that defined the Cambridge Analytica scandal: the accumulation of personal data at scale, justified by a legitimate-sounding use case (age verification in this case, political research in CA’s), with security and consent treated as afterthoughts. Cambridge Analytica harvested psychological profiles of millions without explicit consent, storing and weaponizing behavioral data. Here, identity documents were collected for age verification but stored with such negligence that anyone could download them in bulk.

What Happens When Identity Documents Are Stolen at Scale?

The Verge’s investigation did not identify a specific attack or breach. No hacker broke in. No ransomware gang demanded payment. The documents were simply left there, accessible by design—or more accurately, by default. This is a category of exposure that security researchers call “misconfiguration,” but that term obscures the reality: a company handling millions of identity documents treated them with less care than most people give to a public photo album.

Research published in PMC’s cybersecurity analysis demonstrates that the healthcare sector continues to suffer some of the highest costs from data security breaches, with identity document exposure creating particularly severe long-term risks for affected individuals.

The timeline of discovery and remediation remains unclear from available reporting. The documents have since been taken offline, but the damage window—how long they were accessible, how many people or automated systems may have downloaded them—is unknown. No official statement from Nefos or the cannabis clubs using the platform has been cited in reporting.

Why Can’t You Just “Change” Your Passport Like a Password?

For individuals whose documents were exposed, the immediate risk is identity theft. Passport and driver’s license scans in criminal hands can be used to open accounts, apply for credit, or facilitate document fraud. There is no universal “change your passport” option like resetting a compromised password. The exposure is permanent unless and until those documents expire or are reissued.

Identity Document Vulnerability:
• Unlike passwords, government-issued IDs cannot be instantly changed or revoked
• Document replacement requires lengthy bureaucratic processes across multiple countries
• Criminal use of stolen documents can continue for years before detection

The broader implication is sharper: any company collecting identity documents for verification purposes is now on notice that “we’ll just store them securely” is not a credible promise without demonstrated technical controls. The NIST Computer Security Incident Handling Guide establishes baseline security requirements that were completely absent in this case—no password protection, no encryption, no access logs.

What remains unanswered is whether regulatory bodies in the European countries affected will impose penalties on Nefos or the cannabis clubs for this exposure, and whether individuals will have any recourse for identity restoration or monitoring. The structural parallel to data collection failures that defined previous privacy scandals suggests this incident represents a broader failure in how companies approach sensitive data stewardship. As of mid-April 2026, those questions hang open.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

19. WATaBoy: JIT-Ing Game Boy Instructions to WASM Beats a Native Interpreter

Source: https://humphri.es/blog/WATaBoy/
Site: humphri.es
Submitter: energeticbark (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-29 15:02 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 185 points · 30 comments
Length: 2.7K words (~12 min read)
Language: en

Published on June 28th, 2026

Background This text assumes the reader is familiar with the concept of just-in-time compilation.

Dolphin isn’t on iOS, because you can’t do JIT compilation on iOS. That’s a quick summary of OatmealDome’s blog post “Why Dolphin Isn’t Coming to the App Store”. Ever since reading that, I’ve wondered what it would take to get a CPU-bound emulator like Dolphin working on iOS. Do we just... have to wait a few years for iPhone CPUs to get fast enough to run Dolphin with an interpreter?

Well, Apple has one exception to its JIT restrictions: web browsers. JavaScriptCore, WebKit’s JS engine, uses JIT compilation for its higher-performance tiers. So, if a JS function is called enough times, eventually it’ll be optimised and compiled into native machine code. The same is true for WebAssembly.

So, what if we just piggyback off of this? Instead of generating native machine code directly, we could just generate Wasm bytecode, which will eventually be compiled to native machine code by the web browser. After reading Andy Wingo's blog post "just-in-time code generation within webassembly", I knew such a thing would be possible. In fact, a handful of projects already use this technique, namely The Jiterpreter and v86, but at the time of writing, no emulators for game consoles have used it, and nobody has compared the performance to an interpreter running natively to see if it's faster.

So, for my undergraduate final-year project, I decided I’d build a Game Boy emulator, first using an interpreter, and then using a JIT-to-Wasm. This project primarily serves as a proof of concept and benchmark to compare the performance of each approach. For the rest of this blog post, I'll call this a “JIT-to-Wasm” instead of a “Wasm JIT” to avoid confusion with what the JS engine itself does (recompile Wasm to machine code).
Screenshot of WATaBoy, a Game Boy emulator that compiles SM83 to Wasm

Anyone reading this who knows a bit about emulation just rolled their eyes, because how the hell is a Game Boy emulator going to benefit from JIT compilation? Luckily, GameRoy’s blog post describes exactly how it’s possible while remaining cycle-accurate:

predict when interrupts are going to occur
whenever a JIT block might be interrupted, fall back to an interpreter
lazily evaluate any non-CPU Game Boy components accessed via MMIO

GameRoy’s JIT only targets x86, but nearly all of its optimisation techniques still apply to our JIT-to-Wasm. Definitely check it out if you’re interested in the nitty-gritty details of the Game Boy emulation side of things; it was a huge inspiration.

Still, a Game Boy emulator doesn't benefit from JIT compilation as much as, say, a sixth-gen console. But it was much faster to make, and actually fit within the scope of my final-year project.

Implementation

Now, to narrow the scope of this blog post, I’ll take you through the most broadly applicable part of WATaBoy that I couldn't find a guide for anywhere else: Wasm codegen and late-linking from within Rust. A lot makes WATaBoy interesting, specifically from a Game Boy emulation perspective (e.g., SIMD tile rendering), but those implementation details deserve separate write-ups (you can also just read WATaBoy’s source, of course). If you aren’t interested, skip to the results.

Normally we'd usually reach for tools like wasm-bindgen and wasm-pack to generate glue code between Rust and JavaScript. But those tools cause some ergonomics issues when working with Wasm at a low level. Instead, I use an approach similar to the one described in ”Rust to WebAssembly the hard way”. This just means we'll pass data across the Rust-JS boundary via the C ABI, using pointers and buffer lengths instead of JavaScript objects.

Just a heads up, you’ll need Nightly Rust, because we'll use a tiny bit of inline Wasm later. So run:

rustup default nightly To switch back, just run this again but swap ‘nightly’ for ‘stable’.

Create a new library:

cargo new --lib jit-to-wasm

Hey look, we've already got some code here:

pub fn add(left: u64, right: u64) -> u64 {
	left + right
}

For our simple example, let’s try producing some Wasm bytecode at runtime that does the same thing.

Wasm code generation

The wasm-encoder crate will be our only dependency. With it, we can emit the bytes for Wasm instructions using a sort of builder pattern. It wasn’t designed for our JIT use case, so there are some ergonomics issues and a tiny bit of boilerplate, but it definitely beats writing an array of raw bytes by hand. :)

[package]
name = "jit-to-wasm"
version = "0.1.0"
edition = "2024"

[lib]
# Required to produce a .wasm file.
crate-type = ["cdylib"]

[dependencies]
wasm-encoder = "0.252.0"

Now, let’s use it to produce the bytecode for a Wasm module containing an ‘add’ function. Here comes that boilerplate I mentioned:

use wasm_encoder::*;

fn make_add_module() -> Vec<u8> {
	let mut module = Module::new();

	// Encode the type section for the add function.
	// Parameters: 32-bit int left, 32-bit int right.
	// Returns: 32-bit result.
	let mut types = TypeSection::new();
	let params = vec![ValType::I32, ValType::I32];
	let results = vec![ValType::I32];
	types.ty().function(params, results);
	module.section(&types);

	// Encode the function section.
	let mut functions = FunctionSection::new();
	let type_index = 0;
	functions.function(type_index);
	module.section(&functions);

	// Encode the export section.
	let mut exports = ExportSection::new();
	exports.export("my_add_func", ExportKind::Func, 0);
	module.section(&exports);

	// Encode the code section.
	let mut codes = CodeSection::new();
	let locals = vec![];
	let mut my_add_func = Function::new(locals);
	my_add_func
		.instructions()
		// Get the first 32-bit int onto the stack (left).
		.local_get(0)
		// Get the second 32-bit int onto the stack (right).
		.local_get(1)
		// Add the two ints together.
		.i32_add()
		.end();
	codes.function(&my_add_func);
	module.section(&codes);

	// Extract the encoded Wasm bytes for this module.
	module.finish()
} This example is almost exactly the same as the one from wasm_encoder’s documentation.

Alright, now how do we actually execute this bytecode?

#[unsafe(no_mangle)]
pub extern "C" fn make_and_execute_add(left: i32, right: i32) -> i32 {
	let add_bytecode = make_add_module();

	// Execute add ...somehow???
}

Compiling and linking

Harkening back to Wingo’s blog post, Wasm is a Harvard architecture rather than a von Neumann architecture. Practically speaking, this means we can’t directly execute the bytecode generated by our programme. For WebAssembly specifically, we have to reach out to the embedder (typically JavaScript) to compile, instantiate and link in our new Wasm bytecode. The jit-interface proposal may provide a way to do this directly in Wasm with a func.new instruction, but for now, we gotta talk to JavaScript.

First, we use the synchronous compilation interface to compile and instantiate our bytecode. (Compile & Instantiate)
Then, we add the function from our generated module to our main module’s indirect function table, and keep track of its index in the table so we can invoke it later. (Link)
Finally, we can actually execute the function using the call_indirect instruction, which calls the nth function in our indirect function table. (Dispatch).

Let’s imagine we’re already importing a function called "linkNewModule" that compiles, instantiates, and links a buffer of bytecode; we’ll implement the real thing in JavaScript later.

#[link(wasm_import_module = "env")]
unsafe extern "C" {
	// Returns the new function's index in the table.
	#[link_name = "linkNewModule"]
	fn link_new_module(buffer: *const u8, len: usize) -> i32;
}

Next, we implement our dispatch function to call the nth function in our indirect function table. All we really need to do is execute the call_indirect Wasm instruction. Normally when you want to do something like this, you'd reach for an intrinsic function in std::arch, but there isn't one for call_indirect. So we're going to have to use a tiny bit of inline WebAssembly.

This is an unstable feature, so you'll have to put this at the top of lib.rs:

#![feature(asm_experimental_arch)]

use std::arch::asm;

// Indirectly call the function at `index` in this module's function table.
fn dispatch(index: i32, left: i32, right: i32) -> i32 {
	let mut result: i32;
	unsafe {
		asm!(
			"local.get {right}",
			"local.get {left}",
			"local.get {index}",
			"call_indirect (i32, i32) -> (i32)",
			"local.set {result}",
			index = in(local) index,
			left = in(local) left,
			right = in(local) right,
			result = lateout(local) result,
		);
	}
	result
}

Putting it all together, this is what we have:

#[unsafe(no_mangle)]
pub extern "C" fn make_and_execute_add(left: i32, right: i32) -> i32 {
	let add_bytecode = make_add_module();

	let func_idx = unsafe {
		link_new_module(add_bytecode.as_ptr(), add_bytecode.len())
	};

	dispatch(func_idx, left, right)
}

And one last thing: we have to pass a couple of flags to LLD using a /build.rs file: The first one, --export-table, exports our main Wasm module's indirect function table, so we can access it from the embedder (JS). The second one, --growable-table, lets us grow the table so we can append our JIT-compiled functions. This flag is totally undocumented, but it works, and there's a test for it, so...

fn main() {
	println!("cargo:rustc-link-arg=--export-table");
	println!("cargo:rustc-link-arg=--growable-table");
}

Alright, that's the Rust side of things done. Let's build our main Wasm module:

cargo build --release --target wasm32-unknown-unknown

The embedder (JavaScript) side of things

Now, let's try to call our make_and_execute_add function from the embedder:

// Instantiate the main Wasm module for the JIT itself.
const source = fetch(
	"target/wasm32-unknown-unknown/release/jit_to_wasm.wasm"
);
const {instance} = await WebAssembly.instantiateStreaming(source);

// Generate an add function at runtime and use it to add 2 and 3 together.
const result = instance.exports.make_and_execute_add(2, 3);
console.log(result);

Console output:

TypeError: import env:linkNewModule must be an object

Ah right, we haven't implemented that linking function yet. Let's do that now:

const linkNewModule = (bufferPtr, bufferLen) => {
	// Read the Wasm bytecode from the main instance's memory.
	const bytecode = new Uint8Array(
		instance.exports.memory.buffer,
		bufferPtr,
		bufferLen
	);
	
	// Compile and instantiate the bytecode into a new instance.
	const newModule = new WebAssembly.Module(bytecode);
	const newInstance = new WebAssembly.Instance(newModule);
	
	// Add the new instance's "my_add_func" function to our main instance's
	// indirect function table.
	instance.exports.__indirect_function_table.grow(
		1,
		newInstance.exports.my_add_func
	);
	
	// Return the index of the function we've just linked in.
	return instance.exports.__indirect_function_table.length - 1;
}

const importObj = {env: {linkNewModule}};

// Instantiate the main Wasm module for the JIT itself.
const source = fetch(
	"target/wasm32-unknown-unknown/release/jit_to_wasm.wasm"
);
const {instance} = await WebAssembly.instantiateStreaming(
	source,
	importObj
);

// Generate an add function at runtime and use it to add 2 and 3 together.
const result = instance.exports.make_and_execute_add(2, 3);
console.log(result);

Here's the console output:

5

And here’s an example of the code we just wrote running on this page: Left: + Right: =

And that’s the basis of WATaBoy’s codegen, linking, and dispatch. I'm sure you can guess how you might modify the function's signature and instructions in make_add to generate more useful Wasm modules at runtime. In WATaBoy, our JIT recompiles and appends each non-branching Game Boy instruction to create a basic block (a Wasm module with a single execute_block function) that we can cache and re-execute later. If you're curious, check out how part of the Game Boy's instruction set is recompiled.

Results

Now, let’s compare performance between WATaBoy’s JIT compiler running in Wasm, its interpreter running in Wasm, and its interpreter running natively. For this benchmark, all three variations were set to load a game’s ROM and emulate the looping title screen at uncapped speed for 10 seconds of wall-clock time. The three ROMs I tested were: Pokémon Blue, The Legend of Zelda: Link’s Awakening, and Tobu Tobu Girl (a free homebrew platformer). Results are measured in total number of frames emulated within the 10-second timespan.

Benchmark environment
Environment MacBook Air (13-inch, M2, 2022)
Memory 16 GB
OS macOS 26.5 (25F71)
Safari 26.5 (21624.2.5.11.4)
Chrome 148.0.7778.168
Firefox 150.0.3
Rust Compiler 1.97.0-nightly (82bee9650 2026-05-09)
WATaBoy Commit c06850a

Each benchmark configuration was run for 5 iterations. Wasm benchmarks were conducted in a web browser with no other tabs open, and the tab that ran the benchmark was refreshed after each iteration. The total number of frames emulated was averaged, then divided by the Game Boy's refresh rate (59.73)×10 to get the relative speed shown below.
Comparison of each approach relative to the original Game Boy hardware

Nice! Emulating Pokémon Blue, the JIT-to-Wasm managed to be ~1.2x faster than the interpreter running natively, so we benefit from JIT, despite being an extra layer of indirection away from the native machine code. It’s also ~1.5x faster than the interpreter running in Wasm.

I also ran the benchmark across the three major browser engines just to see how they stack up.
Comparing our JIT-to-Wasm's performance across Safari, Chrome and Firefox

Looks like Safari pulls ahead! Just to be clear, our JIT wasn’t intentionally tuned to any specific browser; most of the profiling during development was actually done in Firefox. So it's nice to know that iOS being WebKit-only doesn’t hold us back (at least in this case). :)

One good thing about this whole thing being web-based is that I can just put the demo right here in the blog post. One bad thing about it being so fast is that it may trigger seizures in people with photosensitive epilepsy ⚠️, so please be careful before pressing start.

frametime
0ms

avg last 100
0ms

min last 100
0ms

max last 100
0ms

Speed: × Tobu Tobu Girl is licensed under MIT/CC-BY.

Further work

WATaBoy

Audio and GBC support are the most prominent missing features.

In terms of performance, profiling shows that emulating the PPU still takes up most of WATaBoy's runtime, because there are still a few PPU interrupts that I haven't implemented prediction for. This causes the JIT to fall back to the interpreter more often than it actually needs to, so it'll be my main priority before optimising the JIT compiler any further.

Our JIT-to-Wasm clearly beats out our interpreter running natively, and these results possibly apply to other emulators as well, especially those which are heavily CPU-bound. But looking at the results critically, we have only shown that our basic-block JIT compiler beats our basic fetch-decode-execute interpreter.

The interpreter is fast, and a lot of time was spent optimising it, but there are still niche optimisation techniques (e.g., a cached interpreter) that might help it catch up with our basic block JIT compiler.

The same goes for optimising our JIT compiler as well. For example, recompiling branching instructions would mean we’d stay executing JIT blocks for longer and spend less time falling back to the interpreter and dispatching between blocks.

I think it would be interesting to compare their relative performance with further optimisations, and I plan to continue working on this project as a hobby until I’m pushing the limits of both approaches. And if you know about cycle-accurate Game Boy emulation and you’d like to contribute, or if you're just curious, check out the project on GitHub.

JIT-to-Wasm in general

I'd argue that right now, the main pain point with JIT-ing to Wasm is codegen. Every project I've seen so far is using their own bespoke tooling for generating Wasm bytecode, and none of them is as ergonomic or robust as tools like DynASM or Cranelift. For this technique to see more widespread adoption, emulator developers will probably want some way to write strings of human-readable WAT that gets translated into bytecode at compile time, in the same way that DynASM translates ARM/x86 assembly into machine code.

It’s also worth acknowledging another limitation to this approach. There’s no way to do a few of the lower-level optimisations Dolphin relies on. For example, Dolphin's hardware fastmem wouldn't work since any invalid memory accesses are irrecoverable within the Wasm runtime.

Conclusion

This doesn't necessarily prove that a GameCube emulator would run at full speed just by implementing a JIT-to-Wasm. But given that even the basic block JIT was able to outperform an interpreter, I think it’s an avenue worth exploring. And hopefully, with more mature tooling for codegen, Wasm could become a common target for faster cross-platform console emulation, especially on iOS.

You can try out the full version of WATaBoy with your own ROMs. Yes, I know the interface looks more like Universal Paperclips than an emulator; that’s O.K. The primary focus is its fancy implementation details rather than its design. :)

Thanks for reading!

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

20. Wallace the 6 inch f/2.8 telescope, building it, and hiking with it

Source: https://lucassifoni.info/blog/hiking-with-wallace/
Site: Lucas Sifoni
Author: Lucas Sifoni
Published: 2026-06-25
HN activity: 119 points · 20 comments
Length: 1.0K words (~5 min read)
Language: en

Wallace the 6 inch f/2.8 telescope, building it, and hiking with it Jun 25 2026

TOC :

Walking with Wallace
Technical details

Walking with Wallace

I wanted to try a new kind of post, to present Wallace, a 153mm f/2.8 ultra-wide-field telescope that I’ve built last year a bit more, but also try to share the “outdoor” part of astronomy.

I now spend a lot of time outside with running and hiking, and started to wonder how could I share that, the same question that emerged when I started observational astronomy - how can I share the views ? There are people wonderfully skilled at that, with astronomical drawing, like Serge Vieillard and I encourage you to browse his website.

Of course we can’t ever share the visual experience, like we can’t share the sensorial experience of hiking or trail running - but we can try to give a few impressions, and I’ve found myself watching trail running content from Kelp and Fern on YouTube who, in my opinion, is one of the best current outdoor content producer, because he removes himself a lot from the process in appearance, and produces a finely-worked but raw material impression.

So, here is a kind of photo-video dump, with pictures and sounds of the forest, of going to a cliff, setting up Wallace from my backpack, observing for a while, and going back. The fun, and new to me thing, is that I’ve had a lovely evening despite the temperature being in the 36 degrees Celcius, and bearing more hardware than necessary (nearly 3L of water, the telescope, my foldable stool, its 3D printed foldable stool, a DSLR and tripod, batteries, a smartphone tripod) because I wanted to take pictures, and had to concentrate on telling the story of the astronomy-hike I would have done without sharing in mind.

It was enjoyable despite distracting me, and I had the surprise to get “hints” at times of being actually more focused on the environment (wind, insects chirping, sound of my feet on the limestone) because I wanted to actually pay attention to what I should capture. It did not distract me that much though because I already snap a lot of pictures when I go outside, just to sometimes rewind them.

The result is an “ambient impression”. I hope you’ll enjoy it as I did despite not being a capable videographers/photographer. And sorry for the shakiness of the on-the-path videos. It truly makes one appreciate the work of actual videographers.

Technical details

I also realize I didn’t show Wallace in detail on the site yet. It’s my best instrument to date because it has such a well-defined purpose and fulfills it fully, because it doesn’t try to do anything other than ultra-wide deep-sky views, and framing NGC7000 whole in a wide-field eyepiece is something magical.

So here are a few more “technical” pics of Wallace, before it was adapted to take 2” eyepieces.

Wallace has a 153mm primary at f/2.84 but that ultra-fast ratio is a bit of an accident. I was aiming for f/3, but misread the thickness of the shim needed on the sine table where I ground the curve the curve, ended up at nearly f/2.7, and decided to finish it anyway as a challenge, but raises the focal ratio a bit by doing all the fine grinding mirror on top.

The primary mirror took me two attempts, the first ending (detailed in the cloudynights post) when I dug a deep scratch across the face trying to smooth down a central bump. So I went back to fine grinding. The second figure kept a central hole that the 59mm secondary fully masks, which is not a problem. Figuring that fast of an asphere and ending up with a rather smooth figure with a good edge was already a real challenge, and nothing guarantees that I would have ended up with a better figure after raising the central hole again (well at least in a reasonable timeframe). But above all, I was frightened of maybe not having eliminated the source of a scratch. So 0.92 in-instrument it is, and it is quite glorious on the sky.

At f/2.8x, correcting coma is mandatory :p. So I used the 4-element GSO corrector designed by Roger Ceragioli, found on leboncoin for 65 euros. Most people think of this corrector as quite bad because of its low price and wrong-spacing out of the box. Indeed, if you use it as-bought, its backfocus is about 56mm, but its optical design calls for more than 70mm (in Wallace’s case, the best fit determined visually was around 79mm), and it beats my MPCC+hyperbolic formula in K2, while showing a lot less chromatism. There is a lot written on CN about this corrector, and R.Ceragioli confirms the design and spacing needs there. Why it was packaged and sold with the form-factor spacing it wrong, I have no idea.

The two-modules-on-a-dovetail construction is a tribute to the legendary Coulter CT-100, and I printed in deep-blue ASA. In addition to the dovetail, there are six solid 6mm carbon rods. The primary cell is a simple 6-points on three levers cell.

Correction is great over 66% of the field and starts to fall a little at the edge, which isn’t a problem since in a 100 degree eyepiece, this thing shows more than 4 degrees of true field and the outer part is more “context” that you have to turn your head towards to see it.

And of course, files are free and on Printables.

Discussions on:

Astrosurf (http://www.astrosurf.com/topic/177708-wallace-petit-scope-et-grand-champ/)
Cloudynights (https://www.cloudynights.com/forums/topic/911830-6-f28-second-attempt/#comments)
Webastro (https://www.webastro.net/forums/topic/256031-wallace-mon-nouveau-chercheur-imprim%C3%A9-en-3d/)

The next iteration will be a lot harder to pull off, because with a lot of enthusiasm after actually observing with Wallace, we diamond-generated a new blank with a meniscus to make it very light. It is very thin, very sensitive to hand temperature while working, but will cool down very fast in the field, which is nice for a grab-and-go scope. The mirror of the first Wallace needs a good 30 minutes to cool down to ambient, in comparison, before correction settles. And this time, I’ll have a revenge on the center bump/low and won’t settle for less than 0.95 strehl, for the beauty of the craft.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

21. Old Computer Challenge

Source: http://occ.sdf.org/
Site: occ.sdf.org
Submitter: wrxd (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-27 22:18 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 5 points · 0 comments
Length: 1.3K words (~6 min read)
Language: en-US

irc: #oldcomputerchallenge libera.chat

Old Computer Challenge community is a smol group of enthusiasts, who come together every year to experience new and old things.

Solène Rapenne began the Old Computer Challenge in July 2021 with the initial 7 day 512M of RAM task. Since then the challenge brought together a following of retro computing and digital minimalism enthusiasts.

Like before, if you decide to document your journey and have it archived here, you can submit your journal by sending us the url to the mailing list:

~tekk/old-computer-challenge@lists.sr.ht

irc: #oldcomputerchallenge irc.libera.chat
mailing list: email this address to subscribe
~tekk/old-computer-challenge+subscribe@lists.sr.ht
rss feed

2026
2025
2024
2023
2022
2021

2026 - Make Something

First off, some news: I (Tekk, the person running the mailing list,) have been given control over the website as Matto and Prahou, who ran it previously, have stepped down. I'd like to thank them (and of course Solene) for all the work they've put in to make every year until now have fun! In positive news, that means that if you have any issues with the mailing list or website, you can just contact me (my e-mail address is easily found on the list.)

This year's OCC will take place during the first full week of July. That means from the 5th to the 12th this year.

Given the constant onslaught of LLM garbage the last few years, I thought it was appropriate for us to have a theme again, if a simple one. There are still no rules for how you OCC, but I'd like to encourage people to hand-make something during their OCC week and share it somehow, be it on their page, on the mailing list, or in IRC. Write a story, make some music, publish a new program. Just flex your creative muscle!

Thanks to Emilio for the banner this year!

Participants To be filled in.

2025 - No Challenge

aka DIY

Participants

[www] lambdacreate.com
[gopher] bencollver on tilde.pink
[gopher] box.matto.nl
[www] wastingmoves.com
[gopher] anthk on texto-plano
[www] ti-l.de
[www] andrei.xyz
[www] thedaemons.space
[gopher] stoickidoomer on tilde.institute
[gopher] g4slv.cloud
[www] www.k58.uk
[gemini] jasonsanta.xyz
[www] tekk.in
[www] sinopemigre.neocities.org
[www] vidak
[www] 82MHz
[gopher] nathancampos
[www] dkrefft.de
[www] bsandro.tec
[www] talibov.xyz
[www] deadnet.se/occ25
[gopher] unixlore
[www] unixlore.net
[www] retrobsd.ddns
[gemini] bugwhisperer.dev
[www] bugwhisperer.dev
[www] cyberhole
[gemini] tilde.town/~mio
[www] jeanjack on catto.garden
[www] screwlisp.small-web.org
[www] lyk.so
[www] acdw.net
[www] novelistparty.com
[gemini] jmccue at sdf.org
[gopher] jmccue at sdf.org
[gopher] /booji.mutated.net
[www] blog.not-outdated.com

2024 - DIY

The topic of 2024 was DIY. Getting inspired by other users and previous years and crafting a personal experience!

The Challengees

0x00 | TC 2048
82mhz | "Back to 2000s"
andreixyz | "Party like it's 2004"
angora.pet | 9front
Daniel | 586 NetBSD
ddlyh | Pentium III, 128M, no phones allowed
gopher: ~dokuja (http proxy) | G3 iMac
durrendal | the Ruby crusades
gopher: ed(1) conference (http proxy) | Combination of the three
gopher: emilio (website) | (es)
gopher: gef (http proxy) | observe and understand
Headcrash | Apple flavored OCC
gemini: jasonsanta (http proxy) | Intel Atom Win7
jag | OpenBSD
gopher: jdd (http proxy) | Internet on Demand
JDRM | T500 9front
gemini: jmcunx (http proxy) | xorgless OpenBSD like it's 1989
Keith Burnett | "actually using troff"
Klaus Zimmermann | "Push it to the limit!"
gemini ~lettuce (http proxy) | zine making
Marc | Debian Dell
gopher: matto (http proxy) | no X11, no xorg, FreeBSD
gopher: ~mhd (http proxy)
gemini: mio (http proxy) | Portrait of a penguin as an old computer
msangi | 2009 Macbook
Nathan | Many Macs
Paths of the Moon | A glorious Sony VAIO
prahou | xorgless OpenBSD
rollcat | hand-me-down-Macs
gopher: sinza (http proxy) | in favor of the 2000s
sizeof(cat) | Windows 7
gemini: socksinspace (http proxy) | EeePC 4G
Steve Lord | Going Newer Than Normal
gopher: ~stoickidoomer (https proxy) | trickled(8)
gopher: sunoc (http proxy) **work in progress**
teabag.ninja | Acer 3500
Tekk | Now with 30% more fruit
thedaemon | "artists of the front!"
gemini: vigilia (http proxy) | First gen Macbook Air and OpenBSD
gopher: xiled (http proxy)

2023 - "The machine is not timeless"

The 2023 issue of the Old Computer Challenge was a nostalgic return to its roots. Old and slow, still divine.

512M RAM
1 CORE
LOWEST CPU FREQUENCY

The list:

[gemini] Adam's OCC
82MHz
[gopher] xiled
bsandro
[gemini] lionelfromlunel
DdlyH's SmolPub
thedaemon's space
[gemini] EhrindCB
[gopher] emilio
ffog
[gemini] ghostze.ro
Headcrash's deadnet.se blog
hotchill
jmcunx
[gopher] juliobrome
Keith Burnett
(λ (x) (create x) '(knowledge))
lich
luke8086
[gopher] mhd
Notes from the Dork Web
[gopher] matto
[gemini] ~mio
[gemini] mouseless
[gopher] nutilius
prahou triapul
[gopher] praetor.tel
supernova's space
[gemini] socksinspace
[gopher] screwtape
Solene'%
Tekk's webbed site
Yanik Magnan
[gemini] xchg
[gopher] z3bra

2022 - 60 minutes of internet

The 2022 edition focused on limited internet time. The idea was to recreate the experience of the old time of RTC modems with a monthly time budget. Again, the duration of the challenge was one week, from 10th to 17th July 2022.

The challenge rules for this edition were easy: you are allowed to connect your computer to the Internet for a maximum accumulated time of 1h per day, from 10th to 17th July included. This means you can connect six times for ten minutes, twice for thirty minutes, or once for one hour in the day.

Again, for the participants it was a challenging experience. The rules of the challenge resulted in an unexpected side effect. It allowed for limited interaction on the IRC channel. Other than that, people were positive about having attended.

Participants' blogs and notes

EG's blog
durendall's website
rollcat's challenge notes
mio with Alpine and Asus C201
[gopher] dokuja
[gemini]NinjaTrappeur
Tekk's journal
stn's experience
Keith Burnett's journal
matto: The Old Computer 2022
Soléne: Day 1
prahou: Demon Internet; day -1

2021 - 512M of RAM

The challenge of 2021 was the first edition, with the following rules:

1 CPU maximum, whatever the model. This means only 1 CPU|Core|Thread. Some bios allow to disable multi core.
512 MB of memory (if you have more it's not a big deal, if you want to reduce your ram create a tmpfs and put a big file in it)
using USB dongles is allowed (storage, wifi, Bluetooth whatever)
only for your personal computer, during work time use your usual stuff
relying on services hosted remotely is allowed (VNC, file sharing, whatever help you)
using a smartphone to replace your computer may work, please share if you move habits to your smartphone during the challenge
if you absolutely need your regular computer for something really important please use it. The goal is to have fun but not make your week a nightmare.

The challenge took place from 10th July morning until 17th July morning.

At the end of the challenge it turned out that the participants were all very positive about the experience.

Participants

prahou's blog, running a T42 with OpenBSD 6.9 i386 with hostname brouk
Joe's blog about the challenge and why they need it
Solene running an iBook G4 with OpenBSD -current macppc with hostname jeefour
[gopher] matto's report using FreeBSD 13 on an Acer aspire one
cel's blog using Void Linux PPC on an Apple Powerbook G4
Keith Burnett's blog using a T42 with an emphasis on using GUI software to see how it goes
Kuchikuu's blog using a T60 running Debian (but specs out of the challenge)
Ohio Quilbio Olarte's blog using an MSI Wind netbook with OpenBSD
[gemini] carcosa's blog using an ASUS eeePC netbook with Fedora i386 downgraded with kernel command line
Tekk's website, using a Dell Latitude D400 (2003) running Slackware 14.2

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

22. SQLite improving performance with pre-sort

Source: https://andersmurphy.com/2026/06/07/sqlite-improving-performance-with-pre-sort.html
Site: andersmurphy.com
Submitter: tosh (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-26 14:36 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 38 points · 3 comments
Length: 573 words (~3 min read)
Language: en

07 Jun 2026

In the last post we showed how the randomness of UUID4 can have a large impact on insert speed and how UUID7 can help. But, what about other data that might have random qualities? Where we can't reach for UUID7 to solve our problems?

Random data

We will use a 160-bit (20 byte) random value generated by SecureRandom similar to the one described in this article. Why? Because for things like session tokens you probably do not want to use UUID7 (leaks information, might not have enough entropy for your use case etc). This could also represent any data that has a primary key that is random (or more specifically unordered).

Here's the code to generate them:

(defn random-unguessable-uid []
  (let [buffer (byte-array 20)]
    (.nextBytes secure-random buffer)))


Let's see how this performs.

(d/q writer
  ["CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS event(id BLOB PRIMARY KEY, data BLOB) WITHOUT ROWID"])
  
(dotimes [_ 10]
  (time
    (d/with-write-tx [db writer]
      (dotimes [_ 1000000]
        (d/q db ["INSERT INTO event (id, data) values (?, ?)"
                 (random-unguessable-id) data])))))


Results:

total rows	time in ms
1000000	2478
2000000	4927
3000000	6262
4000000	7195
5000000	8257
6000000	8704
7000000	9244
8000000	9771
9000000	10387
10000000	11103

Around a hundred thousand inserts per second. Just like with UUID4 things are slow.

Pre sort

The defining characteristic of a B+ Tree is that it is ordered. Sequential writes are fast. Random data works against this thrashing pages, causing page splits and tree re-balancing. It's not a good time.

But, we are batching the data already. So what if we sort it before we insert?

First we need a fast way to compare our random id. It's 20 bytes, we don't want to iterate over them, so instead we just take the first 8 bytes and convert them into a long. We probably don't need to compare the entire byte array to get a good enough sort. The important part is this comparison is unsigned to match SQLite.

When two BLOB values are compared, the result is determined using memcmp().

Note: This probably isn't the fastest way to sort random data. I don't write blog post with an internet connection (it's too distracting). Search is also terrible these days. So mostly work with good old offline docs with fuzzy text search using dash (zeal is the linux equivalent). If you know a faster/better way to sort byte arrays in Java/Clojure let me know!

(defn bytes->long [^bytes bytes]
  (-> (ByteBuffer/wrap bytes 0 8)
    (ByteBuffer/.getLong 0)))
    
(defn byte-compare
  "Compares the first 8 most significant bytes of a byte array.
  Big Endian (matches SQLites blob sort)."
  [a b]
    (Long/compareUnsigned
      (bytes->long a)
      (bytes->long b)))


Let's see how this performs:

(d/q writer
  ["CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS event(id BLOB PRIMARY KEY, data BLOB) WITHOUT ROWID"])

(dotimes [_ 10]
  (time
    (d/with-write-tx [db writer]
      (->> (repeatedly 1000000 random-unguessable-id)
        (sort byte-compare)
        (run!
          (fn [id]
            (d/q db ["INSERT INTO event (it, data) values (?, ?)"
                     id data])))))))


Results:

total rows	time in ms
1000000	1987
2000000	2251
3000000	2296
4000000	2614
5000000	2687
6000000	3244
7000000	3118
8000000	3311
9000000	3485
10000000	3835

Fun! Despite the overhead, sorting the batch improves performance by around 2-3x.

Conclusion

Hopefully, this post helps show you how batching data opens up useful optimisations like pre-sort when dealing with unordered data.

The full benchmark code can be found here.

Thanks to Everyone on the Datastar discord who read drafts of this and gave me feedback.

Discussion

hackernews
reddit

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

23. Dark Sky Lighting

Source: https://www.savingourstars.org/darkskylighting#whatisdarkskylighting
Site: Saving Our Stars
Submitter: alexandrehtrb (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-25 16:19 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 170 points · 30 comments
Length: 801 words (~4 min read)
Language: en-US

Why Dark Sky Lighting

Safety

Health

Wildlife

Rest

Planet

Stars

Hope

What is Dark Sky Lighting?


Why Dark-Sky Lighting?

SCROLL DOWN

Why Dark Sky Lighting

Why Dark-Sky Lighting?

Safety

Safety

Safety

Dark-sky lighting still gives us light but in a safer way while also greatly reducing the scope and distance light pollution travels. It's the solution to light pollution!

It reduces dangerous disability glare for drivers and pedestrians (have you ever been blinded by a car with white headlights?). Too much light (especially if it's white) can make it harder to see and makes us less safe by creating harsh shadows and giving criminals a place to hide. Brighter does not mean safer. In England and Wales, an extensive study analyzing over 14 years of data from 62 authorities found little evidence of an increase in traffic accidents or crime after reduced lighting.

Health

Health

Health

Darkness beneficially affects our circadian rhythm, which controls our hormones, sleep cycles and even our organs and immune systems. Blue light at night (from white LEDs, smart phones, etc.), can possibly harm your health and contribute to insomnia, cancer, diabetes, heart disease, obesity, etc (see Dark Sky Resources for tips). For good health, we need sunshine, but we also need exposure to darkness.

Wildlife

Wildlife

Rest

Rest

Rest

Nighttime is a time to rest. Amber dark-sky lighting utilizes colors that more closely resemble sunsets and candlelight rather than white colors that many find too bright and unpleasant at night--not to mention the possible disturbance to sleep! The town of Davis, CA put up a fight after their streetlights were replaced with white LEDs, and they won!

Planet

Planet

Stars

Stars

Our Stars

What you'll notice most about light pollution is that it makes our stars disappear from view. Dark skies, places where you can truly see the awe-inspiring, ancient, sacred skies and stars our ancestors saw, are dwindling. This is due to rapidly growing light pollution and especially the current problem of blue-Rich White LEDs replacing older streetlights. Please contact your city/county officials to make sure these lights aren't coming to your streets...before it's too late!

Hope

Hope

What is Dark Sky Lighting?

What is Dark Sky Lighting?

What is Dark-Sky Lighting?

· It's simply a way of lighting that helps keep the sky dark by fully shielding the light bulb on the top and sides so the light is directed down rather than to the sides and up to the sky, which creates glare, excess light and hides our stars. (Skip to 4:50 of "Losing the Dark," below, to see this demonstrated). See photo examples.

· It is amber in color instead of blue, green or white. Amber LEDs are a better choice than warm white or low CCT white LEDS. However, choose warm white or low CCT (2700 kelvin or less) over a higher kelvin white LED. Find amber LED sources here. For further understanding, please see Dark-Sky Resources.

· It is dimmed and no brighter than necessary, is only used where or when needed, and often uses timers or motion detectors.

This solution to light pollution began with Flagstaff Dark Skies Coalition, when in the 1950s, they realized the necessity of protecting their dark skies, and they now have the darkest skies of probably any illuminated city you will find. They use mostly *amber* dark-sky lighting, and it's now widely available--people just need to know about it.

Thank you for reading! I appreciate you! As you can see, with amber dark-sky lighting, we all win! It's widely available and affordable. We don't have to settle for white LED streetlights and commercial lighting when there are amber LEDs that are affordable, efficient, and practical. We just need to stand together as a society (as we did with limiting cigarette smoking in public areas of the U.S.) and let our towns know we want it!

Please take 2 minutes to watch the beautiful trailer of "Saving the Dark" by Sriram Murali, below, which perfectly states what I wish all people knew--that we *can* reclaim our night sky! It will take all of us speaking up to our cities, asking for amber dark-sky lighting, and we must act fast, as new, even worse lighting, white LEDs, are currently being chosen.

Here, you will find a variety of sample letters, and please see How to Help for the most powerful things you can do to help reduce light pollution. We can do it, but to win this battle, we must all work together!

Sarah

Saving Our Stars

Disclaimer: The views about the nature of the universe expressed in this video do not necessarily reflect the views of Saving Our Stars.

Note: These are not affiliate links. I do not work for these companies or earn a commission, and Saving Our Stars does not receive sponsorship funds.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

24. What happens when you run a CUDA kernel?

Source: https://fergusfinn.com/blog/what-happens-when-you-run-a-gpu-kernel/
Site: fergusfinn.com
Submitter: mezark (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-29 13:11 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 219 points · 28 comments
Length: 6.4K words (~28 min read)
Language: en

Here’s a simple CUDA program. It adds two vectors.

__global__ void vadd(const float* a, const float* b, float* c, int n) {
    int i = blockIdx.x * blockDim.x + threadIdx.x;
    if (i < n) c[i] = a[i] + b[i];
}

int main() {
    int n = 1 << 20;                 // a million floats (1,048,576)
    size_t bytes = n * sizeof(float);

    float *a = (float*)malloc(bytes), *b = (float*)malloc(bytes),
          *c = (float*)malloc(bytes);
    for (int i = 0; i < n; i++) a[i] = b[i] = 1.0f;

    float *da, *db, *dc;
    cudaMalloc(&da, bytes);
    cudaMalloc(&db, bytes);
    cudaMalloc(&dc, bytes);
    cudaMemcpy(da, a, bytes, cudaMemcpyHostToDevice);
    cudaMemcpy(db, b, bytes, cudaMemcpyHostToDevice);

    vadd<<<4096, 256>>>(da, db, dc, n);   // 4096 * 256 = n threads, one per float

    cudaMemcpy(c, dc, bytes, cudaMemcpyDeviceToHost);
    printf("c[0]=%f c[n-1]=%f\n", c[0], c[n-1]);
}

Compiled for an RTX 4090, and launched, it does correctly work out that $1+1=2$, a million timesI didn’t check all of them..

$ nvcc -arch=sm_89 -o vadd vadd.cu && ./vadd
c[0]=2.000000 c[n-1]=2.000000

Telling you that involved tens of millions of CPU instructions, a couple of device files, nine hundred ioctls, and one memory-mapped doorbell register. In this post, we’ll follow this one kernel from the code down to the warps, and back up to the answerAn aside, this post is an instance of the ‘legibility transition’ that agents have engendered. There really is very little about computers you can’t find out with curiosity and (machine-enhanced) persistence. An interesting discussion of the implications of legibility for what AI can help us to know here..

Compiling our program with nvcc§

We ought to start with how to turn this CUDA program into something that the device can actually read. To do that we need a compiler. Really, we need many compilers.

nvcc is a driver program that runs several other compilers and combines their output. If you pass --keep it leaves the whole pipeline on disk for you to read:

$ nvcc --keep -arch=sm_89 -o vadd vadd.cu && ls
...
vadd.ptx            # device code as PTX        (from cicc)
vadd.sm_89.cubin    # device code as SASS       (from ptxas)
vadd.fatbin         # cubin + PTX, bundled      (from fatbinary)
vadd.cudafe1.stub.c # host launch stub + kernel registration
vadd.o              # final host object, fatbin embedded
...

The host code goes to your host compiler. The device code (vadd) takes more steps: cicc, an LLVM-based compiler, turns it into PTX, and then ptxas turns the PTX into SASS.

PTX is a virtual ISA. It has infinitely many typed registers, and no notion of how many of them the hardware actually has. Here is the (elided) body of vadd in PTX:

$ cat vadd.ptx
...
mad.lo.s32      %r1, %r3, %r4, %r5;        // set register r1 to ctaid*ntid + tid
setp.ge.s32     %p1, %r1, %r2;             // set predicate p1 if i >= n
@%p1 bra        $L__BB0_2;                 // if out of bounds, skip to exit
cvta.to.global.u64  %rd4, %rd1;            // convert generic pointer %rd1 to a global address, store in %rd4
mul.wide.s32    %rd5, %r1, 4;              // multiply r1 by 4, store the result in %rd5
add.s64         %rd6, %rd4, %rd5;          // add %rd4, %rd5, result in %rd6
ld.global.f32   %f2, [%rd6];               // load a[i] into %f2
...
add.f32         %f3, %f2, %f1;             // add %f1 and %f2, result in %f3
st.global.f32   [%rd10], %f3;              // store c[i] = ... in global memory

The virtual registers look like %rd1–%rd10, %f1–%f3The prefix is the type: %r is a 32-bit integer, %rd a 64-bit one, %f a 32-bit float, %p a one-bit predicate..

PTX is more ‘longhand’ than you might expect. For example, forming one address in %rd6 takes three PTX instructions. This happens because PTX is device agnostic.
Why three?

CUDA pointers are “generic” by default, meaning they could name global, shared, or local memory. cvta.to.global asserts the pointer lives in the global window, so a cheaper ld.global can be used later. mul.wide.s32 then turns the index i into a byte offset by multiplying by 4 (sizeof(float)) and widening 32→64 bits in one step. add.s64 adds that to the base pointer.

Next, ptxas transforms our PTX, which is device agnostic, into the SASS for your architecture, which isn’t. The SASS it emits looks different:

$ cuobjdump -sass vadd
/*0000*/  MOV R1, c[0x0][0x28] ;                      // set up the stack pointer (ABI; unused here)
/*0010*/  S2R R6, SR_CTAID.X ;                        // R6 = blockIdx.x
/*0020*/  S2R R3, SR_TID.X ;                          // R3 = threadIdx.x
/*0030*/  IMAD R6, R6, c[0x0][0x0], R3 ;              // i = ctaid*ntid + tid
/*0040*/  ISETP.GE.AND P0, PT, R6, c[0x0][0x178], PT ;// P0 = (i >= n)
/*0050*/  @P0 EXIT ;                                  // if so, exit
/*0060*/  MOV R7, 0x4 ;                               // load literal 4 (sizeof(float)) into R7 as multiplier
/*0070*/  ULDC.64 UR4, c[0x0][0x118] ;                // uniform load of a driver-provided system value
/*0080*/  IMAD.WIDE R4, R6, R7, c[0x0][0x168] ;       // &b[i]
/*0090*/  IMAD.WIDE R2, R6, R7, c[0x0][0x160] ;       // &a[i]
/*00a0*/  LDG.E R4, [R4.64] ;                         // b[i]
/*00b0*/  LDG.E R3, [R2.64] ;                         // a[i]
/*00c0*/  IMAD.WIDE R6, R6, R7, c[0x0][0x170] ;       // &c[i]
/*00d0*/  FADD R9, R4, R3 ;                           // a[i] + b[i]
/*00e0*/  STG.E [R6.64], R9 ;                         // c[i] = ...
/*00f0*/  EXIT ;
What the S2R lines are doing

S2R is “special register to register”: it copies a special register the hardware maintains per thread — here SR_CTAID.X (the block’s index, blockIdx.x) and SR_TID.X (the lane’s index within the block, threadIdx.x) — into an ordinary register so IMAD can do arithmetic on it.

Ten-odd virtual registers have collapsed onto seven real onesncu reports launch__registers_per_thread = 16. The disassembly only names up to R9, but the allocator reserves a few more for the ABI and alignment.. The two mul.wide plus add sequences have fused into a single IMAD.WIDE. The cvta conversions are gone, absorbed into the addressing.

The c[0x0][…] operands are constant bank 0, in a small, driver-managed region. These are the kernel’s arguments — the pointers a, b, c and the size n — along with the launch geometry. Filling the bank is the job of a structure called the QMD that the driver hands the GPU at launch, which we’ll come to once the launch itself reaches the card.
Why the arguments sit in constant bank 0, and where

They’re in constant memory because this is a broadcast read: every thread in the grid needs the identical pointers, and the constant cache is able to serve all 32 lanes in one shot. The layout is fixed — 0x160, 0x168, 0x170 are the pointers a, b, c, and 0x178 is n, with the launch geometry alongside them at 0x0 (blockDim.x). Bank 0 also holds ABI parameters such as c[0x0][0x28], the stack base that MOV R1, c[0x0][0x28] loads at entry. We’ll see these same offsets again when the host stub packs the arguments for launch.

The ‘cubin’ file holding this SASS is an ELF file — the same object-file container Linux uses for ordinary executables and shared librariescuobjdump -elf shows a symbol table, a .text.vadd section holding the machine code, plus CUDA-specific sections like .nv.callgraph.. The fatbinary executable bundles the cubin together with the PTX into a single ‘fatbin’, and cuobjdump on the result reveals that the fatbin embedded in our binary contains both:

$ cuobjdump vadd
...
Fatbin elf code:  arch = sm_89        # the SASS we just read
Fatbin ptx code:  arch = sm_89  compressed   # the PTX, shipped too

The SASS is what actually runs on this 4090, but the PTX rides along as a forward-compatibility fallback. If you then take this binary to a GPU whose architecture the cubin doesn’t cover, the driver can JIT the PTX into fresh SASS at load time.

Finally, that fatbin is nested in the host executable, where readelf -S finds it occupying its own sections:

$ readelf -S vadd
...
[18] .nv_fatbin        PROGBITS   ...
[19] __nv_module_id    PROGBITS   ...
[29] .nvFatBinSegment  PROGBITS   ...
...

The vadd binary that nvcc spits out is a single executable containing host code, a complete ELF object containing the Ada SASS, and a copy of the PTX. Because PTX is verbose plain text, nvcc compresses it by default to keep the binary size small; the driver will only decompress and JIT-compile it if the binary is run on an architecture that the pre-compiled SASS doesn’t cover.

How the host triggers the GPU§

The compiled GPU machine code is now sitting inert inside the .nv_fatbin section of our ./vadd executable. When you launch the program on the host, we have to bridge two worlds: the host CPU, and the GPU sitting across the PCIe bus.

To set up a host binary that knows how to cross the bridge, the frontend compiler (cudafe++) inserts a hidden constructor into your code, running before the main function starts. Its job is to register our embedded fatbinary with the CUDA runtime and record a mapping that the runtime will later use: associating the host-side function pointer vadd with the compiled device kernel’s mangled name in the fatbin.

When the compiler encounters vadd<<<4096, 256>>>(da, db, dc, n), it replaces that high-level expression with a generated host launch stub. This stub packs our kernel arguments into a buffer in host memory. The pointers da, db, dc and the integer n are aligned at byte offsets 0, 8, 16, and 24 These offsets are the constant bank offsets 0x160, 0x168, 0x170, and 0x178 that we saw our SASS machine code reading from constant bank 0 earlier.:

// from vadd.cudafe1.stub.c
void __device_stub__Z4vaddPKfS0_Pfi(const float *__par0, const float *__par1,
                                     float *__par2, int __par3) {
    __cudaLaunchPrologue(4);
    __cudaSetupArgSimple(__par0,  0UL);   // arg buffer offset 0
    __cudaSetupArgSimple(__par1,  8UL);   // offset 8
    __cudaSetupArgSimple(__par2, 16UL);   // offset 16
    __cudaSetupArgSimple(__par3, 24UL);   // offset 24
    __cudaLaunch((char*)(void(*)(const float*, const float*, float*, int))vadd);
}

Once the arguments are packed, the stub calls __cudaLaunch, passing it the memory address of the host-side dummy vadd function. Because this host function is just an empty shell on the CPU, its host memory address serves as a lookup key. The runtime queries its registration table with this address to find the corresponding device-side symbol name, and then crosses the boundary into the closed-source user-mode driver (libcuda.so.1)The usermode bit of the driver comes with the GPU’s kernel driver, not with the CUDA toolkit: the libcuda.so.1 from the strace resolves to libcuda.so.590.48.01, the driver release on this machine. to initiate the launch of that kernel.

The runtime opens this driver dynamically on the first GPU call in our program, which we can catch using strace:

$ strace -f -e trace=openat ./vadd
...
openat(..., "/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/libcuda.so.1", O_RDONLY|O_CLOEXEC) = 3
...

When this first call is performed, a ‘context’ is created, containing all the infrastructure the driver needs to talk to the device, including the channel through which the CPU speaks to the GPU. We’ll talk more about that in the next section.

At this stage, the compiled machine code still hasn’t reached the GPU. Since CUDA 12.2, module loading is lazy by defaultControlled by CUDA_MODULE_LOADING. It shipped opt-in in CUDA 11.7 and defaulted to EAGER for years; the 12.x series flipped the default to LAZY (which can be overridden if you want loading costs paid up front).—the driver defers uploading a kernel’s SASS cubin to the card’s memory until the very first time that specific kernel is actually launched.

Underneath libcuda sits the kernel-mode driver, nvidia.ko, which libcuda reaches by invoking ioctl on device files. When cuLaunchKernel finally needs to put work on the GPU, it becomes a conversation with that kernel module. What follows is the mechanics of that conversation.

Getting it onto the GPU§

A GPU does not take function calls like a CPU does. There is no entry point to jump to, and no stack to push arguments onto from the CPU. The GPU sits across a PCIe bus and reads a stream of driver commands out of host memory. Everything cuLaunchKernel does past this point is in service of getting one fully formed launch command into that stream, and then telling the GPU it has done so.

The first thing that needs to be done is loading the GPU code onto the device. The first time you run vadd, the driver copies across the kernel’s code: it allocates a buffer and copies the SASS in.

Once the code is on the GPU, the CPU needs to get the GPU to read it and start executing it. It does so via a complex dance, across host and device memory. Both the host and the GPU can map regions of each other’s memory spaces, but accesses across the PCIe bus pay a penalty. To achieve a kernel launch, both write to various structures, living across both spaces. These structures comprise the channel — the work queue that runs the GPU’s operations.

There are two important such structures living in host RAM: the pushbuffer, and the GPFIFO, representing between them the list of work the GPU has to perform.

The pushbuffer is a region of memory into which the driver writes commands to the GPU, called methods. A method is a register address and a value in the GPU’s native command encoding — the pair defines what action the GPU should perform.

The GPFIFO is a ring buffer of pointers, used by the GPU & CPU to coordinate what the GPU still needs to read, and what it’s read already. Each entry in the GPFIFO is made up of two 32-bit words, describing a span of the pushbufferIn this case, base is a GPU virtual address pointing to host memory (base, length).

The GPU continually walks the GPFIFO to find work. Between the driver and the GPU, two cursors need to be maintained: GP_GET (how far the GPU has consumed), and GP_PUT (how far the driver has produced). Both cursors live in USERD, a small per-channel structure that here sits in device memory. To launch a kernel, the driver fills a pushbuffer span with the relevant methods, points a GPFIFO entry at it, and advances GP_PUT. Once the GPU consumes the entry, it advances GP_GET.

Where the different pieces live.

Our launch is triggered by a burst of methods, first SET_INLINE_QMD_ADDRESS_A/BHow I know it’s this method, given that libcuda is closed source: see the appendix. followed by a run of LOAD_INLINE_QMD_DATA. These methods serve to stream an object called the “Queue Meta Data” (QMD) into the pushbuffer.

The QMD is the launch descriptor for a compute grid. It holds the grid and block dimensions — our 4096 and 256, from the .cu code — the registers per thread and shared memory it needs, and two addresses: the program’s start (the SASS the first launch loaded into GPU memory) and the constant bank holding the kernel’s arguments. That bank is where the arguments the host stub packed land: the driver copies them in and records the bank’s address in the QMD. The QMD tells the GPU where the SASS is, how to turn that SASS into a parallel program, and where to signal its completion of that program.

Everything is now in place for the GPU to start running. The problem is that the GPU’s host engineThe part of the GPU’s control logic that interfaces with the host. hasn’t acted: it doesn’t watch the cursor on modern cardsThey used to: older GPUs snooped USERD, so writing GP_PUT was enough. Turing and later don’t, so the driver rings the doorbell instead., so the change to GP_PUT just sits there until something tells the engine to look.

It is told to look through the doorbell. The GPU maps a small window of its registers into the process, and one of them is the doorbell; the driver writes the channel’s work-submit token to it. The token tells it which channel has new work.

When its doorbell gets rung, the host engine reads the updated GP_PUT, follows the new GPFIFO entry to the pushbuffer span, and pulls the methods out of it by DMA. When it reaches the compute method carrying our QMD, it hands that descriptor to the “compute work distributor”, about which more shortly.

From the CPU’s side the launch is done: cuLaunchKernel returned the moment the doorbell was rung. The call was asynchronous, so control returns to the program and the CPU runs on while the GPU works; we pick the host side back up once the kernel has run.

It’s time for the GPU to start doing its job.

Instruction by instruction§

The host engine hands the QMD to the compute work distributorSometimes still called the GigaThread Engine. There is one of these on the whole GPU. There is one linear list of SASS instructions in VRAM, and the compute work distributor + the QMD is the first step in telling the hardware how to make that linear list of thread instructions into a massively parallel program across all the Streaming Multiprocessors (SMs).

In our journey down the stack, our compute work distributor now has a QMD describing 4096 blocks of 256 threads. The card we are targeting is a GeForce RTX 4090 chip with 128 SMsNVIDIA’s AD102-300-A1 SKU disables 16 of the physical 144 SMs on the full die to maximize manufacturing yield, as detailed in the NVIDIA Ada GPU Architecture whitepaper.. The distributor’s task is to keep all 128 saturated with work.

The compiled machine code sits as a single linear sequence in global memory. Each SM contains its own local Instruction Cache (I-cache), and every active warp on the GPU maintains its own private Program Counter (PC)Since Volta, the model goes finer still — each thread carries its own program counter and call stack (Independent Thread Scheduling), letting threads in a warp diverge and reconverge freely. Issue is still per-warp, though: each cycle the scheduler picks one warp and issues to the lanes currently at a common PC.. Schedulers on the SM then fetch instructions from that linear sequence independently, allowing different warps to execute the same SASS code at different speeds, or down different branch paths.

One instruction stream in VRAM, cached locally per SM. An SM keeps up to 48 warps resident (the grid), but its four schedulers issue at most one instruction each per cycle. Here nearly every warp is parked on the LDG.E load (orange) and only one slot is issuing the FADD (green).

The hardware constraints of our SMs set the number of blocks that can run at the same timecudaGetDeviceProperties tells you this information:

  +------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                   AD102 SM Resource Caps                   |
  +------------------------------------------------------------+
  |  Max Active Threads/SM |  1,536 threads (48 warps)         |
  |  Register File/SM      |  65,536 32-bit registers (256 KB) |
  |  Shared Memory/SM      |  100 KB                           |
  +------------------------------------------------------------+

Our launch configuration specifies blocks of 256 threads (8 warps), and ptxas reserved 16 registers per thread.

Register capacity: Each block needs $256 \times 16 = 4,096$ registers. On registers alone, an SM could fit $65,536 / 4,096 = 16$ resident blocks.
Thread capacity: The hardware caps each SM at 1,536 active threads. Divided by our block size, this yields $1,536 / 256 = 6$ resident blocks.

Because thread capacity is the tighter bottleneck, each SM holds at most 6 blocks (48 warps) at once.

The distributor assigns these 6 resident blocks to an SM. Each SM is divided into four processing blocks (sub-partitions). Each sub-partition is a self-contained execution pipeline.

The SM distributes our 48 resident warps evenly across these four sub-partitions, so when the SM is full each warp scheduler has 12 active warps ($48 / 4$) to manage. Every cycle, a warp scheduler evaluates its 12 candidates, selects one eligible warp, and dispatches its next instruction across the 32 physical lanes of its execution slice.

What does it mean for a warp to be eligible?§

A GPU decides when an instruction is ready to run differently from a CPU. A modern out-of-order CPU discovers dependencies dynamically at runtime, with reorder buffers and rename logic spending silicon on extracting parallelism from a single thread. A GPU doesn’t need that: it hides latency by keeping many warps resident and switching between them when they stall. With parallelism the order of the day, too much heavyweight dependency machinery is the wrong use of silicon. So the hardware leans on the compiler to schedule everything whose timing it can predict, falling back to lightweight hardware scoreboards for whatever it can’t.

Every 128-bit SASS instruction carries a packed control-code payload written by ptxasThe clearest public reconstructions are the Citadel microbenchmarking papers (Jia et al., “Dissecting the NVIDIA Volta GPU Architecture via Microbenchmarking”) and these maxas control-code notes for Maxwell.. These scheduling control bits dictate hardware timing directly and contain three key directives:

A static stall count: For fixed-latency instructions—like standard integer or floating-point maths—the compiler knows exactly when the ALUs will write back. It encodes a precise cycle count telling the scheduler exactly how long to park this warp before issuing its very next instruction.
A yield hint: A single bit telling the scheduler whether this warp should yield its scheduling priority. If the compiler knows this warp is about to hit a bottleneck, it sets this hint to let the scheduler prioritize other active warps on the next clock cycle.
Dependency-barrier indices: For variable-latency operations whose duration cannot be predicted at compile time—most notably global memory loads (LDG) and special functions (MUFU)—the hardware provides six physical scoreboard barriers (numbered 0 to 5) per warp.
Why you won't see these bits in the disassembly

When you disassemble a binary using NVIDIA’s standard nvdisasm tool, the raw control codes are hidden by default; the tool strips them away to show you standard, clean SASS mnemonics. However, they are stored directly alongside the instructions. If you inspect the raw binary using cuobjdump -sass and look closely at the hexadecimal instruction comments (e.g., /* 0x... */), you will see the packed, raw hex words that house these control bits.

What we know about their exact layout comes from the microbenchmarking community’s reverse-engineering efforts. Although the bit fields have shifted and evolved between Maxwell, Volta, Ampere, and Ada Lovelace, the core architectural concept remains identical: compile-time static scheduling metadata is packed directly into the instruction stream to keep the SM hardware as simple and power-efficient as possible.

Running cuobjdump -sass on our vadd, each instruction comes with its raw 128-bit encoding as two 64-bit words, and the second word of each pair carries the control payload:

$ cuobjdump -sass vadd                              # control payload
/*00a0*/  LDG.E R4, [R4.64]                       /* 0x000ea8000c1e1900 */
/*00b0*/  LDG.E R3, [R2.64]                       /* 0x000ea2000c1e1900 */
/*00c0*/  IMAD.WIDE R6, R6, R7, c[0x0][0x170]     /* 0x000fe200078e0207 */
/*00d0*/  FADD R9, R4, R3                         /* 0x004fca0000000000 */
/*00e0*/  STG.E [R6.64], R9                       /* 0x000fe2000c101904 */

Pulling out the control payloadsThe clearest public reconstructions are the Citadel microbenchmarking papers (Jia et al., “Dissecting the NVIDIA Volta GPU Architecture via Microbenchmarking”) and these maxas control-code notes for Maxwell. — their bit layout is in the appendix — you can see the schedule that ptxas wrote, with each directive in action:

instruction	stall	yield	sets	waits-on
LDG.E	4	yes	B2	—
LDG.E	1	yes	B2	—
IMAD.WIDE	1	yes	—	—
FADD	5	no	—	B2
STG.E	1	yes	—	—

The two loads leverage directive 3, each “set”-ing the same scoreboard barrier, B2. The FADD, the first instruction that needs the loaded R4 and R3, carries a wait on B2: until both loads have returned and the barrier clears, the warp is ineligible, and the scheduler skips it for one of the other eleven warps in the sub-partition.

The FADD→STG hand-off is directive 1. A floating-point add has a fixed latency, so there is no barrier: FADD just carries stall=5, which parks the warp for the few cycles it takes for R9 to land before STG reads it.

The yield bit, directive 2, toggles on & off across the sequence, as the compiler nudges scheduling priority around the operations that are about to wait.

Each cycle the scheduler reads the warp’s six-bit barrier state and a small stall counter, and makes the eligibility decision for each warp. This is how a GPU hides latency with close to zero hardware-scheduling overhead.

Loading the data§

When a warp scheduler does find an eligible warp and issues the LDG.E loads, we can follow the hardware requests down the memory hierarchy. Each of the 32 threads in the warp computes an address. Because our threads access consecutive elements of float arrays (each 4 bytes), the warp requests a contiguous block of 128 bytes ($32 \times 4$ bytes).

The SM’s load/store unit detects this consecutive access pattern and performs request coalescing. It merges the 32 per-thread 4-byte requests into four 32-byte sector requests. Fetches are in units of 32 bytes, so this is perfect — if the reads were not consecutive & coalesced like this we’d end up loading more data than we needed.

The coalesced requests first check the SM’s local L1 Data Cache. If they miss, they are routed through a high-bandwidth crossbar interconnect that links all 128 SMs to the distributed slices of the 72 MB L2 Cache. If the requests miss in the L2 cache as well, they descend further to the memory controllers and travel across the memory bus to the physical GDDR6X VRAM chipsThe RTX 4090 uses GDDR6X memory rather than the High-Bandwidth Memory (HBM) found in datacenter-class GPUs like the A100 or H100.. The STG.E store that writes c[i] at the end of the loop follows the exact same path in reverseIn principle anyway, we’ll see later that c[i] never hits VRAM..

If we run our compiled kernel under the NVIDIA Nsight Compute profiler (ncu), we can get some telling metrics:

$ ncu --metrics \
    launch__grid_size,launch__block_size,launch__registers_per_thread,\
    launch__waves_per_multiprocessor,sm__warps_active.avg.pct_of_peak,\
    smsp__issue_active.avg.pct_of_peak,dram__throughput.avg.pct_of_peak,\
    gpu__time_duration.sum \
    ./vadd
...
----------------------------------------------------------
Metric Name                                   Unit   Value
----------------------------------------------------------
launch__grid_size                                    4,096
launch__block_size                                     256
launch__registers_per_thread                            16
launch__waves_per_multiprocessor                      5.33
sm__warps_active.avg.pct_of_peak              %      82.77
smsp__issue_active.avg.pct_of_peak            %       5.17
dram__throughput.avg.pct_of_peak              %      79.65
gpu__time_duration.sum                        us     10.78
----------------------------------------------------------

82.77% of warps were active over the run. The warps were issuing instructions 5.17% of the time. The DRAM was running at 79.65% of its maximum utilization.

The kernel has an extremely low arithmetic intensity: it performs exactly one floating-point addition (FADD) and a tiny amount of pointer arithmetic for every 12 bytes of data it transfers (two 4-byte loads and one 4-byte store).

So the 10.78 $\mu$s just comes down to how fast the DRAM bus can feed the kernel its inputs, here about four-fifths of peakOnly the two inputs cross the bus, not the full 12 MB. ncu shows 8.4 MB read from DRAM and essentially nothing written: the 4 MB output c fits in the 72 MB L2 and isn’t flushed to DRAM until the later device-to-host copy reads it back. The four-fifths-of-peak figure is the read side — 8.4 MB / 10.78 $\mu$s $\approx$ 780 GB/s..

Back to the CPU§

The result is now sitting in the GPU’s L2 cache. The CPU is what runs our terminal, so it needs to get the result in order to show it to us. We return to its view of events.

The launch returned control to the CPU the moment the doorbell rang. So the GPU needs to tell the CPU it’s done. When the last of our 4096 blocks retires, the GPU does so by posting a completion semaphore the QMD carried (the fence fields at words 23–24).

The device-to-host cudaMemcpy(c, dc, …)A pinned-memory cudaMemcpyAsync would skip the wait and let the host run ahead. copy sits behind the kernel on the default stream, so the GPU’s copy engine (which performs the transfer) is gated on the semaphore. Once the value appears the GPU performs the DMA. Because c is still sitting dirty in the 72 MB L2 — the STG.E stores never had to spill it to DRAM — the engine’s reads are served straight from L2, and the data crosses PCIe without a DRAM round trip.

Once the copy finishes, it posts its own semaphore, which the host was waiting on in cudaMemcpy. cudaMemcpy completes on the host, c is ordinary host memory again, and printf loads c[0] and c[n-1] out of RAM, formats them into a string, and hands them to a write syscall on stdout.

The whole path§

The kernel source went through cicc to PTX and through ptxas to SASS, which fatbinary packed with a fallback copy of the PTX into a cubin-bearing fatbin that the linker welded into an ordinary Linux executable. A constructor registered that fatbin before main, mapping a host stub to a mangled device name. The first launch lazily uploaded the cubin to the GPU. cuLaunchKernel built a QMD from the launch configuration, wrote it into a pushbuffer as GPU methods, advanced GP_PUT, and rang a doorbell with a single MMIO store, at which point the GPU’s host engine fetched the work and handed the QMD to the compute work distributor. The distributor spread 4096 blocks across 128 SMs at full occupancy, four warp schedulers per SM issued 128-bit instructions whose stall counts the compiler had written, and a coalesced memory path pulled the inputs through DRAM at four-fifths of peak bandwidth to compute, in each of a million lanes, a single sum. A completion semaphore and a copy engine then carried that result back across the bus to where printf was waiting, and we learnt that:

c[0]=2.000000 c[n-1]=2.000000

Appendix: how to look inside the launch§

Claude & I used a lot of different tricks to see the different parts of the kernel launch happen here. Some of it comes from painstakingly reading the open kernel modules.

A few claims in this post can’t be read off the open source, because libcuda is closed source. To figure them out, there are a few useful diagnostic hooks.

An interposition hook§

Driver method writes never go through a syscall (the driver writes them straight into a write-combined buffer it has already mapped), so to find them you need to read the memory. We used an LD_PRELOAD shim that wraps mmap, records every region the driver maps from the /dev/nvidia* file, and exposes a function a test program calls just after the launch returns to dump them:

#define _GNU_SOURCE
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
#include <dlfcn.h>
#include <sys/mman.h>
#include <unistd.h>
#include <string.h>

// Dynamic linker function pointers
static void* (*orig_mmap)(void*, size_t, int, int, int, off_t) = NULL;

// Store captured channel mappings
struct Map {
    void* addr;
    size_t length;
    off_t offset;
    char path[256];
} maps[128];
static int map_count = 0;

void* mmap(void* addr, size_t length, int prot, int flags, int fd, off_t offset) {
    if (!orig_mmap) {
        orig_mmap = dlsym(RTLD_NEXT, "mmap");
    }
    void* ret = orig_mmap(addr, length, prot, flags, fd, offset);
    if (ret != MAP_FAILED && fd != -1 && map_count < 128) {
        char proclink[256];
        char path[256];
        sprintf(proclink, "/proc/self/fd/%d", fd);
        ssize_t len = readlink(proclink, path, sizeof(path) - 1);
        if (len != -1) {
            path[len] = '\0';
            // We care about NVIDIA device files
            if (strstr(path, "/dev/nvidia")) {
                maps[map_count].addr = ret;
                maps[map_count].length = length;
                maps[map_count].offset = offset;
                strcpy(maps[map_count].path, path);
                map_count++;
            }
        }
    }
    return ret;
}

// Expose a function to dump memory ranges holding the pushbuffer
void dump_pushbuffer() {
    printf("\n=== [Shim] Dump of Mapped Pushbuffers ===\n");
    for (int i = 0; i < map_count; i++) {
        // User-space channels/pushbuffers are mapped at large sizes
        if (maps[i].length >= 0x1000) {
            unsigned int* ptr = (unsigned int*)maps[i].addr;
            printf("Mapping %d: %s, at %p (%zu bytes), offset 0x%lx\n",
                   i, maps[i].path, maps[i].addr, maps[i].length, (long)maps[i].offset);

            // Walk the words looking for a method-header burst
            for (size_t j = 0; j < maps[i].length / 4; j++) {
                unsigned int word   = ptr[j];
                unsigned int opcode = (word >> 29) & 0x7;     // 1 = INC
                unsigned int count  = (word >> 16) & 0x1FFF;  // payload words
                unsigned int method = (word & 0xFFF) << 2;    // register offset

                // 0x318 is SET_INLINE_QMD_ADDRESS_A, the start of the inline burst
                if (opcode == 1 && method == 0x318) {
                    printf("  [+] Method burst at word %zu: header = 0x%08X\n", j, word);
                    printf("      INC, count %d, offset 0x%04X\n", count, method);
                    for (unsigned int k = 1; k <= count && (j + k) < (maps[i].length / 4); k++) {
                        printf("      word %02u: 0x%08X\n", k, ptr[j + k]);
                    }
                }
            }
        }
    }
}

Compile it into a shared library:

$ gcc -shared -fPIC -o shim.so shim.c -ldl

and then call dump_pushbuffer() from the test program just after the kernel launch, and run it with the shim preloaded so this mmap runs in place of libc’s:

$ LD_PRELOAD=./shim.so ./vadd

The driver maps a write-combined buffer for the channel; the dump walks it and prints the launch’s method burst. Which we then need to decode.

Decoding the pushbuffer command stream§

A pushbuffer method is a header word followed by data words. The header packs four fields (defined as NVC46F_DMA_INCR_* macros in clc46f.h):

bits 31:29 — opcode: 0x1 is an increasing-method write (INC_METHOD/INCR_OPCODE_VALUE), 0x3 is a non-increasing-method write (NON_INC_METHOD), and 0x4 is an immediate-data write (IMMD_DATA_METHOD).
bits 28:16 — count: the number of payload words (NVC46F_DMA_INCR_COUNT).
bits 15:13 — subchannel index: routes the commands to a specialized backend engine context (NVC46F_DMA_INCR_SUBCHANNEL).
bits 11:0 — the method’s register offset, divided by four (NVC46F_DMA_INCR_ADDRESS), as the shim shifts it back.

There are two launch paths that seem relevant here. The methods are defined per compute class in src/common/sdk/nvidia/inc/class/ — clc3c0.h (Volta), clc5c0.h (Turing), clc6c0.h/clc7c0.h (Ampere), clc9c0.h (Ada), clcbc0.h (Hopper), clcdc0.h (Blackwell). The Ada header (clc9c0.h) is a 29-line stub that only defines the class number 0xC9C0 and inherits the Ampere method set, so the definitions we actually read live in the Ampere headers:

0x0318 — SET_INLINE_QMD_ADDRESS_A (defined as NVC6C0_SET_INLINE_QMD_ADDRESS_A in the Ampere header, inherited unchanged by Ada), which opens an inline-QMD burst streamed straight into the pushbuffer via LOAD_INLINE_QMD_DATA(i) (offset 0x0320 + i * 4).
0x02b4 — SEND_PCAS_A, the out-of-line path, which carries only a pointer to a QMD that lives elsewhere in VRAM.

From the dump, we can figure out which one ends up in the pushbuffer. The dump shows the inline path: one increasing-method burst, count 66, opening at SET_INLINE_QMD_ADDRESS_A. The 66 words are the two address words (SET_INLINE_QMD_ADDRESS_A/_B, 0x0318/0x031c) followed by 64 LOAD_INLINE_QMD_DATA words (0x0320 onward) — a 256-byte QMD carried inline. Within it, word 12 is 0x1000 and word 18 is 0x100: the 4096 and 256 of vadd<<<4096, 256>>>.

Reading device memory & QMD Layout§

The Queue Meta Data (QMD) structure is represented as a multi-word layout, with fields defined as multi-word (MW) bits spanning 32-bit boundaries inside src/common/sdk/nvidia/inc/class/cla0c0qmd.h. The QMD stores several address-like fields, but they aren’t all the same kind of value:

PROGRAM_OFFSET — MW(287:256) (Word 8) is a 32-bit entry-point offset relative to the channel’s code base, not a 64-bit pointer.
CONSTANT_BUFFER_ADDR_LOWER(i) / ADDR_UPPER(i) — MW(959+i64:928+i64) (e.g. Constant Bank 0 holding our arguments sitting in Words 29–30).
RELEASE0_ADDRESS_LOWER/UPPER — MW(767:736) (Words 23–24), used for fences/semaphores.
CIRCULAR_QUEUE_ADDR_LOWER/UPPER — MW(319:288) (Words 9-10).

These point into device memory the CPU can’t read directly: a plain load faults, and both cudaMemcpy and cuMemcpyDtoH reject the address.

So we need to read it with the GPU. A small kernel copies 512 bytes from a raw pointer into a buffer the host can fetch:

__global__ void peek(const unsigned char* src, unsigned char* dst) {
    for (int i = blockIdx.x * blockDim.x + threadIdx.x;
         i < 512;
         i += blockDim.x * gridDim.x) {
        dst[i] = src[i];
    }
}

Pointed at each of the QMD fields, exactly one returns all 512 bytes of the SASS. If we run a memory-scanning shim to look for valid GPU virtual addresses inside the QMD, we see a match at Word 48:

qmd[48] -> 0x74167b272300   512 / 512 bytes match

Why is SASS matched at Word 48 (qmd[48]) when the driver’s program field is PROGRAM_OFFSET at Word 8?

Word 8 holds only a 32-bit offset set by the driver, whereas words 48/49 are the hardware-owned HW_ONLY_INNER_GET (MW(1566:1536)) and HW_ONLY_INNER_PUT (MW(1598:1568)) fields. In the post-launch dump those words hold a full 64-bit GPU virtual address, and dereferencing the word-48 value returns the kernel SASS. The simplest reading is that the scheduler resolves the program offset into these scheduler-owned fields at launch.

Decoding the driver’s ioctls§

The command stream needs to be read from the memory, but libcuda sets up its memory and GPU objects the ordinary way: by running ioctl (see Michael Kerrisk, The Linux Programming Interface, Chapter 4 & 15) on the driver’s device files. strace on the one-kernel program records 948 of themAlmost all are one-time setup; a steady launch loop makes far fewer., almost all on two file descriptors — /dev/nvidiactl and /dev/nvidia-uvm:

$ strace -f -e trace=ioctl ./vadd
...
ioctl(8, _IOC(_IOC_READ|_IOC_WRITE, 0x46, 0x2a, 0x900), ...)   # /dev/nvidiactl
ioctl(8, _IOC(_IOC_READ|_IOC_WRITE, 0x46, 0x2b, 0x30),  ...)   # /dev/nvidiactl
ioctl(9, ...)                                                  # /dev/nvidia-uvm
...

The magic byte 0x46 is 'F', the NVIDIA resource manager’s ioctl magicThe ‘magic’ byte is a value every NVIDIA ioctl carries as a sanity check; see the Linux kernel documentation.. The command numbers decode against the open kernel modules’ nv_escape.h: 0x2A is NV_ESC_RM_CONTROL and 0x2B is NV_ESC_RM_ALLOC.

Decoding the SASS control words§

The stall counts, barriers and yield bits from the eligibility section come from a 21-bit control field ptxas packs into the top of each instruction’s second 64-bit word, which cuobjdump -sass prints next to the mnemonic:

 20    17 16       11 10   8 7    5 4 3    0
┌────────┬───────────┬──────┬──────┬─┬──────┐
│ reuse  │ wait mask │ read │write │Y│stall │
│  (4)   │    (6)    │ barr │ barr │ │ (4)  │
└────────┴───────────┴──────┴──────┴─┴──────┘

The two 3-bit indices name the scoreboard barriers the instruction sets, the 6-bit mask is the barriers it waits on, Y is the yield bit, and stall is the static cycle count. The layout is undocumented and reconstructed from microbenchmarkingThe clearest public reconstructions are the Citadel microbenchmarking papers (Jia et al., “Dissecting the NVIDIA Volta GPU Architecture via Microbenchmarking”) and these maxas control-code notes for Maxwell..

NVCC host registration callbacks§

If you want to see the exact code the compiler generates to register your GPU code at startup, compiling with nvcc --keep lets you inspect vadd.cudafe1.stub.c.

The start-of-process registration is handled by an automatically generated constructor:

// from vadd.cudafe1.stub.c
static void __sti____cudaRegisterAll(void) __attribute__((__constructor__));

static void __nv_cudaEntityRegisterCallback(void **__T4) {
    __cudaRegisterEntry(__T4, (void(*)(const float*, const float*, float*, int))vadd,
                        _Z4vaddPKfS0_Pfi, -1);
}

static void __sti____cudaRegisterAll(void) {
    __cudaRegisterBinary(__nv_cudaEntityRegisterCallback);
}

The __attribute__((__constructor__)) directive tells the linker to execute __sti____cudaRegisterAll before main starts. It registers our device binary with the CUDA runtime and schedules the callback. When executed, __cudaRegisterEntry maps the host function pointer vadd to the mangled device entry point _Z4vaddPKfS0_Pfi, building the hash table that cudaLaunchKernel queries at launch time.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

25. Philae's extraordinary comet landing relived (2024)

Source: https://www.esa.int/Science_Exploration/Space_Science/Rosetta/Philae_s_extraordinary_comet_landing_relived
Site: esa.int
Submitter: 1970-01-01 (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-24 12:53 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 7 points · 0 comments
Length: 1.3K words (~6 min read)
Language: en

Science & Exploration

12/11/2024 9258 views 55 likes

On 12 November 2014, after a ten year journey through the Solar System and over 500 million kilometres from home, Rosetta’s lander Philae made space exploration history by touching down on a comet for the first time. On the occasion of the tenth anniversary of this extraordinary feat, we celebrate Philae’s impressive achievements at Comet 67P/Churyumov-Gerasimenko.

Decisions, decisions

Rosetta arrived at the comet on 6 August 2014, and the race was immediately on to find a suitable landing site for its lander Philae.

The site needed to offer a balance of safety and unique science potential. Rosetta’s images of candidate landing sites were scrutinised and debated, and within a few weeks the final choice was made: a smooth-looking patch, later named Agilkia, located on the smaller of the comet’s two lobes.

Intense preparations followed, but the night before landing, a problem was identified: Philae’s active descent system, which would provide a downward thrust to prevent rebound at touchdown, could not be activated. Philae would have to rely on harpoons and ice screws in its three feet to fix it to the surface.

Nonetheless, the green light was given and after separating from Rosetta, Philae began its seven-hour descent to the surface of the comet. During the descent, Philae began ‘sensing’ the environment around the comet, taking stunning imagery as the first landing site came into view.
Welcome to a comet

Welcome to a comet

Philae’s touchdown at Agilkia was spot-on. The sensors on Philae’s feet felt the touchdown vibrations, generating the first recording of contact between a human-made object and a comet. But it soon became clear that Philae’s harpoons hadn’t fired and it had taken flight again.

In the end Philae made contact with the surface four times. Thanks to an automatic sequence that was triggered by the first touchdown signal, Philae’s instruments were operating while in flight, collecting unique data that would later yield important results. It was also an unexpected bonus that data were collected at more than one location, providing the first direct measurements of surface characteristics and allowing comparisons between the touchdown sites.

For example, Philae ‘felt’ the difference in surface texture and hardness as it bounced from one site to another. At the first landing site, it detected a soft layer several centimetres thick, milliseconds later encountering a much harder layer.

After colliding with a cliff, Philae scraped through its second touchdown site, providing the first in situ measurement of the softness of the icy-dust interior of a boulder on a comet. The simple action of Philae ’stamping’ an imprint in billions-of-years-old ice revealed the boulder to be fluffier than froth on a cappuccino, equivalent to a porosity of about 75%.

Philae then ‘hopped’ about 30 metres to the final touchdown site, named Abydos, where its CIVA cameras provided the first image of a human-made object touching a 4.6 billion year old Solar System relic. The exact location on the comet would remain hidden from view for almost two years.
Philae’s instruments

In this location, Philae’s MUPUS hammer penetrated a soft layer before encountering an unexpectedly hard surface a few centimetres below the surface. Philae ‘listened’ to the hammering with its feet, recording the vibrations that passed through the comet. This was the first time since the Apollo 17 mission to the Moon in 1972 that active seismic measurements were conducted on a celestial body.

MUPUS also carried a thermal sensor, which measured the local changes in temperature from about -180ºC to 145ºC, in sync with the comet’s 12.4 hour day – the first time the temperature cycle of a comet had been measured at its surface.

Meanwhile the CONSERT experiment, which passed radio waves between Rosetta and Philae through the comet in the first cometary sounding experiment, revealed the interior of the comet to be a very loosely compacted mixture of dust and ice, with a high porosity of 75–85%.
Highlights from Philae's 64-hour life on a comet

In-flight science

During the bouncing, Philae’s COSAC and Ptolemy instruments ‘sniffed’ the comet’s gas and dust, important tracers of the raw materials present in the early Solar System. COSAC revealed a suite of 16 organic compounds comprising numerous carbon and nitrogen-rich compounds, including methyl isocyanate, acetone, propionaldehyde and acetamide that had never before been detected in comets. The complex molecules detected by both COSAC and Ptolemy play a key role in the synthesis of the ingredients needed for life.
Philae on the surface of the comet

Philae’s bouncing also allowed it to measure the magnetic field at different heights above the surface, showing the comet is remarkably non-magnetic. Detecting the magnetic field of comets has proven difficult in previous missions, which have typically flown past at high speeds, relatively far from comet nuclei. It took the proximity of Rosetta’s orbit around the comet and the measurements made much closer to and at the surface by Philae, to provide the first detailed investigation of the magnetic properties of a comet nucleus.

In the end some 80% of Philae's planned science sequence was completed in the 64 hours following separation from Rosetta and before the lander fell into hibernation.

While Philae hibernated, Rosetta continued returning an unprecedented wealth of information from the comet as it orbited around the Sun, watching the comet’s activity reach a peak and then slowly subside again. Philae would be heard from briefly in June–July 2015 but could not be reactivated. Then, as Rosetta’s mission was drawing to its planned end with its own daring descent to the surface at a site named Sais, Philae’s final landing site was revealed in orbiter imagery, a final twist in what had become one of the greatest stories of space exploration.

What’s next?

ESA has an impressive legacy in small body exploration, with the Rosetta-Philae double-act inspiring the next generation of comet and asteroid-chasers.

ESA’s Giotto mission to fly by Comet Halley in 1986 was the first mission to image a comet surface. The Rosetta mission was a natural next step, becoming the first to orbit a comet, as well as deploying a lander to its surface. Rosetta was also the first to follow a comet around the Sun, monitoring its activity as it made its closest approach to the Sun.

Rosetta paves the way for the upcoming Comet Interceptor mission, which unlike its predecessors, will probe a comet visiting our Solar System for the first time. As such, the comet will contain material that has undergone minimal processing, offering a ‘cleaner’ look at pristine material from the dawn of the Solar System, before it is sculpted by the heat of the Sun. The mission will consist of a primary craft and two probes, providing a multi-angled view of the comet.
ESA missions to small bodies

ESA is also visiting asteroids, with its flagship ‘planetary defender’ Hera on its way to survey Dimorphos following NASA’s impact experiment to alter its trajectory, a grand-scale test of planetary defence techniques. Hera’s orbit scheme is borrowed directly from Rosetta, and the mission's two smaller satellites carry radar and dust-measuring instruments based on those designed for Rosetta.

Meanwhile Ramses will accompany asteroid Apophis as it makes an exceptionally close flyby of Earth in 2029. And suitcase-sized M-Argo will be the smallest spacecraft to perform its own independent mission in space when it rendezvous with a small near-Earth asteroid later this decade.

Rosetta and Philae’s legacy also lives on in the hearts and minds of people, as revealed in our new online exhibition celebrating this uniquely inspiring mission. We are also reliving the key moments around Philae's landing on the comet and Rosetta team members' experiences on X. Join us by following #CometLandingRelived.

Rosetta was an ESA mission with contributions from its Member States and NASA. Philae was provided by a consortium led by DLR, MPS, CNES and ASI.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

26. Working With AI: A concrete example

Source: https://htmx.org/essays/working-with-ai/
Site: htmx.org
Submitter: comma_at (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-29 14:53 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 99 points · 35 comments
Length: 2.0K words (~9 min read)
Language: en

Carson Gross June 29, 2026

I am, generally, ambivalent towards AI. There is no doubt it has become a very powerful tool for development in the last year, but it also comes with many dangers, both for us individually (e.g. the slow dulling of our intellects) as well as collectively (e.g. environmental concerns, increasingly expensive personal computing, etc.)

In “Code is Cheap(er)”, I warn about The Sorcerer’s Apprentice problem, where a developer becomes reliant on AI and is unable to understand and properly address issues that come up in the systems they are building.

In this article I want to go through a specific interaction that I had with AI while maintaining hyperscript to show the strengths and weaknesses of AI in general and to demonstrate The Sorcerer’s Apprentice problem (which I narrowly avoided) in particular.

The Hyperscript Parser

For some background, hyperscript is an alternative interpreted scripting language for the web. It is, ironically, written entirely in JavaScript.

It is a strange piece of software: I intentionally broke many of the rules of parsing when writing it as an experiment to see how things would work out.

Some examples:

Parsing logic is colocated on parse elements
The parser is pluggable, and the grammar is defined dynamically
It supports multiple syntaxes for property access.

It is not an approach I would recommend for most programming languages, but it has worked out pretty well for this project.

Yet another demonstration that there are indeed multiple ways to skin the cat in software.

A Bug Report

Our story begins when a user reported a regression when upgrading to the 0.9.91 release. The following expression no longer parsed properly:


fetch `{% url 'trade:get_symbol_data' %}?symbol=${symbol}` as JSON



In particular, the as JSON was binding too tightly and trying to convert the string literal into JSON before it was handed to fetch instead of doing what the user expected (and what it did previously) namely fetching the given url with the results treated as JSON.

This sort of binding conflict is a classic problem in parsing.

Because hyperscript is an xTalk style language and inherits many of the ambiguities of English, this problem is all the worse in it.

Investigating The Cause

The first thing to do was to investigate why this regression occurred.

This is an area where I am typically going to lean on AI to help.

I use Claude, and it did an admirable job finding the root cause: in 0.9.91 I had been overly aggressive in refactoring the go command to reuse/share logic with the fetch command.

I had extracted a common method for both of these commands to use, parseURLOrExpression(), but, in doing so, I accidentally expanded the grammar after the fetch command to include the general expression, er, expression.

The as keyword has a meaning in expressions: it is a conversion expression, allowing you to convert between types:

  set x to "42" as Int


But the as keyword is also a modifier of the fetch command, telling it how to convert the response:

  fetch https://hyperscript.org as Text


(Perhaps this fact makes you throw up a little bit in your mouth. Good.)

The crux of the issue was that, inadvertently in the refactor, I had made the parser parse an expression after a fetch keyword which was now consuming the as keyword as an expression, rather than allowing it to be a modifier for fetch.

With the help of Claude I was able to figure this out in a few minutes, much faster than if I had had to figure it out on my own.

Fixing The Issue

AI was very helpful in finding the cause of the problem.

In fixing the problem, however, it was much weaker.

I will admit here I was being lazy and asked AI for a solution, so complaining about those solutions feels a bit, well, lazy, but I still think the string of events is informative, so let’s go through exactly what happened.

Proposed Fix 1: A Hack

The first suggestion that was given was to parse what is called a “string-like” leaf first, then fall back to a full expression:

return this.parseElement("stringLike") || this.requireElement("expression");


This fix would have solved the immediate problem presented by the user.

However, it was very specific to the reported bug and wouldn’t have fixed the general case, such as if someone uses a variable as the target of a fetch:

  fetch $url as JSON


I rejected this proposal because of this: too hacky and not general enough.

(Note that the hyperscript parser has plenty of organically supplied hacks in it, so this may have been the pot calling the kettle black.)

Proposed Fix 2: Better But Unnecessary Complexity

The second proposal was more interesting: add a noConversions flag on the parser, set it around the URL parse, and have AsExpression.parse bail when it is set:

// AsExpression.parse()
if (parser.noConversions) return;


This will horrify many parser engineers because it makes the hyperscript parser context-sensitive.

Good.

The hyperscript parser was already context-sensitive.

In looking at this fix and thinking for a second, I realized that we already had the hacky context-sensitive infrastructure we needed without introducing a new flag on the parser, but Claude had missed it.

“Follows” In The Hyperscript Parser

In the hyperscript parser we have a notion of “follows”, that is, tokens that are claimed by a “higher up” parse element as a follow token.

The hyperscript parser is (a somewhat strange) recursive descent parser, and this allows a parse element (usually a command) to “claim” a keyword, and expressions won’t match against them during parsing.

As an example, the when feature uses or as a separator rather than as a logical connective in its declaration:

<div _="when $x or $y changes put it into me"></div>


(I can hear many parser engineers closing this window in anger. Good.)

It turns out that this feature could be used to achieve what we wanted: rather than adding a new flag to the parser we could push as as a follow, then parse the expression, then pop it as a follow.

This would prevent the AsExpression from parsing, while still allowing most general expressions such as variables to work.

Proposed Fix 3: Close, But No Cigar

I pointed this out to Claude and, in a frisson of excitement, it told me that I was “absolutely right!” and set about using this technique to fix the bug.

Claude added the correct code to the parseURLOrExpression() which fixed the issue generally without adding any additional parser infrastructure.

Good to go.

The Final, Semi-Organic Fix

However, as I was reviewing the change, I realized that the new fix was overly broad: both fetch and go shared this method, but only fetch used as to signal a modifier.

The existing fix prevented the perfectly valid use of as conversion expressions in go commands as well.

So I implemented the final fix myself, in FetchCommand#parse():

  parser.pushFollow("as");
  try {
    var url = parser.parseURLOrExpression();
  } finally {
    parser.popFollow();
  }
  
  if (parser.matchToken("as")) {
      ...


Here I narrowed the special case to only the fetch command, leaving go parsing unaffected.

This ended up being my final answer to the bug.

Tests

Along the way I had Claude generate some tests for the various cases.

There is a good existing test suite for hyperscript, and Claude did a good job of creating small, focused tests that showed the problem and that the fix was working properly.

Another area AI appears to work well.

The Moral of The Story

OK, so what is interesting about this fairly mundane bug fix story?

I think it is interesting to see where AI did well, namely in investigation and test creation, and to contrast that with where it didn’t do so well: coming up with a clean solution.

If I had not been familiar with the hyperscript parser and its infrastructure this fix could have easily led to technical debt being accrued in the project: another hacky parsing corner case, another bit of state on the parser, etc.

Technical debt, I assert without evidence1, grows exponentially, and therefpre it is very important to minimize it in your projects.

This story shows how having a human in the loop, working with an agent and with a good understanding of the underlying infrastructure, can be much more effective in controlling complexity than an agent left to its own devices.

Some people will look at the hyperscript code base and scoff at the notion that controlling complexity was ever a consideration at all. I am sympathetic to that view.

However, in this example we can see in a concrete scenario how complexity was restrained, at least a bit, in fixing an admittedly embarrassing bug, by a knowledgeable human working with an AI agent.

This is a situation where, rather than being a sorcerer’s apprentice and blindly accepting the solutions AI proposed, I was acting as a sorcerer (I hope that’s not too arrogant to say!) demanding a correct solution that better fit the existing codebase’s architecture.

I understood the problem and saw the correct solution and was able to work with AI to achieve it and then verify the solution with the help of AI-generated tests.

This is in contrast, I hope a good contrast, with some forms of vibe coding currently being pushed in which developers (or whatever) appear to pride themselves on not understanding what is actually going on.

Aside: AI & The Older Developer

Another thing occurred to me as I was going back over this experience.

I am an older developer, having turned 50 this year. As developers get older the reality is that we tend to “lose our fastball”, at least to some extent.

Practically, for me, this has meant two things:

I am not able to remember as much as I used to
I am not able to work as long of hours as I used to

It turns out that AI directly addresses both of these issues.

With respect to memory, while I can’t remember everything I used to be able to, I can understand things again very quickly with appropriate, er, prompting. AI is very good at helping me with this, and it lets me switch between open source projects and work projects much more efficiently than if I didn’t have it.

With respect to the long hours, AI is able to grind in a way that, even as a young developer, I would have had a difficult time keeping up with. This means, for example, I can have a much more extensive test suite for my projects than I would have otherwise.

Looking at the tests that Claude generated in this case, they are more extensive than what I probably could have mustered the energy to do myself.

So AI has addressed two fundamental (relative) weaknesses I have developed as an older developer.

On the other hand, I am very worried that it is also enabling a more general regression in my overall intelligence. This is something that occurs naturally as you age anyway. AI reliance may accelerate this process however and I have to say, looking back at this story, I’m a bit ashamed of how long I leaned on Claude before just doing the right thing darned myself.

This is an area I am still trying to navigate myself.

Conclusion

I wanted to write up this series of interactions because I thought it captured some of the good and some of the bad of AI assistance in coding. It demonstrated the value of a reasonably competent developer in the loop working with an AI agent, and also showed the danger of blindly accepting the first (or second) solution that an AI agent suggests to a problem.

I hope that it is useful to you as you develop your own thoughts and strategies around AI agents.

–

1

This was revealed to me in a dream.

</>

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

27. Micro-Agent: Beat Frontier Models with Collaboration Inside Model API

Source: https://vllm.ai/blog/2026-06-29-micro-agent-frontier-models
Site: vLLM
Author: vLLM Semantic Router Team
Published: 2026-06-29
HN activity: 58 points · 19 comments
Length: 1.9K words (~9 min read)
Language: en

Everyone is watching for the next frontier model.

The more interesting layer may be the one in front of it.

Routers are becoming the control plane for AI inference. Their first role was practical: route the right request to the right model. That already matters because production AI is no longer a one-model world.

A router can cut cost by deciding when a request deserves a frontier model and when an open-source or local model is enough. It can make safety policy executable by sending sensitive domains to stricter models, stricter filters, or stronger review paths. It can coordinate cloud and edge, keeping private or low-latency intent local while escalating harder work to the cloud.

Those are important jobs.

But the next router job is more interesting:

A router can make the model better.

Not by changing weights. Not by asking every application to build a bespoke agent graph. By turning one model API call into a bounded collaboration inside the serving layer.
Figure 1: The router is moving from model selection to capability construction.

This is why Sakana Fugu landed so loudly: it made a commercial product out of a simple but powerful idea, that a "model" can be a surface, and behind that surface can be a team. The research around this idea, including the Fugu technical report and coordination papers such as Conductor and Trinity, gives useful language for thinking about orchestration.

But the vLLM Semantic Router vision is different in where it puts the abstraction. Collaboration should not live only inside one commercial endpoint or one application-specific agent graph. It should become an open serving primitive.

vLLM Semantic Router brings that idea into the open serving layer. The user still calls one model:

{
  "model": "vllm-sr/auto",
  "messages": [{"role": "user", "content": "..."}]
}

Behind that stable model identity, the router can select a recipe, fan out to workers, collect a quorum, verify disagreement, synthesize a final answer, repair the output contract, and return one normal OpenAI-compatible response.

The point is not to expose complexity.

The point is to make collaboration feel like a model.

The Looper Is the Runtime

In vLLM Semantic Router, the looper is the execution runtime for bounded micro-agents.

A request enters the router as an ordinary chat completion. The router extracts signals, projects them into task-shape or risk bands, matches a decision, and then chooses an algorithm. That algorithm may be a normal single-model route, or it may be a looper route.

Today, the main looper patterns are:

Confidence: a sequential escalation loop. It tries a cheaper candidate first, measures confidence, and escalates only when the score is too low.
Ratings: a bounded fan-out loop. It runs multiple candidates under a hard concurrency cap and aggregates them with rating-aware weights.
ReMoM: repeated mixture-of-model reasoning. It fans out breadth samples, waits for enough successful responses, and runs a final synthesis round.
Fusion: a panel-judge-final pattern. Independent model responses become evidence for a judge and finalizer.
Workflows: a micro-agent workflow runtime. It supports static roles or a dynamic planner, executes bounded worker steps, and synthesizes a final response.
Figure 2: Looper algorithms run inside the router while preserving the model API surface.

The implementation details matter. A looper is not a slogan for "ask more models." It is a small runtime with budget, topology, trace, and failure policy.

Confidence: spend escalation only on hard cases

Confidence is the cost-aware loop. It starts with a smaller or cheaper candidate, then evaluates whether the answer is confident enough to stop. The confidence signal can come from token-level log probability, logprob margin, a hybrid score, self-verification, or an AutoMix-style entailment verifier.

If the score passes the threshold, the router returns immediately. If the score is too low, the route escalates to the next candidate. The important part is not that escalation exists. It is that escalation becomes explicit router policy: thresholds, failure behavior, and stopping conditions are visible and tunable.
Figure 3: Confidence turns escalation into a measured stopping policy.

Ratings: parallel quality under a hard cap

Ratings is the controlled ensemble loop. It launches several candidates in parallel, but only up to a configured max_concurrent cap. That makes it useful when a route should benefit from multiple model views without turning every request into an unbounded fan-out.

The router collects successful responses, applies rating-aware aggregation, and handles failures according to the route policy. In practice, Ratings is a good fit for A/B-style evaluation, ensemble strategies, and routes where the operator already has meaningful per-candidate quality signals.
Figure 4: Ratings keeps multi-candidate execution bounded and rating-aware.

ReMoM: breadth with a contract

ReMoM is useful when the task has high reasoning variance and the answer format must survive the collaboration. It fans out multiple reasoning attempts, waits for a minimum-success quorum, then asks a synthesis model to merge evidence into the required output contract.

If synthesis fails but earlier workers produced valid evidence, the route does not have to collapse into an API error. It can fall back to the best valid evidence and still return a normal response.
Figure 5: ReMoM treats breadth, quorum, synthesis, and fallback as serving-time controls.

Fusion: disagreement as signal

Fusion starts from a different bet. Sometimes the useful object is not the average answer; it is the structure of disagreement. Independent panel answers become evidence. The judge sees agreement, contradiction, and unique insight, then the finalizer returns one answer with the trace collapsed behind the API.

That makes Fusion especially useful when there are plausible competing paths: hard multiple-choice reasoning, long-form expert judgment, or exact-answer tasks where a single confident response can be brittle.
Figure 6: Fusion does not hide disagreement. It turns disagreement into evidence.

Workflows: roles under a budget

Workflows is the most agentic pattern, and also the one that needs the strictest boundaries. The planner can only choose allowed worker models. The plan is validated. Steps are bounded by max steps, max parallelism, timeouts, and error policy. The final response still has to satisfy the output contract.

For SWE-style tasks, that means the router can express a planner, patcher, verifier, and finalizer without letting the application own a bespoke agent stack. For production serving, that distinction is critical: the loop is powerful, but it is still governed by infrastructure.
Figure 7: Workflows gives the router a bounded role system, not an unbounded autonomous agent.

Auto recipes: one model name, many loops

The public surface remains one model name: vllm-sr/auto. Internally, the router can use signals and projections to choose the right loop for the request. Difficulty, risk, contract pressure, latency, and cost are not comments in a prompt. They are routing facts that can select Confidence, Ratings, ReMoM, Fusion, Workflows, or a fallback path.
Figure 8: Auto recipes let signals choose the collaboration pattern while preserving one model identity.

This is the difference between "agent as app logic" and "micro-agent as serving runtime." The router controls the budget, policy, topology, trace, and failure mode.

Recipes Beat One Universal Loop

The most important lesson from our eval work is not that one algorithm always wins.

It is the opposite:

The best loop is task-shaped.

GPQA-Diamond wants strict multiple-choice answer preservation. LiveCodeBench wants runnable code and hidden-test robustness. Humanity's Last Exam wants disagreement resolution and exact-answer formatting. SWE-style tasks need a planner, patcher, verifier, and finalizer.

That is why vllm-sr/auto should not mean "always run the biggest loop." It should mean: select the recipe that fits this task.
Figure 9: Signals and projections let the router choose a benchmark-shaped collaboration pattern.

In our recipes, that shape is explicit:

GPQA-Diamond routes hard science multiple-choice prompts into a ReMoM recipe with strict ANSWER: X preservation.
LiveCodeBench looks for constraints, starter code, standard input, float tolerance, timeout risk, and hidden-test risk before selecting a code-shaped loop.
HLE detects formal reasoning, disagreement risk, long context, and exact answer pressure before choosing between deeper ReMoM, smaller Fusion, or a fallback path.

This is why router-side collaboration is more than prompt engineering. The prompt is only one part. The recipe also defines model pool, model roles, reasoning effort, concurrency, quorum, timeout, synthesis model, fallback policy, output contract, and observability labels.

The Scorecard Is a Proof, Not the Whole Story

We evaluated the current closed-model recipe across three hard benchmarks. The numbers are useful because they show that the idea is not only aesthetic.
Figure 10: VSR Closed and VSR Hybrid scorecard view across LiveCodeBench, GPQA-Diamond, and Humanity's Last Exam.

In this scorecard, VSR Closed means the recipe uses only closed-model backends. VSR Hybrid means the recipe mixes open and closed models, using the stronger closed models where the recipe needs higher-risk judging, repair, synthesis, or fallback.

Benchmark	VSR scorecard row	Score	Reference rows
LiveCodeBench, January-April 2025	VSR Closed	92.6	Fugu Ultra 92.0, Fugu 90.3, GPT-5.5 90.7, Opus 4.8 90.3
GPQA-Diamond	VSR Closed	96.0	Fugu Ultra 95.5, Fugu 95.5, Gemini 3.1 Pro 94.3, GPT-5.5 93.6
Humanity's Last Exam	VSR Closed	50.0	Fugu Ultra 50.0, Fugu 48.5, Gemini 3.1 Pro 45.0
Humanity's Last Exam	VSR Hybrid	47.1	GLM-5.2 40.5, Qwen3.7 Max 41.4, GPT-5.5 41.4

The scorecard should be read carefully. It is not a claim that every request should always use every closed model. That would be the wrong product.

The claim is that router-owned collaboration can create a stronger model identity than the individual calls beneath it. It can beat or match frontier single-model baselines while preserving one API surface.

That is the real product shape:

Users see one model name.
Operators control the recipe.
The system can improve without changing the client integration.
Open and closed models can participate under the same serving abstraction.

What This Means for Model Serving

The old serving stack was passive. It accepted a model name and sent the request to a backend.

The next serving stack is active. It asks:

What evidence do we have about this request?
What quality, cost, latency, and safety band does it fall into?
Is one model enough?
If not, what collaboration pattern should run?
Which answer contract must be preserved?
What should happen if one provider is slow or wrong?
How do we expose one clean response while keeping the full trace?

That is not application glue. That is infrastructure.

Micro-agents belong in the router because the router already owns the things micro-agents need: model aliases, provider policy, credentials, cost metadata, signals, decisions, retries, timeouts, traces, and OpenAI-compatible response semantics.

The Takeaway

The phrase "frontier model" is starting to mean two things.

One is a checkpoint.

The other is a system boundary.

The recent orchestration wave made the direction visible. vLLM Semantic Router is the bet that this capability should be programmable, observable, and open at the serving layer.

The next model race will still involve better models. But it will also involve better routers: routers that know when to save money, when to enforce safety, when to stay on the edge, when to go to the cloud, and when to turn one request into a small, disciplined team.

That is the promise of micro-agents inside the Model API.

Acknowledgements

We thank researchers from MBZUAI, McGill University, Mila, and Agentic Intelligence Lab, especially Prof. Xue Liu and Dr. Bowei He, for research collaboration and discussions around router-side model collaboration.

Individual Contributors: Huamin Chen, Yincheng Ren.

We also thank AMD's Andy Luo and Haichen Zhang for AMD GPU evaluation support.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

28. What can you confidently guarantee about your software?

Source: https://queue.acm.org/detail.cfm?id=3819084
Site: queue.acm.org
Submitter: eatonphil (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-29 14:12 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 104 points · 46 comments
Length: 2.9K words (~13 min read)

June 22, 2026
Volume 24, issue 3

PDF

What can you confidently guarantee about your software?

Fernanda Graciolli and Nada Amin

The cost and tooling of formal verification have reached the point of widespread use. By eliminating the cost of writing proofs, AI is removing the biggest barrier to formal verification. This makes it easier than ever to build software with critical business rules that are guaranteed to be mathematically correct, rather than merely tested.

If your program has a complex set of business rules, can you guarantee that no combination of valid inputs will produce an invalid outcome?

Consider a secrets-management platform with a permission system. Rules control who can read, edit, or delete secrets across environments. When a user creates a custom role, the system checks that the new role’s permissions are a subset of the user’s own (i.e., you shouldn’t be able to grant access you don’t have). The boundary check covers every combination of permission operators. It has a thorough test suite, and all are passing.

But there’s a case that the tests never tried: A user with access scoped to a single environment (say, QA) could create a role scoped to “not development.” That sounds narrow, but “not development” matches every environment except development (e.g., user acceptance testing, sandbox, canary, production, etc.)—meaning a single-environment permission escalated to near-universal access. The boundary check approves it and the tests don’t catch it, because every test uses overlapping values, which means the excluded value always appears in the parent’s set. The bug triggers only when they don’t overlap.

A correctly designed and implemented permission system has one fundamental semantic invariant: Permission derivation is subset invariant. That is, the set of environments that a derived permission matches must always be a subset of the environments the granting permission matches. That property says nothing about how permissions are represented. It covers finite sets, negated sets, and any representation that might be added later. With this invariant set, permission derivation can’t fail at runtime because a bug of this class would be made impossible by construction.

The distinction between “the code didn’t fail at runtime” and “the code can’t fail” is what this article is about.

What Formal Verification Actually Is

At its core, formal verification is a simple concept. You start with properties you want your code to uphold. These are contracts for input and output, functions and methods. For a shopping cart, you might want to prove the following:

– The balance never goes negative.

– Every item in the cart is reflected in the total.

– Only one coupon code can be applied per order.

A verifier can’t work with English, so those properties need to be expressed in a verification-aware language—a programming language designed so that specifications and proofs are treated as first-class citizens alongside implementation code. Several exist, each with different strengths: Dafny uses an imperative style familiar to most developers and automates much of the proof work via SMT (satisfiability modulo theories) solvers; Lean has roots in pure mathematics and is rapidly gaining traction for both theorem proving and verified software; Rocq (formerly Coq) and Isabelle are interactive proof assistants with decades of use in research and high-assurance systems; F* targets verified systems programming with extraction to C and OCaml; and TLA+ focuses on specifying and model checking distributed protocols.

They all work differently, but the core idea is the same: You write your code and your properties in the same system, and the tool checks that one satisfies the other. Here’s what that looks like in Dafny. For “the balance never goes negative” property, you would write:

method ApplyCoupon(balance: int, discount: int) returns (newBalance: int)
requires discount >= 0
requires balance >= discount
ensures newBalance >= 0
{
newBalance := balance - discount;
}

The requires clauses are preconditions, which means that this must be true before the function runs. The ensures clause is a postcondition; this is what the function guarantees when it finishes. The verifier doesn’t run this code. Instead, it reasons about its structure and hands the verification conditions to an automated oracle (in this case, an SMT solver) that determines whether the postcondition holds for every input that satisfies the preconditions. If it does, the proof goes through. If there’s even one reachable state where the property breaks, the code doesn’t compile.

The guarantee is only as good as the spec, but when the spec is right, the guarantee is absolute: The property holds in every reachable state of the program. You can now guarantee that this verified piece of code will not break under any circumstance (that is, assuming preconditions are met, postconditions are ensured).

This is fundamentally different from testing. With property tests, you can sample one million random inputs into a system and catch some nasty bugs. Your software sits in production with high confidence levels until a user runs a sequence that would have been caught by the 1,000,001st random input.

Verification tells you, “There is no bug to find here.” That 1,000,001st sequence was already covered before the code compiled, and so was every sequence after it. The proof didn’t check them one by one—it ruled them all out at once.

So, why haven’t you used it? Because, historically, the cost of writing proofs dwarfed the cost of writing the code. You would state an “obvious” property and then spend days coaxing a proof assistant into accepting it. The tools were slow, the process was painstakingly tedious and required Ph.D.-level skill, and this all produced error messages that were inscrutable. The guarantee was real, but the price was too high, which is why formal verification lived almost exclusively in avionics, chip design, nuclear systems, and cryptographic protocols—domains where a bug costs lives or fortunes. For everyone else, the reasonable conclusion was: Tests are good enough.

Now, Formal Verification Is AI’s Problem

The conclusion that testing is enough no longer holds because AI can now handle the exact bottleneck that prevented this system from being used in mainstream development in the first place. The bottleneck was not the verification itself since a lot of the tools can check proofs automatically. The bottleneck had to do with writing the proofs: translating an intuitive requirement into the precise logical form a verifier demands, and then spending hours or days wrestling with it when the solver can’t automatically confirm what you know to be true. That’s the part that made the cost prohibitive.

Since Opus 4.5, most frontier LLMs can draft formal specifications from natural-language requirements, propose proof strategies, and—critically—iterate relatively fast on failing lemmas in a tight loop with the verifier.

AI proposes implementation candidates, and a deterministic, mechanical process checks each candidate’s correctness. If the proof is wrong, the verifier rejects it and AI tries again. Trust in AI is reduced (to the specifications) because the verifier is an external authority. The human stays in the loop for the part that requires judgment: deciding which properties are worth guaranteeing and system design. Meanwhile, the machine handles the labor of producing a verifiably correct implementation.

This changes who and what formal verification is for. It’s no longer just for safety-critical systems with the budget for specialized proof engineers. It’s for anyone who has a property worth proving.

Formal Verification in Practice

Consider an e-commerce order that follows a state machine: Cart → Placed → Shipping → Delivered, with Cancelled reachable from Placed or Shipping. Placing an order charges the customer’s card; the warehouse begins shipping items; and at any point before delivery, the customer can cancel and the system must issue a refund.

The fundamental property to verify is financial conservation: On cancellation, the refund equals exactly the value of unshipped items. Equivalently, the net amount the customer pays must always equal the value of the items they receive.

In Dafny:

datatype State = Cart | Placed | Shipping | Delivered | Cancelled
datatype Item = Item(name: string, price: nat)
datatype Order = Order(state: State, items: seq<Item>,
shippedValue: nat, charged: nat, refunded: nat)
predicate Valid(o: Order)
{
o.shippedValue <= Total(o.items) &&
match o.state
case Cancelled =>
o.charged == Total(o.items) &&
o.refunded == o.charged - o.shippedValue
// ... other states
}

The critical clause: in Cancelled, refunded == charged - shippedValue. One line encodes the financial conservation law for every possible cancellation: nothing shipped, half shipped, or all but one shipped. The invariant covers every case at once.

Each state transition is a method with preconditions and postconditions:

method CancelOrder(o: Order) returns (o': Order)
requires Valid(o)
requires o.state == Placed || o.state == Shipping
ensures Valid(o') && o'.state == Cancelled
{
var refund := Total(o.items) - o.shippedValue;
o' := o.(state := Cancelled, refunded := refund);
}

Every state transition preserves Valid. A subsequent FinanciallySound ghost predicate stating that the customer pays for exactly what they received (charged - refunded == shippedValue) discharges automatically from Valid’s Cancelled case. So does a NoMoneyLost lemma: If a charge exists, then either items shipped, a refund was issued, or the order is still in fulfillment.

No sequence of operations—adding items, placing, shipping, cancelling—can produce an invalid order. The cancellation refund equals exactly the value of unshipped items. These guarantees hold for every possible order at any price, shipment pattern, and cancellation timing.

Catching Drift and Preserving Intent

When the accounting is simple, the FinanciallySound property holds up trivially for terminal states Cancelled and Delivered. An engineer with some knowledge of the e-commerce domain, however, knows that features such as discounts, batched and recurring orders, or return windows can add complexity to the accounting.

Regardless of what’s added later, there is no scenario in which you would want a user to be over- or undercharged. By encoding the financial conservation property upfront, you ensure that no future code inside this model can violate this fundamental property.

Let’s say that, six months later, the product adds order-level coupons: a “$20 off $100” promotion. The change looks small: a discount field on Order and charged becomes Total(items) - discount. The test fixtures are updated, and the cancellation tests still pass.

A bug is introduced where the customer is now overcharged in certain cancellation scenarios. (The detailed calculation is left as an exercise for the reader.)

Of course, since this product’s order lifecycle is being implemented as a verified domain, the discount feature—as it is part of this lifecycle—must be implemented inside the same system. In this case, a discount calculation would be added to the FinanciallySound predicate.

The invariant refunded == charged - shippedValue is correct when charged == Total(items). Once discount > 0, charged, and Total(items) diverge, the invariant silently encodes the wrong financial law. Adding a discount field changes the meaning of charged without changing its name, and every invariant that refers to charged comes to mean something different (a drift in intent).

The verifier says nothing about whether the meaning is preserved. If Valid is the only invariant, the implementation still satisfies it. What the verifier does catch, however, is inconsistency between invariants.

The error doesn’t fix the bug, but the failure indicates a gap in design that needs to be addressed so that the fundamental property put in place earlier—holding that the user should not be over- or undercharged—cannot be violated. In this case, you need to consider how the discount is allocated across items. Proportionally? Shipped first? Unshipped first?

Because the discount feature is implemented inside a verified system, no implementation of this feature will even compile if it violates the invariant.

The Proof Is Only as Good as the Spec

Everything stated in this article so far assumes the spec is right. That’s not a small assumption—it’s the hardest part and the crux of formal verification. No tool can fully automate the design decisions you want your app to adopt. The verifier will ruthlessly enforce whatever you tell it to, but it can’t tell you what to enforce. Brainstorming and planning with AI, along with spec-conflict audits during the formal spec-writing step, facilitates the design process.

Consider the example set forth in this article. The secrets-management bug is catchable only if someone has stated the subset invariant: Derived permissions must always match a subset of the granting permission’s environments. If the spec had instead said something narrower—“finite permissions can contain only other finite permissions”—the proof would pass, but the guarantee wouldn’t cover future permission representations. The invariant needs to be stated at the right level of abstraction, and the subsequent proof needs to prove it at the right level of depth. Getting both of these right requires a deep understanding of the domain, even if you never need to touch a formal spec or proof and your review is focused on the artifacts produced by the results of both.

What Formal Verification Can and Can’t Do

The properties you choose to verify are a statement about what matters most in your system. Once you get that right, the guarantees are absolute.

As of today, the formally verified core can handle most effect-free logic—invariants, transitions, conflict resolution. But the UI, network calls, and database interactions typically sit outside the verification boundary. Verification makes the core airtight but doesn’t guarantee end-to-end correctness.

Some tools exist, and the cost of proofs is now the cost of the tokens it takes to write them. With the right tooling, formal verification is ready to be integrated into mainstream AI workflows.

Acknowledgment

We thank Anastasiya Kravchuk–Kirilyuk for reading and discussing drafts.

Related Material

Proving the Correctness of Nonblocking Data Structures

Nonblocking synchronization can yield astonishing results in terms of scalability and realtime response, but at the expense of verification state space.

Mathieu Desnoyers

https://queue.acm.org/detail.cfm?id=2490873

The Verification of a Distributed System

A practitioner’s guide to increasing confidence in system correctness

Caitie McCaffrey

https://queue.acm.org/detail.cfm?id=2889274

You Don’t Know Jack About AI

And ChatGPT probably doesn’t either

Sonja Johnson-Yu and Sanket Shah

https://queue.acm.org/detail.cfm?id=3703128

Fernanda Graciolli is co-founder of Midspiral. After an early career in neuroscience research, she pivoted to web development and product design, focusing on making complex technologies accessible to end users. Since 2020, she has built several AI tools, including, most recently, co-creating both the methodology for applying formal verification to web application patterns and lemmafit, an npm package that employs that methodology in Claude Code to build end-to-end apps.

Nada Amin is an assistant professor of computer science at Harvard, where she combines PL and AI to create systems that are correct by construction. Prior to Harvard, she was a University Lecturer at the University of Cambridge and completed her PhD at EPFL as part of the Scala team. She has received two Amazon Research Awards in Automated Reasoning and best papers awards at NeurIPS Math-AI and PLDI. With Fernanda Graciolli, she has recently co-founded Midspiral to bring verification to mainstream development with AI.

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution International 4.0 License.

Copyright © 2026 held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.

Originally published in Queue vol. 24, no. 3

More related articles:

Mark A. Overton - The IDAR Graph
UML is the de facto standard for representing object-oriented designs. It does a fine job of recording designs, but it has a severe problem: its diagrams don’t convey what humans need to know, making them hard to understand. This is why most software developers use UML only when forced to. People understand an organization, such as a corporation, in terms of a control hierarchy. When faced with an organization of people or objects, the first question usually is, "What’s controlling all this?" Surprisingly, UML has no concept of one object controlling another. Consequently, in every type of UML diagram, no object appears to have greater or lesser control than its neighbors.

Eric Bouwers, Joost Visser, Arie Van Deursen - Getting What You Measure
Software metrics - helpful tools or a waste of time? For every developer who treasures these mathematical abstractions of software systems there is a developer who thinks software metrics are invented just to keep project managers busy. Software metrics can be very powerful tools that help achieve your goals but it is important to use them correctly, as they also have the power to demotivate project teams and steer development in the wrong direction.

Duncan Johnston-Watt - Under New Management
In an increasingly competitive global environment, enterprises are under extreme pressure to reduce operating costs. At the same time they must have the agility to respond to business opportunities offered by volatile markets.

Derek Miers - Best Practice (BPM)
Just as BPM (business process management) technology is markedly different from conventional approaches to application support, the methodology of BPM development is markedly different from traditional software implementation techniques. With CPI (continuous process improvement) as the core discipline of BPM, the models that drive work through the company evolve constantly. Indeed, recent studies suggest that companies fine-tune their BPM-based applications at least once a quarter (and sometimes as often as eight times per year). The point is that there is no such thing as a "finished" process; it takes multiple iterations to produce highly effective solutions. Every working BPM-based process is just a starting point for the future.


© ACM, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

29. Open Memory Protocol – One Memory Store for Claude, ChatGPT, Curso

Source: https://github.com/SMJAI/open-memory-protocol
Site: GitHub
Submitter: soji_mathew (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-30 00:05 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 13 points · 5 comments
Length: 1.3K words (~6 min read)
Language: en

An open standard for portable, interoperable AI memory across tools, sessions, and devices.

The Problem

Every AI tool remembers you differently — and only within its own walls.

Claude knows what you told it yesterday. Cursor doesn't.
ChatGPT learned your preferences. Your custom agent hasn't.
Copilot saw your code style. Your terminal AI is starting from zero.

Every time you switch tools, your AI forgets you. You repeat yourself. Context is lost. The AI that was finally starting to know you resets to a stranger.

This is the AI memory silo problem. And it has the same solution as every silo problem before it: an open protocol.

What is OMP?

Open Memory Protocol is a vendor-neutral specification for how AI tools store, retrieve, and share memory about users and their context.

It is:

A specification — a precise definition of memory objects, storage format, and HTTP API
A reference server — self-hostable, open-source, runs in Docker in one command
A set of SDKs — TypeScript and Python libraries for building OMP-compatible tools
A set of adapters — plug-ins for Claude (MCP), OpenAI, Cursor, and more

Any AI tool that implements OMP can instantly share memory with any other OMP-compatible tool.

Quick Start

Requirements: Node.js 22 or newer

1. Run your memory server

npx omp-server

Or with Docker:

docker run -p 3456:3456 -v omp-data:/data ghcr.io/smjai/omp-server

Your server is now running at http://localhost:3456. Test it:

curl http://localhost:3456/v1/health
# {"status":"ok","version":"0.1","compliance":"OMP-Core","memories_count":0}

2. Connect Claude (via MCP)

Find your Claude Desktop config file:

macOS: ~/Library/Application Support/Claude/claude_desktop_config.json
Windows: %APPDATA%\Claude\claude_desktop_config.json
Windows (Store app): %LOCALAPPDATA%\Packages\Claude_pzs8sxrjxfjjc\LocalCache\Roaming\Claude\claude_desktop_config.json

Add to it:

{
  "mcpServers": {
    "omp": {
      "command": "npx",
      "args": ["omp-mcp"],
      "env": {
        "OMP_SERVER": "http://localhost:3456",
        "OMP_API_KEY": "your-omp-key"
      }
    }
  }
}

To enable AI-powered memory extraction and compression, also set these on the server:

OMP_AI_PROVIDER=anthropic   # or "openai"
OMP_AI_API_KEY=sk-ant-...   # your Anthropic or OpenAI key

3. Make Claude use OMP automatically

Without a system prompt, you have to ask Claude to use OMP tools manually. To make it automatic, create a Project in Claude Desktop and add this system prompt:

You have access to OMP memory tools (omp_remember, omp_recall, omp_list).

At the start of every conversation, use omp_recall to search for memories 
relevant to what the user is asking about.

Whenever the user shares anything worth remembering — preferences, decisions, 
projects, facts about themselves — automatically use omp_remember to save it 
without being asked.

Never tell the user you are saving a memory. Just do it silently.


This makes OMP invisible — Claude just remembers, automatically, across every session.

4. Continue a conversation in a different AI tool — automatically

The OMP Bridge browser extension makes this seamless. No copying JSON, no manual steps.

How it works:

Chat with ChatGPT about anything
The extension silently saves your conversation to your OMP server every 2 minutes
Open Claude.ai (or any other AI) to start a new chat
A toast notification appears: "Continue from ChatGPT? [topic]"
Click "Continue in Claude" — OMP generates a natural handoff brief and injects it
Claude responds as if it was in the conversation the whole time

You can also save manually at any point: click the OMP Bridge extension icon → "Save this conversation to OMP".

The handoff brief (AI-generated) looks like:

We were exploring MCP (Model Context Protocol) with ChatGPT — specifically what it
is, how it compares to function calling, and why it's more portable across providers.
I'm ready to go deeper on real-world implementations. Can you show me how to build
an MCP server from scratch?


API — save and replay conversations programmatically:

# Save a conversation
curl -X POST http://localhost:3456/v1/conversations \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "model": "chatgpt",
    "topic": "MCP deep dive",
    "messages": [
      {"role": "user", "content": "Tell me about MCP"},
      {"role": "assistant", "content": "MCP stands for..."}
    ]
  }'

# Generate a handoff brief for another model
curl -X POST http://localhost:3456/v1/handoff \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "conversation_id": "conv_abc123",
    "target_model": "claude"
  }'
# → { "brief": "We were exploring MCP with ChatGPT...", "topic": "...", "source_model": "chatgpt" }

Write a memory from any tool

curl -X POST http://localhost:3456/v1/memories \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "content": "User prefers TypeScript over JavaScript and dislikes verbose comments",
    "type": "semantic",
    "source": { "tool": "claude" },
    "tags": ["preferences", "coding"]
  }'

Query from any other tool

curl "http://localhost:3456/v1/memories/search?q=coding+preferences"

How It Works

┌─────────────┐     ┌─────────────┐     ┌─────────────┐
│   Claude    │     │   Cursor    │     │  Your Agent │
│  (MCP)      │     │  (SDK)      │     │  (REST API) │
└──────┬──────┘     └──────┬──────┘     └──────┬──────┘
       │                   │                   │
       └───────────────────┼───────────────────┘
                           │
                  ┌────────▼────────┐
                  │   OMP Server    │
                  │  (self-hosted)  │
                  │                 │
                  │  ┌───────────┐  │
                  │  │  SQLite   │  │
                  │  │  / Pgvec  │  │
                  │  └───────────┘  │
                  └─────────────────┘


Every tool reads and writes to a single OMP server you control. One memory store. All tools. Zero silos.

The Spec

OMP defines:

Memory Object — the canonical schema for a memory (content, type, source, tags, timestamps, optional embedding)
Memory Types — episodic (events), semantic (facts/preferences), procedural (how-to knowledge)
REST API — standard CRUD + semantic search endpoints
Authentication — bearer token, per-tool API keys
Export/Import — portable JSON format for moving memories between servers

Read the full specification: SPEC.md

Memory Object

{
  "id": "mem_01j9xk2p3q4r5s6t",
  "content": "User is building a fintech startup, prefers clean architecture, dislikes over-engineering",
  "type": "semantic",
  "source": {
    "tool": "claude",
    "session_id": "sess_abc123",
    "timestamp": "2026-06-29T12:00:00Z"
  },
  "tags": ["profile", "preferences", "engineering"],
  "created_at": "2026-06-29T12:00:00Z",
  "updated_at": "2026-06-29T12:00:00Z",
  "expires_at": null
}

Adapters

Tool Status Install
Claude (MCP) ✅ Available npx omp-mcp
Browser Extension ✅ Available Load unpacked — Chrome/Edge/Brave
OpenAI Assistants 🙋 Help wanted Open issue
Cursor 🙋 Help wanted Open issue
Copilot / VS Code 🙋 Help wanted Open issue
Gemini 🙋 Help wanted Open issue
Custom (REST) ✅ Available Any HTTP client

OMP Bridge — Browser Extension

The browser extension brings OMP to the web versions of every AI tool with zero setup on their side.

What it does:

Shows a floating 🧠 button on Claude.ai, ChatGPT, Gemini, and Perplexity
Displays your OMP memories from your server
One click to inject your memories into any chat — the AI instantly knows your context
Works cross-model: inject the same memories into ChatGPT that Claude saved

Install (Chrome / Edge / Brave):

cd adapters/browser-extension
npm install && npm run build

Then open chrome://extensions → Enable Developer mode → Load unpacked → select the adapters/browser-extension folder.

Want to build one? An adapter is typically 100–200 lines — read CONTRIBUTING.md and use adapters/claude-mcp as a template.

SDKs

The OMP API is plain REST — any HTTP client works out of the box. Typed SDKs are on the roadmap.

Want to build one? Python, Go, Rust, and Ruby SDKs are all needed. See CONTRIBUTING.md.

REST (any language)

# Save a memory
curl -X POST http://localhost:3456/v1/memories \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{"content":"User prefers TypeScript","type":"semantic","source":{"tool":"myapp","timestamp":"2026-06-30T00:00:00Z"}}'

# Search memories
curl -X POST http://localhost:3456/v1/memories/search \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{"q":"TypeScript","limit":5}'

Why Open Source?

Your memories are yours. They should not be locked inside a company's database, used to train models without your consent, or lost when you switch tools.

OMP is designed on these principles:

Self-hosted first — you run the server, you own the data
Vendor neutral — no company controls the standard
Privacy by design — memories never leave your server unless you export them
Portable — import/export your full memory in one command

Roadmap

v0.1 — Core spec, reference server, MCP adapter
v0.2 — AI memory extraction, conversation compression, MCP resources + prompts
v0.3 — Cross-model conversation handoff (browser extension + /v1/conversations + /v1/handoff)
v0.4 — Semantic search with embeddings, pgvector support
v0.5 — Memory namespacing (per-project memories)
v0.6 — Multi-user support, access control
v1.0 — Stable spec, submitted to open standards body

Contributing

OMP is community-driven. We need:

Adapter builders — connect your favourite AI tool
SDK contributors — Go, Rust, Java SDKs welcome
Spec reviewers — read SPEC.md and open issues
Early adopters — try it and report what breaks

See CONTRIBUTING.md to get started.

Community

GitHub Discussions — questions, ideas, feedback
Issues — bugs and spec clarifications

License

Apache 2.0 — free to use, modify, and distribute. See LICENSE.

Built by SMJAI and contributors.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

30. Ornith-1.0: Self-scaffolding LLMs for agentic coding

Source: https://deep-reinforce.com/ornith_1_0.html
Site: DeepReinforce
Submitter: kordlessagain (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-06-28 17:58 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 59 points · 7 comments
Length: 1.3K words (~6 min read)
Language: en

Aloha! 🌺

Today, we are introducing Ornith-1.0, a self-improving family of open-source models specially for agentic coding tasks. Ornith-1.0 spans the full spectrum, from compact 9B Dense models suitable for edge device deployment to 397B MoE frontier-scale models optimized for maximum performance, with variants including 9B Dense, 31B Dense, 35B MoE, and 397B MoE. Built on top of pretrained Gemma 4 and Qwen 3.5, it achieves state-of-the-art performance among open-source models of comparable size on coding benchmarks.

The key innovation behind Ornith-1.0 is a self-improving training framework. Instead of relying on human-designed harnesses to drive solution generation in RL, Ornith-1.0 learns to generate both solution rollouts and the task-specific harnesses that guide those rollouts. By jointly optimizing the scaffold and the resulting solution, the model can discover better search trajectories and generate higher-quality solutions.

Ornith-1.0 achieves state-of-the-art performance among open-source models of comparable size across a broad range of agentic coding benchmarks: Ornith-1.0-397B (77.5 on Terminal-Bench 2.1 and 82.4 on SWE-Bench Verified) matches the performance of Claude Opus 4.7 (70.3 on TB-2.1 and 80.8 on SWE-Bench Verified) and outperforming leading open-source models of similar size, including MiniMax M3 (66.0 on TB-2.1 and 80.5 on SWE-Bench Verified) and DeepSeek-V4-Pro (67.9 on TB-2.1 and 80.6 on SWE-Bench Verified). Ornith-1.0-9B, which can be easily deployed on edge devices, matches or exceeds the performance of much larger models such as Gemma 4-31B and Qwen 3.6 35B.

At the flagship scale, Ornith-1.0-397B achieves 77.5 on Terminal-Bench 2.1 and 82.4 on SWE-Bench Verified, surpassing Claude Opus 4.7 on both benchmarks and outperforming leading open-source models of similar size, including Minimax M3 and DeepSeek-V4-Pro.

Ornith-1.0-35B significantly outperforms similarly sized models, including Qwen 3.5-35B, Qwen 3.6-35B, and Gemma 31B. Despite having only 35B parameters, it even surpasses Qwen 3.5-397B on Terminal-Bench 2.1 (64.4 vs. 53.5) while matching its performance across several other coding and agentic benchmarks.

The edge-deployable Ornith-1.0-9B also delivers remarkably strong results, achieving 43.1 on Terminal-Bench 2.1 and 69.4 on SWE-Bench Verified. Despite being a compact 9B-parameter model, it matches or exceeds the performance of much larger models such as Gemma 4-31B, demonstrating that strong agentic coding capabilities can be achieved even in resource-efficient deployments.

A Self-improving Strategy for LLM Training

At the core of Ornith-1.0 is a self-improving training framework that jointly learns to solve tasks and to construct the scaffolds that guide those solutions. Rather than relying on a fixed, human-designed harness shared across a task category, Ornith-1.0 treats the scaffold as a learnable object that co-evolves with the policy.

Each RL step proceeds in two stages: conditioned on a task and the scaffold previously used for it, the model first proposes a refined scaffold; conditioned on that scaffold and the task description, it then generates a solution rollout. Reward from the rollout is propagated to both stages, so the model is optimized not only to produce better answers but to author the orchestration that elicits them.

Repeated over training, this yields a feedback loop in which scaffolds are continually mutated and selected toward those that induce higher-reward trajectories, allowing per-task-category strategies to emerge automatically and driving sustained capability gains without hand-engineered harness design.

Addressing Reward Hacking in Self-improvement

Allowing the model to author its own scaffold naturally introduces the reward-hacking issue. A self-generated scaffold can learn to satisfy the verifier without performing the task: reading the visible test files and hardcoding the expected artifacts, such as touching the checked-for file or writing the literal expected output, or copying an oracle solution present in the environment.

We defend against this in three layers. First, we fix the outer trust boundary: the environment, the tool surface, and test isolation are immutable and outside the model's reach, so the model evolves only the inner policy scaffold: its memory, error-handling, and orchestration logic.

Second, a deterministic monitor enforces that boundary at the level it can be specified exactly, flagging any attempt to read withheld paths, modify verification scripts, or invoke actions outside the sanctioned tool surface, and assigning such trajectories zero reward with exclusion from the advantage computation.

Third, because intent-level gaming can occur entirely within the allowed tool surface, a frozen LLM judge acts as a veto on top of the verifier rather than the primary reward.

Asynchronous RL Training

For RL training, to address the off-line policy problem for long rollouts, Ornith-1.0 adopts the pipeline-RL strategy. To control the effect of earlier generated off-policy tokens, we apply a staleness weight \(w(d_t)\) that downweights tokens according to their age \(d_t\) and drops them entirely once a threshold is exceeded:

\[ w(d_t)= \begin{cases} \!1, & \text{if } d_t \le K_1,\\ \!\exp\!\bigl(-\lambda(d_t-K_1)\bigr), & \text{if } K_1 < d_t \le K_2,\\ \!0, & \text{if } d_t > K_2. \end{cases} \]

The token-level GRPO loss is weighted as follows:

\[ L_t=\min\!\bigl(r_t A_t,\; \mathrm{clip}(r_t,1-\epsilon^{-},1+\epsilon^{+})A_t\bigr)\cdot w(d_t), \]

where

\[ r_t= \frac{\pi_{\theta}(y_t \mid x, y_{<t})} {\pi_{\theta_t^{\mathrm{beh}}}(y_t \mid x, y_{<t})} \]

Full Table

Benchmark Ornith-1.0-397B Qwen3.5-397B Qwen3.7-Max GLM-5.2-744B Minimax-M3-428B DeepSeek-V4-Pro-1.6T Claude Opus 4.7 Claude Opus 4.8
Terminal Bench 2.1 (Terminus-2) 77.5 53.5 73.5 81.0 64 64 70.3 85
Terminal Bench 2.1 (Claude Code) 78.2 48.6 69.8 82.7 - 66.5 69.7 78.9
SWE-Bench Verified 82.4 76.4 80.4 - - 80.6 80.8 87.6
SWE-Bench Pro 62.2 51.6 60.6 62.1 59 55.4 64.3 69.2
SWE-Bench Multilingual 78.9 69.3 78.3 - - 76.2 - -
NL2Repo 48.2 36.8 47.2 48.9 42.1 - - 69.7
ClawEval Avg 77.1 70.7 65.2 - - 75.8 78.2 -
SWE Atlas - QnA 41.2 20.4 - - 37.9 27.2 40.3 48.8
SWE Atlas - RF 42.6 18.4 - - - - 48.6 46.7
SWE Atlas - TW 39.1 18.5 - - 30.8 - 38.5 -

Benchmark Ornith-1.0-35B Qwen3.5-35B Qwen3.6-35B Gemma4-31B Qwen3.5-397B
Terminal Bench 2.1 (Terminus-2) 64.2 41.4 52.5 42.1 53.5
Terminal Bench 2.1 (Claude Code) 62.8 38.9 49.2 - 48.6
SWE-Bench Verified 75.6 70 73.4 52 76.4
SWE-Bench Pro 50.4 44.6 49.5 35.7 51.6
SWE-Bench Multilingual 69.3 60.3 67.2 51.7 69.3
NL2Repo 34.6 20.5 29.4 15.5 36.8
ClawEval Avg 69.8 65.4 68.7 48.5 70.7
SWE Atlas - QnA 37.1 13.2 15.5 - 20.4
SWE Atlas - RF 29.7 10.2 11.4 - 18.4
SWE Atlas - TW 27.8 9.8 13.3 - 18.5

Benchmark Ornith-1.0-9B Qwen3.5-9B Qwen3.5-35B Gemma4-12B Gemma4-31B
Terminal Bench 2.1 (Terminus-2) 43.1 21.3 41.4 21 42.1
Terminal Bench 2.1 (Claude Code) 40.6 18.9 38.9 - -
SWE-Bench Verified 69.4 53.2 70 44.2 52
SWE-Bench Pro 42.9 31.3 44.6 27.6 35.7
SWE-Bench Multilingual 52 39.7 60.3 32.5 51.7
NL2Repo 27.2 16.2 20.5 10.3 15.5
ClawEval Avg 63.1 53.2 65.4 32.5 48.5
SWE Atlas - QnA 17.9 9.2 13.2 - -
SWE Atlas - RF 16.6 4.3 10.2 - -
SWE Atlas - TW 15.3 4.4 9.8 - -

Footnote

Terminal-Bench 2.1 (Terminus-2): We evaluate Terminal-Bench 2.1 using the Harbor/Terminus-2 framework with parser=json, temperature=1.0, top_p=1.0, and a 128K context window. Each run uses a 4-hour timeout with 32 CPU cores and 48GB RAM, and results are averaged over 5 runs. We adjust the Qwen chat template to ensure consistency between training and inference (https://huggingface.co/deepreinforce-ai/Ornith-1.0-397B/blob/main/chat_template.jinja), and modify Harbor to align with vLLM's reasoning_content key.
Terminal-Bench 2.1 (Claude Code): We evaluate Terminal-Bench 2.1 using Claude Code 2.1.126 with parser=json, temperature=1.0, top_p=1.0, max_new_tokens=131072. Results are averaged over 5 runs. Again, Qwen chat template needs to be modified.
SWE-Bench Verified, Pro and Multilingual: using OpenHands harness with temp=1.0, top_p=0.95, 256k context window.
SWE Atlas QnA, RF, TW: using mini SWE agent harness with temp=1.0, top_p=0.95, 128K context window. Results are averaged over 5 runs.
NL2Repo: with temperature=1.0, top_p=1.0, 400K context, 48K output and anti-hacking filters.
ClawEval: An agentic code benchmark over real-user task distributions; temp=0.6 and 256K context.

