Hacker News Top 30 — 2026-05-14

Generated on 2026-05-14 03:20 UTC

1. Scorched Earth 2000 is back

Source: http://www.scorch2000.com/web/
Site: scorch2000.com
Submitter: meshko (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-14 00:41 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 128 points · 43 comments
Length: 16 words (~1 min read)
Language: en

Name Game name Private Hide from public list Tank

Game Resolution Wind Initial cash Rounds

Offline

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

2. Linux gaming is faster because Windows APIs are becoming Linux kernel features

Source: https://www.xda-developers.com/linux-gaming-is-getting-faster-because-windows-apis-are-becoming-linux-kernel-features/
Site: XDA
Author: Ty Sherback
Published: 2026-05-10
HN activity: 573 points · 374 comments
Length: 1.9K words (~9 min read)
Language: en

Published May 10, 2026, 12:30 PM EDT

His love of PCs and their components was born out of trying to squeeze every ounce of performance out of the family computer. Tinkering with his own build at age 10 turned into building PCs for friends and family, fostering a passion that would ultimately take shape as a career path.

Besides being the first call for tech support for those close to him, Ty is a computer science student, with his focus being cloud computing and networking. He also competed in semi-pro Counter-Strike for 8 years, making him intimately familiar with everything to do with peripherals.

Sign in to your XDA account

In March 2026, Linux crossed five percent of Steam's user base for the first time, an all-time high for an operating system that spent two decades as a novelty when it came to any kind of gaming. Microsoft's end-of-support deadline for Windows 10 last October pushed many users to look at alternatives, and the Steam Deck has quietly turned millions of people into Linux gamers without them really thinking about it, leading to more widespread adoption on desktop machines.

Most of that progress used to happen inside a piece of software called Wine, the translation layer that convinces Windows games they're running on Windows. Valve's tuned version of Wine, called Proton, is what makes Steam Play and the Steam Deck work. For years, every meaningful improvement to Linux gaming came from changes to Wine and Proton themselves. That's still true, but increasingly the most important changes are happening one layer deeper, inside the Linux kernel. The latest example of that is something called NTSYNC, a kernel-level driver that has offered great performance gains over previous versions of Wine, and is loaded by default on every Steam Deck that's up-to-date.

Related

What NTSYNC actually is

An additional piece of the performance puzzle

NTSYNC is a small piece of driver added directly to the Linux kernel that gives it a native implementation of a set of Windows-specific tools that games depend on to coordinate themselves.

Modern games juggle dozens of things at once. While you're playing, your CPU manages the rendering pipeline, loading assets, running physics, processing audio, handling AI NPC routines, and tracking inputs, all in parallel across multiple cores. All those jobs constantly have to coordinate so they don't trip over each other.

Quiz

8 Questions · Test Your Knowledge

The history of Linux
Trivia challenge

From a Finnish student's side project to powering the world — how well do you know the story of Linux?

OriginsKernelDistrosPioneersMilestones

Begin

01 / 8

Origins

In what year did Linus Torvalds first announce the Linux kernel to the world?

A1989B1991C1993D1995

Correct! Linus Torvalds posted his now-famous message to the comp.os.minix newsgroup on August 25, 1991, describing Linux as 'just a hobby' project. Few could have predicted it would one day run the majority of the world's servers and smartphones.

Not quite — Torvalds made his announcement in 1991. He was a 21-year-old computer science student at the University of Helsinki at the time, and his modest post described the project as something that 'won't be big and professional' like GNU.

Continue

02 / 8

Pioneers

Which university was Linus Torvalds attending when he created the first version of the Linux kernel?

AStockholm UniversityBAalto UniversityCUniversity of HelsinkiDMIT

Correct! Torvalds was studying at the University of Helsinki in Finland when he began working on Linux as a personal project, initially inspired by MINIX, a small Unix-like system used for educational purposes.

Not quite — Torvalds was a student at the University of Helsinki in Finland. He started Linux partly out of frustration with the limitations of MINIX, which his professor Andrew Tanenbaum had designed deliberately to be simple for teaching.

Continue

03 / 8

Kernel

What operating system primarily inspired Linus Torvalds to create the Linux kernel?

AMS-DOSBMINIXCBSD UnixDSolaris

Correct! MINIX, created by professor Andrew Tanenbaum, was the direct inspiration for Linux. Torvalds used MINIX on his new Intel 386 PC but found it too restricted for his needs, which pushed him to write his own kernel.

Not quite — the answer is MINIX. Torvalds was using MINIX when he started Linux, and even held a famous online debate with its creator Andrew Tanenbaum about kernel design philosophy, specifically monolithic versus microkernel architectures.

Continue

04 / 8

Milestones

What was the version number of the first publicly released Linux kernel in 1991?

A0.01B0.1C1.0D0.99

Correct! Linux version 0.01 was the first kernel Torvalds released publicly in September 1991. It was a rough, early build that could only run on Intel 386 hardware and had very limited functionality, but it marked the true beginning of the Linux project.

Not quite — the first public release was version 0.01 in September 1991. The kernel didn't reach version 1.0 until March 1994, by which point it had grown significantly in capability and had attracted contributions from developers around the world.

Continue

05 / 8

Distros

Which Linux distribution, first released in 1993, is one of the oldest still actively maintained today?

AUbuntuBFedoraCSlackwareDDebian

Correct! Slackware, created by Patrick Volkerding, was first released in July 1993, making it one of the oldest surviving Linux distributions. It is known for its simplicity and Unix-like philosophy, and it continues to be maintained to this day.

Not quite — the answer is Slackware, released in 1993 by Patrick Volkerding. While Debian was also founded in 1993, Slackware narrowly edges it out as the older release. Ubuntu didn't arrive until 2004, and Fedora launched in 2003.

Continue

06 / 8

Origins

The GNU Project, which provided many tools that paired with the Linux kernel, was founded by which developer?

AEric RaymondBRichard StallmanCBruce PerensDIan Murdock

Correct! Richard Stallman founded the GNU Project in 1983 with the goal of creating a completely free Unix-like operating system. When the Linux kernel appeared in 1991, it filled the missing piece GNU needed, and the combination became what many call GNU/Linux.

Not quite — it was Richard Stallman who founded the GNU Project in 1983. Stallman is also known for creating the GPL (GNU General Public License) and founding the Free Software Foundation, two pillars that shaped the legal and philosophical foundation of free software.

Continue

07 / 8

Milestones

Which company released a landmark commercial Linux distribution in 1994, helping bring Linux into the enterprise world?

ACanonicalBSUSECRed HatDMandriva

Correct! Red Hat released its first Linux distribution in 1994 and became one of the most influential commercial Linux companies in history. It pioneered the enterprise Linux market and was eventually acquired by IBM in 2019 for approximately $34 billion.

Not quite — Red Hat is the answer. Founded by Marc Ewing and Bob Young, Red Hat helped prove that companies could build sustainable businesses around open-source software. SUSE Linux also launched in 1994, making it a close rival, but Red Hat became the more globally dominant enterprise force.

Continue

08 / 8

Distros

Ubuntu Linux, one of the most popular desktop distributions, is based on which other Linux distribution?

AArch LinuxBFedoraCDebianDGentoo

Correct! Ubuntu is based on Debian and was first released in October 2004 by Mark Shuttleworth's company Canonical. It was designed to make Linux more accessible to everyday users, and its six-month release cycle and long-term support versions made it a favorite for both desktops and servers.

Not quite — Ubuntu is built on top of Debian. Debian itself was founded in 1993 by Ian Murdock and is known for its strict commitment to free software and stability. Ubuntu inherits Debian's package management system (APT and .deb packages) but adds its own user-friendly layer on top.

See My Score

Challenge Complete

Your Score

/ 8

Thanks for playing!

Try Again

Windows handles this coordination by using a specific set of mechanisms, and before NTSYNC, Wine had to mimic these mechanisms using things like esync and fsync, which both worked, but didn't always match Windows exactly. NTSYNC builds these mechanisms straight into the Linux kernel for the first time, and it means Wine doesn't have to emulate anything anymore. The developer-facing API calls don't actually change, Linux just knows how to answer them natively.

Related

NTSYNC is part of a growing pattern

Not the first time Linux has inherited features because of Windows

NTSYNC isn't the first time Linux has gained a new feature specifically because Windows games needed it. A few years back, Linux added a way for software to wait on several events at once, which is something Windows had built in for decades, but Linux didn't. Wine had been working around the gap with awkward tricks until the kernel finally got native support.

This work is driven by Valve, by CodeWeavers (the company that employs many of the core Wine developers, including NTSYNC's author Elizabeth Figura), and by a steady stream of contributors who want Linux to be a real gaming platform without depending on out-of-ecosystem patches forever.

Related

These aren't magical performance gains

fsync was already pretty good

The headline performance gains look great, but they need some context. The eye-catching 40 to 200 percent FPS gains cited in NTSYNC's original benchmarks were measured against unmodified upstream Wine, which almost nobody uses to play games on Linux anymore. Most Linux gamers, including every Steam Deck owner, use Proton, which already has fsync. Compared to fsync, NTSYNC's performance gains are far more modest. The games that benefit most from the change to NTSYNC are games that were really struggling before. Anything that was running at decent framerates beforehand is still going to run fine.

Related

These 7 Linux myths you still believe simply aren't true

Linux is a completely different beast than it was a decade ago.

Valve adopted it anyway

It's a great sign

Pierre-Loup Griffais, an engineer at Valve, has gone on the record to say that fsync was already fast enough, and despite that, Valve still shipped NTSYNC in stable SteamOS in March anyway, which speaks to the fact that fsync is still a workaround at its core, and can be the cause of issues outside of poor raw FPS.

These old workarounds got subtle edge cases wrong in ways that produced occasional hitches, deadlocks, or weird behavior in specific games, which are bugs that don't show up on benchmark charts but can absolutely ruin individual experiences. NTSYNC fixes those at the source by matching Windows behavior exactly, and that means as soon as your favorite distro moves to the new kernel version, whether it be Bazzite, CachyOS, Fedora, or a flavor of Ubuntu, they all get this much-needed fix.

Related

4 reasons Valve's full SteamOS release will change PC gaming again

Valve's full SteamOS release will change PC gaming again, and here are some of the most important ways.

Gaming on Linux continues to improve by the month

Linux has grown so much in the gaming department. Where there once was nothing but clever Wine patches and community workarounds now lies support from gaming behemoths like Valve, driving changes to the Linux kernel itself. NTSYNC won't be the last time a piece of Windows gets rebuilt inside Linux because gamers needed it, and with more than five percent of Steam's user base now running Linux, the incentive to keep doing it has never been stronger.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

3. Setting up a free *.city.state.us locality domain (2025)

Source: https://fredchan.org/blog/locality-domains-guide/
Site: Frederick's Perch
Submitter: speckx (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-13 14:45 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 514 points · 164 comments
Length: 1.2K words (~6 min read)
Language: en

tl;dr

In the US, can get a domain name like somename.city.state.us for free. If your town has its own domain, you can get nameservers from Amazon Lightsail, send the Interim .US Domain Template to the delegated manager for your locality to register one, then point DNS entries at your webhost.

What’s a locality domain?

A locality domain is a domain name that’s associated with a location in the United States, such as frederick.seattle.wa.us (which currently redirects to fredchan.org). Locality domains were first created in 1992, and the infrastructure has been maintained under government contract ever since.

To register one, you must be a US citizen or permanent resident, an organization incorporated in the US, or an organization with a bona fide presence in the US that regularly engages in lawful activities or has an office in the US. (For the full verbiage, see the bottom of this form).

Step 1: Choose a locality domain

Registration of many locality domains have been delegated to various companies who actually handle the domain registration. See the list of delegated subdomains for domains you can register under, which also has the contact e-mail for the corresponding registrar as of 2009.

Since this list is quite old and some companies may have restructured/renamed, you may need to hunt for an e-mail for the current incarnation of the registrar. For example, the e-mail listed for seattle.wa.us is domainrq@nwnexus.com belonging to NW Nexus, which is now NuOz Corporation, so the e-mail I contacted was support@nuoz.com.

If you do not live in one of these localities, you can try registering a domain under gen.your-state.us, like next.gen.oh.us, which is officially for general independent entities. The contact should be in the same list.

If the locality domain you’re looking for isn’t on the list (i.e. registration has not been delegated), you’re probably screwed. The manager of all undelegated domains, NeuStar, will only allow local government agencies to register them due to government policy. This is supposed to be temporary, but the policy has remained since 2002.

Step 2: Acquire nameservers

When you get a normal domain, like fredchan.org, your domain registrar usually provides nameservers for you after you buy. These nameservers are where you put DNS records that point your domain to an IP address, like your web host’s IP address. However, in order to register a locality domain, you need to already have nameservers.

The only place I could find that provides free nameservers for non-top level domains (e.g. every locality domain) is Amazon Lightsail. Lightsail is Amazon’s low cost AWS web hosting service. You’re normally supposed to rent a web hosting server from them, but you don’t actually need to do that.

Create an AWS account and go to the Lightsail console.
On the left navigation panel, click Domains & DNS.
Click the Create DNS zone button.
Select Use a domain from another registrar and type in the domain you intend to register later.
Click Create DNS zone.
Take note of the domain names in the Name servers section. You need these when you fill out the domain registration form.

Step 3: Fill out the domain registration form

Now that you have name servers, you can fill out the Interim .US Domain Template v2.0. In this section, I’ll walk you through some of the trickier parts of this form, assuming you are registering a domain for yourself.

2. FULLY-QUALIFIED DOMAIN NAME:

This is the domain you want to register, e.g. frederick.seattle.wa.us.

3. ORGANIZATION INFORMATION

If you are a human being and not an organization, you can fill out sections 3a-e with your own address.

4. DESCRIPTION OF ORGANIZATION/DOMAIN:

Describe what you’re doing with this domain. For example, if you expect to host a website on it, you can say that. You can use it for purposes that you don’t write in the form later on as well.

5. Date Operational......:

You can use your birth date here.

6. ADMINISTRATIVE CONTACT OF ORGANIZATION/DOMAIN and 7. TECHNICAL AND ZONE CONTACT

Both of these can be you. 6i, 7i, and 7j can all be your e-mail address, and if you don’t have a fax number, leave 7k blank.

8. PRIMARY SERVER: HOSTNAME, NETADDRESS and 9. SECONDARY SERVER: HOSTNAME, NETADDRESS

This is where you fill in your name server addresses.

Lightsail will have given you at least 2-4 name server addresses, of which you need to know the IP address of each. You can use an online DNS lookup tool to find their IP addresses or the dig command in your terminal.

Any of the nameservers can be the primary server. Then, for the rest of the servers, you can repeat section 9 as many times as you need until you’ve added all the nameservers.

10. US NEXUS REQUIREMENTS

Instructions for section 10 appear at the bottom of the form. For instance, if the domain is for personal use and you are a US Citizen, your application purpose is (iii) personal use, your Nexus Category is (category 11) Natural person who is a United States Citizen, and you leave Nexus Validator blank.

Step 4: Send the form and wait

Send the form to the domain registrar you identified before for your locality domain. When registering, I wrote “I’d like to register a new locality domain with the following information” and pasted the entire form contents into the e-mail, so they know what the form is for.

This can take days or possibly weeks, since they’re not usually automated. If successful, you’ll get an e-mail confirming that your domain has been registered.

Step 5: Finish setting up DNS in Lightsail

You can now go back to the DNS zone you created in Lightsail, and in the DNS records tab, create DNS records to point your domain to whatever server you want― web servers, Minecraft servers, FTP servers… anything!

For free web hosting, I use GitHub Pages, which has a guide to configuring custom domains. Different web hosts will have slightly different instructions, but they will all involve creating DNS records.

Once your DNS records are configured, you should be able to visit your new locality domain and see your website!

FAQ

Do I actually have to live in my locality domain’s area?

I’m not really sure. Honestly, I doubt anyone cares enough to actually check that you live at the address you supply in the registration form. I know someone who used to live in their locality, moved out of the country, and still has their locality domain. However, your mileage may vary.

Will WHOIS requests leak my address?

Nope. Even though you must supply your address in the registration form, a WHOIS request for your locality domain will only show information about the registrar.

Special thanks

Big thanks goes to sleepless and Minh Nguyen for their guides on registering locality domains. After seeing their guides, I wanted to write my own that would clarify some of the questions I had while following them, which led to the creation of this article!

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

4. Cisco Workforce Reductions

Source: https://blogs.cisco.com/news/our-path-forward
Site: Cisco Blogs
Author: Chuck Robbins
Published: 2026-05-13
HN activity: 15 points · 4 comments
Length: 496 words (~3 min read)
Language: en-US

This afternoon, we shared the following email with Cisco employees.

—

Team,

Today we announced our Q3 FY26 earnings with record revenue of $15.8 billion, up 12 percent year over year, and double-digit top and bottom-line growth. The ELT and I could not be prouder of the growth you have all delivered for Cisco.

These results are even more impressive given the complex environment we’re operating in – a rapidly changing market, with intensifying competition, and a global shortage of components critical to support our portfolio and the AI buildout from our customers.

The companies that will win in the AI era will be those with focus, urgency, and the discipline to continuously shift investment toward the areas where demand and long-term value creation are strongest. I’m confident Cisco will be one of those winners. This means making hard decisions – about where we invest, how we’re organized, and how our cost structure reflects the opportunity in front of us.

With this, we are making changes today that will result in the reduction of our overall workforce in Q4 by fewer than 4,000 jobs, representing less than 5 percent of our total employee base. Most notifications will begin on May 14 and continue globally in alignment with applicable local laws and regulations. For employees whose roles are impacted, leaders will share details directly – including timing, available resources, support, and benefits in each country. This will include pro-rated payment of FY26 bonuses to impacted employees. We will provide support in finding new opportunities, whether internal or external, through Cisco’s placement services – a program that has seen 75 percent of participants discover their next role. We are also committed to continued personalized learning and will provide one year of access to all Cisco U courses and certifications, covering AI, Security, Networking, and more.

While we are reducing roles in some areas, we are making clear, strategic investments – particularly in silicon, optics, security, and in our employees’ use of AI across the company. These investments are building from a position of strength – and focusing on the technologies and businesses that will accelerate our growth, deliver unmatched innovation to customers and partners, and define our future.

To those leaving Cisco, thank you for your contribution, your dedication, and the mark you have made on this company. We are deeply grateful and are committed to handling this transition with the care, clarity, and respect that defines our culture.

For those who will continue here, we will discuss these changes and answer questions at the Cisco Beat on May 21 at 8 a.m. PT.

We have important, impactful, and consequential work ahead. Your focus, resilience, and leadership are vital to our growth and relevance in FY27 and beyond.

Chuck and the Executive Leadership Team

Authors

Stay up on Thought Leadership from Cisco

Get the latest blogs from Cisco Executives in your email.

Executive Perspectives

Navigate the latest technology trends and get solutions with the help of Cisco executives.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

5. A History of IDEs at Google

Source: https://laurent.le-brun.eu/blog/a-history-of-ides-at-google
Site: Laurent Le Brun's blog
Submitter: laurentlb (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-09 11:14 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 302 points · 219 comments
Length: 1.5K words (~7 min read)
Language: en

I previously discussed how the main codebase at Google enforces strict tooling and conventions to allow the codebase to scale. For many years, there was one glaring exception: the IDE.

Context: I worked at Google from 2011 to 2024. Some of the information might be approximative, I’ll update it if there are reports. This blog post focuses on the main monorepo at Google (google3).

A fragmented ecosystem

Like in many companies, engineers at Google have been able to pick their IDE of choice, and this resulted in a lot of fragmentation. In 2011, some of the most senior engineers were asked a question: “Is there a way to get a good uniform IDE for all Googlers?“ The answer was essentially “No”. Among others, Jeff Dean replied:

“Trying to get a group of developers to all agree on a common editor is a recipe for unhappiness. Everyone has different opinions about what is important here, and the advantages and disadvantages of different systems are weighed differently by different people. In the end, it doesn’t matter that much.”

This was the prevalent opinion for years. After all, it doesn’t matter which IDE your colleagues use, as long as their code is good. But I worked at Google for 12 years on developer tools, and I sometimes wondered about it.

If you look at it from a company productivity standpoint: you don’t want each engineer to spend too much time setting up their editor. Although engineers used different IDEs, useful integrations eventually had to be reimplemented everywhere: Bazel support, Starlark tooling, code formatters, code search integration, and so on. Google’s internal culture made this manageable. Engineers would often start tooling projects organically, others would discover them through the shared codebase and contribute. This kind of contribution is generally encouraged (through 20% time and peer bonuses). Critical projects would eventually become officially staffed. As an example, a team dedicated to the IntelliJ integration was formed around 2015.

Some people might wonder why you’d need a full dedicated team for this. Was the IDE not good enough in the first place? Part of the reason is that Google has a set of unique tools, and it just makes engineers more productive if you can give them a nice IDE integration. But also, some problems were caused by the sheer size of the monorepo. Traditional IDEs assumed that source code, build metadata, indexing and analysis all happened locally. At Google scale, that assumption starts to break down.

A Cloud IDE

Around 2013(?), something happened that I hadn’t anticipated. Some people started building a web-based editor, named Cider. The name is a reference to “Cloud IDE”, with a trailing “r” to get a more memorable name.

In a company where most tools are web-based, where people spend time in their browser to do code-reviews, navigate the codebase using Code Search… in a company that uses Chromebooks, it actually makes sense to have a quick way to edit files from the browser.

What surprised me though is that Cider eventually became popular across engineers. At first, it was mostly used by technical writers who wanted to edit markdown files without having to deal with version control. The workflow was very efficient for fixing typos. In one click, you would send the pull request, with an option to automatically merge it once approved. Nowadays GitHub has this kind of feature too, but at that time, it felt new to me.

Over time the team added more and more developer-oriented features. The turning point came when they added support for code completion, through the language-server protocol.

Cider was a light client that opened much faster than traditional IDEs. All the magic happened on a backend that indexes the entire codebase, so that all the data was ready whenever someone opened the webpage.

Code intelligence requires connecting each identifier with its type and references. This forms a huge language graph that has to be updated at every commit. And well… the codebase receives many commits per second. But the IDE also needs access to historical data. If I’m working on a project and my colleague merges their code, I don’t want to pick up the changes immediately. So my editor needs to use the graph corresponding to my last sync date… augmented with my local changes, obviously.

With this kind of feature, the popularity of Cider continued to rise among certain demographics. For example, it was much easier to convince Go developers to switch than Java developers (because they expected a much more advanced editor). But the joy of searching and having cross-references across a billion files is real.

Cider V: Using VSCode as a frontend

The investment in the backend could be justified: it was solving Google-specific problems and there was no good alternative to it. But the frontend felt quite limited: it was good for quick fixes, but it couldn’t compete with actual IDEs.

The direction changed in 2020, when I joined the team as one of the tech leads. At that time, Cider was the dominant IDE in the company and the question of its future came up. It was decided to use the VSCode frontend in Cider. It was a natural fit: VSCode was already dominating the IDE landscape, it was language-agnostic, extensible and built for the web.

By switching to the VSCode frontend, we inherited a mature editor, a large extension ecosystem and years of existing features. Many Cider feature requests were already solved problems in VSCode. More importantly, the extension system would unlock teams across the company and remove the Cider team from the critical path.

Screenshot of Cider V, 2022

Even with a dozen engineers in the frontend team, it took a couple of years to build a complete successor to Cider. In 2021, the open beta was used by 5000 engineers, but a lot of work remained to integrate everything and polish the experience. The team had to support version control; integrate the code review tool; provide code completion and refactoring features using the Cider backend; redesign the way extensions are shipped and updated; etc.

Many users were passionate and used to the Cider editor, and expected every little detail to be the same in Cider V. Small workflow changes or an extra click here and there may become an adoption blocker for some users. So the polish part of the project required months of iterations. Even color schemes generated an absurd amount of discussions. As Joshua Bloch observed back in 2011, “the only thing that generates more religious fervour than programming languages is text editors and IDEs.”

I could also write about the interactions with the VSCode engineers and how we contributed changes back to VSCode, but this blog post is long enough. I’ll try to write more about it one day. But let’s say that we had to maintain our local fork, update monthly, and we tried as much as possible to reduce our local hacks and align with the upstream code.

Design exploration for the code review integration, 2022

A Uniform IDE

I started the blog post with a question about a “uniform IDE for all Googlers”. It didn’t completely happen but, by 2023, 80% of the development in the main Google codebase happened in Cider V (and the number kept increasing).

Each IDE has its pros and cons, but Cider attracted users by having the best integrations with the company tools, such as excellent version control support and a code review integration where the reviewer comments are shown inline in the editor.

What I found most exciting was the side effects of having most users using the same tool. It meant that we could invest more resources in the tool (because each change has more impact). I was tech lead for the IDE extensibility and, soon, teams across the company reached out and started developing their own extensions to improve their specific workflows. After two years, around 100 internal extensions were being developed. This enabled many scenarios that were previously infeasible.

In 2023, the management pushed all the teams to integrate more and more AI features. This led to cool features such as Resolving Code Review Comments with Machine Learning and Smart Paste for context-aware adjustments to pasted code. And of course AI code completion.

As more AI features are integrated into the IDE, the advantages of having a single, extensible platform become even more obvious. Of course, it was very expensive and very few companies can justify this kind of work. But I believe that the move to a “standard” (even if it’s not mandated) IDE has been very impactful.

In the end, standard tooling creates leverage.

Comments are closed, but feedback is welcome. You can discuss on Hackernews or Mastodon. If you like this kind of content, you can subscribe through RSS. To get email notifications, try a third-party tool like Feedrabbit.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

6. Chess puzzle I found in my dad's old book

Source: https://ardoedo.it/kempelen/
Site: ardoedo.it
Submitter: Eswo (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-11 16:00 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 110 points · 30 comments
Length: 117 words (~1 min read)
Language: en

More than a hundred years ago, Kempelen, with his famous “Mechanical Chess Player,” not only defeated the strongest chess players who dared challenge him, but also liked to create chess problems that frustrated the greatest minds of the time. This is one of the most difficult among those problems.

Game: The task is to place four black queens and one black bishop on the chessboard so that there is no square not under their attack. In other words, after arranging the five black pieces, it must be impossible to place the white king anywhere without it being in checkmate.

Drag or tap a piece, then choose a square. Tap or click a placed piece to remove it.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

7. The Emacsification of Software

Source: https://sockpuppet.org/blog/2026/05/12/emacsification/
Site: sockpuppet.org
Author: Quarrelsome
Submitted: 2026-05-13 07:06 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 214 points · 151 comments
Length: 1.7K words (~8 min read)
Language: en

You want a good Markdown viewer more than you think you do.

We’re all reading a ton of Markdown. It’s been the lingua franca of software development since long before LLMs. But now agents have led us into a cursed renaissance of TUI tooling, and the reading experience has become intolerable. I’m certain that at least 14% of the agita about AI code is driven by exhaustion over incessantly scrolling terminal Markdown.

There are good TUI Markdown viewers. The Charm folks built glow, which I used & enjoyed. My friend Josh built Markless, which is handsome and bristling with features, most notably a table-of-contents nav. These tools are great. But they’re hamstrung by the terminal itself, which is almost always monospaced and thus fatiguing to read.

There are good graphical UI Markdown editors. On macOS, where I live, there’s Obsidian, Typora, and Bear, my personal daily driver. Native UI Markdown editors are attractive and legible. Good reading experiences. But they’re editors. My editors live in particular virtual desktops, with windows arranged just-so, and it drives me up a fucking wall when I click a random .md file and it messes with my editing environment.

So I took a trip to the App Store, where there are in fact Markdown viewers. They’re fine-ish. None of them were good. All I want is for something sane to happen when I double click a .md file, and the viewers you can grab off the App Store do at first seem sane. It’s only after you live with them for a bit that the problems become apparent. Several of them lack text search. Some have in-app purchases(?!). I settled on one, only to discover a couple days later that it didn’t support copying text into the paste buffer. At that point, I was done.

Suddenly, I realized: a good Markdown viewer was a dumb thing to waste time looking for. It’s 2026. I can just have one extruded for me.

❦

It took several hours to generate a better Markdown viewer than I could find on the App Store, but only about 30 minutes of that was interactive. The rest of it was spent yelling about zoning reform on Facebook while Claude chugged away. Behold, MDV.app:

Now, I’m cheating a little bit with that timeline, because I’d done some preparation weeks before. I recruited an old Macbook to run Claude on. I set up Xcode and git. I got Claude configured, and tracked down some Swift and macOS design skills. But the viewer itself, to a viable state, better than what was on the app store: about 30 minutes.

MDV isn’t the best macOS application ever built. Or even a particularly competent piece of software (although: it might well be the best dedicated macOS Markdown viewer). But it has improved my quality of life immensely.

It does all sorts of cool things. Claude and I have cracked the code on selecting and copying text out of documents, and on finding fixed strings inside of them. Also: MDV keeps a SQLite FTS index of all the Markdown files in its (editable) history, along with hot-keyed bookmarks and a table-of-contents nav. It remembers my place, across restarts, in documents as I toggle between them. And it has fussy color themes and decent typography, which is the most important feature a dedicated Markdown viewer can have. All this stuff just works now, any time I click a .md. It’s great.

❦

Here’s how I know this is a big deal: because every time someone sends me a Signal message, my screen flickers. It doesn’t stop until I explicitly hide the Signal app, which I always forget to do until I’ve been driven 30% of the way to a migraine by subtle flickering.

This is happening because Signal is an Electron app, which means that even though it looks like a native macOS app, it’s not. It’s a whole-ass copy of Chromium rendering a secret web page. It shares this property with virtually every UI app shipped in the last 10 years, each of which carries its own flickering copy of Chromium.

Electron isn’t good. But it’s always been good enough. Building real native user interfaces has historically been a difficult problem, beginning with finding even replacement-level talent to do the work. Capable macOS native UI developers are rare birds.

But Claude isn’t just a replacement-level SwiftUI developer. Claude is actually good.

❦

This isn’t a post about the impending death of Electron (if only). It’s also not about getting you to use my awesome Markdown viewer which is trivially easy to install and better than any viewer on the app store and you should definitely use it.

Actually, no! Stop. Don’t install it. Treat my awesome Markdown viewer, which is awesome, in the same way an Emacs user treats a particularly shiny .emacs. Steal the idea and make a better one.

For those unfamiliar, here’s how Emacs culture works: its lifers build whole applications in elisp (one of the world’s great awful languages). These “applications” are always started to scratch a personal itch related to text editing, and invariably expand in ambition and scope past any reasonable boundaries of what text editors should do. If you look at /r/emacs, it’s 0% Product Hunt, 100% show-and-tell.

There are popular elisp packages lots of people use. But except for Magit, nerds are alarmingly apt to replace them with their own shinier versions (and then to show them off, transitioning to the spore-forming phase of the elisp lifecycle). Everything in Emacs is malleable.

Until now, the Achilles heel of Emacs culture has been that, except for Magit, its packages tend to be wretched user experiences. Ugly, slow, and discoverable only after inflicting years of elisp cortical injuries on yourself.

But AI agents have fracked Emacs culture, and it’s leaking out into the wider world. Given access to a screen and inputs, agents reliably build native user interfaces. Native UI was the province of professionally packaged programs. Now it’s all as bespoke as your editor configuration. And, while I’m sure there’s an upper limit to how good those interfaces can be (with current frontier models), that ceiling is higher than anything you can do in a TUI.

❦

What does it mean for software to be Emacsified? Let’s get into it.

First, it’s personal software. Most of it will be useful only to its creator, and then forgotten, just like the dozens of obsolete little elisp programs littering my .emacs. Personal software defines the ethos of Emacs, which was carefully designed over decades to nurture these kinds of tools. “Emacsification” clocks that everything now works this way, not just baroque text editors.

Still, every once in a while, one of these programs will escape containment. It’ll be useful enough for more than one person to install. But even then, the released artifact won’t be the most important thing about it. The source code won’t be either. If an agent wrote all the SwiftUI code in my project, what do you have to gain from closely reading it?

I’m probably only a little bit right about this, but I think a significant driver of new Emacs packages is a catalytic reaction between your messy local configuration and everyone else’s elisp code. Once you know how to get things done in elisp, it can be easier to build your own solution than to package-install an existing one. In that kind of environment, the code is of passing interest. What matters are the ideas, the observation that “yeah, you can do that, and it’ll work well”.

For the kinds of software I’m talking about, you want the prompts more than you want the source code.

If you’re a nerd comfortable with the idea of rolling your own software, everything is now programmable, not merely in a technical sense but a practical one. And that gets to a feeling I think a lot of people have when creating software with agents: what does it mean to say you’re “building” it? “Building” implies more effort than you’re expending. What you’re doing feels a lot more like configuring, on a platform that has suddenly become vastly more configurable. A platform that feels a lot more like Emacs.

❦

The first thing an AI-pilled developer tells you after taking the plunge is how they’re finally finishing all the random side projects they’d collected over the years.

That was an exciting prospect on its own. But it is now also the case that those things, hyperspecific as they might be, can also be pleasant to use. It’s not lost on me the irony of Emacsification undercutting many of the arguments for putting up with Emacs itself, and its janky user interfaces. Magit is still the best thing going. For now.

I don’t have a grand pronouncement to offer about the Future of Software. But I’m pretty sure nerd software is going to get a lot more interesting. How many clanky terminal apps can we drastically (and easily) improve? I’ll finally be able to understand iostat! Across a fleet of hosts, even. And bpftrace! Have you seen the shit Brendan Gregg had to put up with to do terminal visualizations from bpftrace? You don’t have to put up with any of this anymore. In fact, neither do I.

I’m a vulnerability researcher, and I’ve been like a kid in the candy shop for the first half of 2026 with all the exploit development breakthroughs in agent coding. But I understand that makes me a weirdo, and that for most of you all that comes with those advancements is dread.

So I’m glad to have something new to talk about that actually feels like an unalloyed good. Building native UI is now fun; a lot more fun than building web interfaces ever was. Give it a shot; make something stupidly specific to your own problems, enjoy it for a little while, and then share it somewhere — or, better yet, just a screenshot and the prompts you used to make it.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

8. Princeton mandates proctoring for in-person exams, upending 133 year precedent

Source: https://www.dailyprincetonian.com/article/2026/05/princeton-news-adpol-proctoring-in-person-examinations-passed-faculty-133-years-precedent
Site: The Princetonian
Submitter: bookofjoe (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-13 20:12 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 275 points · 378 comments
Length: 1.1K words (~5 min read)
Language: en-US

All in-person examinations at Princeton will be proctored starting July 1, representing the most significant change to the honor system since it was established in 1893. The faculty passed a proposal requiring instructor supervision at Monday’s faculty meeting, with one opposing vote.

The historic vote was the culmination of months of deliberation within the administration and student governing bodies about how to address increasing concerns over academic integrity violations, including the proliferation of AI usage. The proposal cleared a full faculty vote as the final of three required rounds of approval, having already been passed unanimously by the Committee on Examinations and Standing and the Faculty Advisory Committee on Policy.

According to the policy proposal, previously sent by Dean of the College Michael Gordin to the Faculty Advisory Committee and included in Monday’s meeting notes, instructors will remain present in exam rooms “as a witness to what happens,” but are instructed not to interfere with students. If a suspected Honor Code violation occurs, proctors will document their observations and submit a report to the student-run Honor Committee, where they may later testify under the same standards used for other witnesses.

The proposal notes that additional details, including proctor-to-student ratios and guidelines regarding monitoring practices, will be finalized in consultation with faculty and student representatives before the policy takes effect.

Princeton’s honor system dates back to 1893, when the faculty first instituted the Honor Code following a student petition to eliminate proctoring during examinations. Since then, the honor system has relied on individual accountability, with students pledging both to refrain from academic dishonesty and to report those they witness in violation.

Following the Honor Code’s original implementation, proctoring was explicitly banned in the Rules and Procedures of the Faculty and the Rights, Rules, Responsibilities of the University, which remained in effect for 133 years up until Monday’s vote.

The policy proposal cites AI and personal electronic devices as major catalysts behind the policy shift. “The ease of access of these [AI] tools on a small personal device have also changed the external appearance of misconduct during an examination,” it reads, making cheating “much harder for other students to observe (and hence to report).”

The proposal also points to a growing reluctance among students to report peers directly. The proposal claims that anonymous reporting of allegations has increased in recent years, fueled by fears of “doxxing or shaming among their peer groups” online.

Support nonprofit student journalism. Donate to the ‘Prince.’ Donate now »

In The Daily Princetonian’s 2025 Senior Survey of over 500 seniors, 29.9 percent of respondents reported that they had cheated on an assignment or exam during their time at Princeton. 44.6 percent of senior respondents reported knowledge of Honor Code violations that they chose not to report. Only 0.4 percent of seniors responded saying that they had reported a peer for an Honor Code violation.

An Undergraduate Student Government survey of students cited in the proposal reportedly found that “a majority would favor proctoring or are indifferent to any change,” though a “sizeable minority opposes it on the grounds that students should behave honorably, and that faculty and students should trust each other given the 1893 Honor Code compact.”

Similarly, students and faculty previously interviewed by the ‘Prince’ expressed divided views on the policy’s implementation. Some cited the inadequacy of the current student reporting model, while others said the introduction of proctors could erode the trust that defines Princeton’s academic culture.

The historic change comes in the wake of a November policy change mandating proctoring for all individual and small-group exams, including make-up exams, exams taken by student-athletes while traveling, and exams taken with disability accommodations.

In a March guest Opinion column in the ‘Prince,’ Honor Committee Chair Emerita Nadia Makuc ’26 wrote that the Honor Committee, which adjudicates suspected violations of the Honor Code during in-person examinations, had long discussed introducing proctors as an additional witness and reporter in exam rooms, and that the time had come to take that step.

“The Honor Committee has experienced new strains, including an uptick in cases in the last year and challenges such as generative AI, and student sentiment has recognized that its procedures need to better reflect the current challenges to academic integrity,” Makuc wrote.

Get the best of the ‘Prince’ delivered to your doorstep or inbox. Subscribe now »

Honor Committee hearings are confidential, student-led proceedings addressing potential violations of the Honor Code. Accused students can present defenses, call witnesses, and be assisted by a Peer Representative. If students are found responsible for Honor Code violations, the maximum penalty that can be assigned is expulsion.

William Aepli ’26, former co-chair of the Peer Representatives, which advises students accused of academic integrity violations, previously told the ‘Prince’ that his organization would likely see changes in the type of evidence presented in hearings in Honor Committee hearings.

The Honor Committee Constitution and the Honor Code itself will not need to be changed following the institution of proctoring. Gordin previously confirmed to the ‘Prince’ that just the Rules and Procedures of the Faculty and Rights, Rules, and Responsibilities will need to be updated.

The section of the Rules and Procedures of the Faculty that previously banned proctoring will replace those lines with language mandating instructor supervision during in-person examinations, according to the proposal. A one-sentence revision to Rights, Rules, and Responsibilities will be made before the start of the new academic year.

The proposal states that Gordin met with and received endorsements on the policy from “current and former student chairs of the Honor Committee; colleagues from the Office of the Dean of Undergraduate Students and the McGraw Center for Teaching and Learning; the Faculty-Student Committee on Discipline; and the Academics Chair of the Undergraduate Student Government.”

“Undergraduates and faculty are realistic in understanding that having an instructor supervising examinations will not eradicate cheating,” the proposal notes. “However, they believe that there will be a significant deterrent effect, and that having an additional witness in the room will reduce pressure on students to notice and report concerns while they are themselves completing exams.”

Multiple faculty members declined to comment on the new policy following the meeting. Professor of English and Theater Jill Dolan, who served as dean of the college from 2015 to 2024, briefly discussed the change in an interview with the ‘Prince.’

“I think it’s a shame, but it’s necessary,” Dolan said. “But I also do understand why it passed. I think we need some different practices in this day and age, but it does mark a moment.”

Devon Williams is a News contributor for the ‘Prince’ from Menlo Park, Calif. She can be reached at dw9268[at]princeton.edu.

Support nonprofit student journalism. Donate to the ‘Prince.’ Donate now »

Luke Grippo contributed reporting.

Please send any corrections to corrections[at]dailyprincetonian.com.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

9. Twin brothers wipe 96 government databases minutes after being fired

Source: https://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/2026/05/drop-database-what-not-to-do-after-losing-an-it-job/
Site: arstechnica.com
Submitter: jnord (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-12 22:28 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 332 points · 244 comments
Language: en

No extractable content.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

10. Marco Polo: Finding a friend with only distance and motion

Source: https://www.jackhogan.me/blog/marco-polo
Site: jackhogan.me
Submitter: jackhogan11 (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-11 14:52 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 46 points · 6 comments
Length: 2.9K words (~13 min read)
Language: en

You walk into a cafe, looking for your friend. Seems like an easy task, until you see it’s so packed that you can’t see through the crowd at all, and everyone’s talking so loud that you can barely hear anything. The only things you know are your movements, and how far you are from your friend (through the special psychic bond you two share). How will you find each other?

I wanted to solve the exact same problem, but with devices instead of people (so no psychic connection for me), existing in a space of hundreds of other devices. Working the problem taught me a lot of really interesting science relating to robotics and state estimation, and I wrote this post so you can learn, too.

The Formal Problem: Range-Only Relative Localization

I have two microcontrollers (the large blue boards). Each has an inertial measurement unit (IMU, small board on top right), which gives me data including acceleration and compass heading. They also have an ultra-wideband unit (UWB, small board in slot on left), which gives the distance to the other unit in the pair.
The Beacons in question.

Each of these packages will be contained within a wearable device, and can therefore prompt its wearer to move around. This is an important freedom, because it means we can use the change in distance over time to determine location during the localization process, rather than purely statically.

Potential Solutions

To get us in the mindset of doing a technical implementation, let’s understand some options we have and see why they are or aren’t a good fit for what we’re trying to do.

Candidate 1: Multi-Antenna Ultra-Wideband

Ultra-wideband localization, found in location-aware products including AirTags, uses a simple call-and-response system known as time of flight. The UWB measures the time it takes for a roundtrip exchange of information, which is then turned into a distance $d = c \cdot (T_{loop} - T_{reply})/2$.

The initiator sends out a timestamped pulse to the responder, which then responds in $T_{reply}$ time (reported by the responder) with its own timestamp packet. The whole exchange takes $T_{loop}$ time, calculated at the initiator:

Distance 15.00 M $T_{\text{reply}}$ 120.00 NS

$T_{\text{loop}}$ 220.07 NS $T_{\text{reply}}$ 120.00 NS $\text{Derived ToF}$ 50.03 NS Recovered Distance 15.00 M

$$
\text{ToF} = \frac{T_{\text{loop}} - T_{\text{reply}}}{2} = \frac{220.07 - 120.00}{2} = 50.03 \text{ ns}
$$

$$
d = c \cdot \text{ToF} = 15.00 \text{ m}
$$

Release to update

The time of flight system works fine for getting the distance to the other device, but alone is insufficient for getting the bearing to the other device. This limitation is where phase difference of arrival (PDoA) ultra-wideband comes in.

PDoA uses a property of radio waves called the phase. Light and radio waves oscillate up and down as they travel; where they are in that cycle is the phase. As the wave passes any fixed point in space, its phase at that point cycles:

Wavelength $\lambda$ 80.00

$$
\varphi = 3.14 \text{ rad}
$$

We use this property to determine the heading relative to the other device. By positioning two antennas a known distance $d_a$ apart, we can derive the angle of arrival of the other device’s messages by comparing the phase at the two antennas at each timestep:

Drag the point to move the wave source.

$\lambda$ 80.00

$\Delta\varphi$ 0.00 rad $\theta$ 0.00 rad (0.00°)

$$
\theta = \arcsin\!\left(\frac{\Delta\varphi \cdot \lambda}{2\pi \cdot d_a}\right) = \arcsin\!\left(\frac{0.00 \cdot 80.00}{2\pi \cdot 100}\right) = 0.00 \text{ rad}
$$

Release to update

Failure mode: PDoA is a great system, but it has a caveat: it requires two antennas. This design restriction makes it very difficult to integrate into a wearable, where you have to deal with skin substantially attenuating signals. One antenna (what I chose for Beacons) can maybe get through with clever placement, but two is much more difficult.

Candidate 2: External Trilateration System

Another potential way to do things is to involve external devices with known fixed positions, usually known as anchors. With at least three of them, a Beacon can measure its distance to each and solve for its location. This strategy is the same as how GPS works, using multiple circles (or spheres in 3D) of distance to derive an exact location for the device:

Drag the beacon.

$r_1$ 130.00 $r_2$ 200.00 $r_3$ 200.00

$$
\begin{aligned}
r_1^2 &= (x - x_1)^2 + (y - y_1)^2 \\
r_2^2 &= (x - x_2)^2 + (y - y_2)^2 \\
r_3^2 &= (x - x_3)^2 + (y - y_3)^2
\end{aligned}
$$

$$
\begin{bmatrix} x_2 - x_1 & y_2 - y_1 \\ x_3 - x_1 & y_3 - y_1 \end{bmatrix} \begin{bmatrix} x \\ y \end{bmatrix} = \tfrac{1}{2}\begin{bmatrix} k_2 - k_1 \\ k_3 - k_1 \end{bmatrix},\quad k_i = x_i^2 + y_i^2 - r_i^2
$$

$$
(x, y) = (240.00,\ 190.00)
$$

Release to update

Failure mode: Trilateration is easy, once you have those three anchors. In practice, this means permanently installing devices to always broadcast their locations within a space. The localization needs to work without specially-installed equipment, so I don’t see trilateration as a valid solution. However, if I were to deploy these in a known location that has a lot of traffic (like a conference venue), this strategy could act as a refining system to keep the main system grounded.

Candidate 3: Kalman Filters

Kalman filters are the gold standard for state-space estimation in physical spaces, and are exactly what we need to solve our problem. They operate on the principle of having an internal estimation of the unobservable true state — in this case, the relative position — which is updated with new information we get from measurements in a looping process. This loop eventually converges on a reasonable estimate that we can use to guide the user. Our true state is unobservable because we can’t directly measure bearing from the sensors alone; the bearing comes from the combined information from all of our sensors.

I specifically chose an extended Kalman filter (EKF), which gives support for the nonlinear functions needed to calculate the expected bearing. The reason an EKF is our best solution is that it only requires one UWB antenna (unlike PDoA) and only two devices (unlike trilateration).

Implementing an EKF

An EKF is a loop composed of two parts: a prediction and a measurement step. You have a state vector $\hat{\textbf{x}}$ and covariance matrix $P$ you want to keep as consistent as possible with the real unobservable state $\textbf{x}$ (for example, the $x$ and $y$ distance to a target). We use the “hat” $\hat{\cdot}$ to say that this state vector is an estimate of the true state. $P$ doesn’t get a hat since it isn’t an estimate of anything, it just helps inform the estimate $\hat{\textbf{x}}$. To update $\hat{\textbf{x}}$ and $P$, you will ask two questions:

“What do I think my next state will be?”: Answered by the state transition function $f(\textbf{x}, \textbf{u})$ (also known as the prediction function), this takes the current state along with the control input and projects it to the next timestep. In the case of Beacons, it asks: “Given how I’m moving and how I’m accelerating (represented as $[a_x, a_y]$), what does physics think about where I’ll end up next?” Acceleration is a control input and not a measurement because it’s driving the state transition, not a result of it.
“What measurements do I expect to receive?”: Answered by the measurement function $h(\textbf{x})$, this also takes the current state, but it instead asks what the probable sensor readings are. For Beacons: “Given how I’m moving, what do I expect the UWB reading to be at the next timestep?”

The state $\textbf{x}$ represents what the system is keeping track of, but it’s also very important to know the relations of each of the state values to each other. This is where the covariance matrix $P \in \mathbb{R}^{|\textbf{x}|\times|\textbf{x}|}$ comes in. It’s a square matrix with row/column counts equal to the size of $\textbf{x}$, denoted $|\textbf{x}|$. Each entry $P_{i,j}$ in that matrix answers the question “how do $\textbf{x}_i$ and $\textbf{x}_j$ impact each other’s distributions?” For entries along the diagonal, this reduces to the variance of $\textbf{x}_i$. We use the entries in $P$ to shape our belief of the distributions of the variables in $\textbf{x}$ during the prediction and measurement steps.

Sidenote: Linearization

Linearization is the process of taking a nonlinear function (like a parabola) and “zooming in” really close, so close that the curved line actually looks straight, or in other words, linear. It’s an approximation so it’s not guaranteed to be optimal, but it’s good enough for our use case (and others, including GPS).

Zoom 1×

$f(x) = x^2$ (solid line)

$L(x) = 2x - 1$ (dashed line, linearization at $x_0 = 1$)

EKFs have an additional layer of complexity in return for supporting nonlinear functions like square root, which you will see are necessary for our task: they require differentiability of $f(\textbf{x}, \textbf{u})$ and $h(\textbf{x})$ to linearize around $\hat{\textbf{x}}_{k+1|k}$ using the Jacobians of $f$ and $h$, $F$ and $H$ respectively. Doing so lets us reuse the regular Kalman update equations, making calculations much easier. The notation $k+1|k$ expands to “we condition our guess of $k+1$ on the information we have at timestep $k$”.

The Flow of Data

We now have all of the pieces to describe how data flows through the EKF loop. We start with the current state $\hat{\textbf{x}}_{k|k}$ and covariance matrix $P_{k|k}$, along with our control input for the timestep, $\textbf{u}_k$.

Our first step is to predict what the next state and covariance will be.

$$
\begin{align*}\hat{\textbf{x}}_{k+1|k} &= f_k(\hat{\textbf{x}}_{k|k}, \textbf{u}_k)\\P_{k+1|k}&=F_k P_{k|k} F_k^T + Q_k\end{align*}
$$

Notice $F_k P_{k|k} F_k^T$: this is the linearization I was talking about earlier. The $Q_k$ term is the prediction noise covariance for timestep $k$. The noisier the prediction is, the less the filter trusts it. Next, we update $\hat{\textbf{x}}_{k+1|k}$ and $P_{k+1|k}$ with our measurements:

$$
\begin{align*}
K_{k+1}&=P_{k+1|k}H_{k+1}^T(H_{k+1}P_{k+1|k}H_{k+1}^T + R_{k+1})^{-1}\\
\hat{\textbf{x}}_{k+1|k+1} &= \hat{\textbf{x}}_{k+1|k} + K_{k+1}(z_{k+1} - h_{k+1}(\hat{\textbf{x}}_{k+1|k}))\\
P_{k+1|k+1} &= (I - K_{k+1}H_{k+1})P_{k+1|k}
\end{align*}
$$

$z_{k+1}$ is our measurement for the timestep. $K_{k+1}$ is the Kalman gain, which weights the measurement against the prediction by their relative variances. A higher gain means we trust the measurement more; lower means we trust our prediction more. The linearization $H_{k+1}P_{k+1|k}H_{k+1}^T$ comes back again, this time for the measurement step. $R_{k+1}$ plays the same role as $Q_k$ but for measurement noise covariance.

And that is a single step of an EKF! Not too bad once you understand how everything fits together.

Now that we have an understanding of the underlying logic of an EKF, it’s time to define our variables.

Step 1: The State Vector $\textbf{x}$ and Covariance Matrix $P$

Arguably the most important part of designing a filter is what state to keep track of. There are a million things going on in any nonlinear system, especially in the case of Beacons, so being selective with what gets stored saves both processing time and later headaches when things inevitably don’t work first try. For Beacons, we will store four values:

$\Delta x$ and $\Delta y$: The estimated difference in $x$ and $y$ (measured in meters) from the current device to the other in world frame. Can be turned into a triangle with Pythagoras’ theorem to calculate the bearing and distance.
$\Delta \dot{x}$ and $\Delta \dot{y}$: The estimated velocities in each component direction, important in the physics calculations.

These four values (packed as $[\Delta x, \Delta y, \Delta \dot{x}, \Delta \dot{y}]^T$) allow us to approximate the physical system of two devices moving in a 2D plane. We initialize with the UWB distance $d_0$, assuming the initial relative position lies entirely along $x$:

$$
\hat{\textbf{x}}_0 = [d_0, 0, 0, 0]^T
$$

It’s important to note that it’s impossible to tell the direction to the other device at this point, since at $k=0$ we only have one distance measurement. The filter will accumulate a belief of the direction as the user moves the device around. We initialize the covariance matrix $P_0$ using tuned values:

$$
\textrm{diag}(P_0) = [0.04, d_0^2, 1, 1]
$$

The $0.04\ \textrm{m}^2$ (20 cm standard deviation) informs the EKF that the radial covariance is small and constrained by the UWB’s relatively low error, with the starting assumption that we are directly on the $x$ axis. The $d_0^2$ variance informs the EKF that the larger the distance, the more unsure it should be about the $y$ axis (since we assume we are only on the $x$ axis at $k=0$). We initialize the variances for $\Delta\dot{x}$ and $\Delta\dot{y}$ to $1\ \textrm{(m/s)}^2$ as a tuned starting value. The rest of $P_0$ is $0$. The filter will start changing all of its values as it learns more about the system.

Now that we know what we’ll be storing, we need to think about how we project that state prediction forward.

Step 2: The State Transition Function $f(\textbf{x}, \textbf{u})$

We have our state vector layout, now we need to project it forward each timestep using information from the control vector. Luckily this is pretty easy, using physics equations you likely learned in high school:

$$
\begin{align*}
\Delta\dot{x}_{k+1|k}&=\Delta\dot{x}_{k|k} + a_{x,k} \cdot \Delta t\\
\Delta\dot{y}_{k+1|k}&=\Delta\dot{y}_{k|k} + a_{y,k} \cdot \Delta t\\
\Delta x_{k+1|k} &= \Delta x_{k|k} + \Delta\dot{x}_{k|k}\cdot \Delta t + \tfrac{1}{2}\,a_{x,k}\cdot \Delta t^2 \\
\Delta y_{k+1|k} &= \Delta y_{k|k} + \Delta\dot{y}_{k|k}\cdot \Delta t + \tfrac{1}{2}\,a_{y,k}\cdot \Delta t^2
\end{align*}
$$

These equations give our predicted state update $\hat{\textbf{x}}_{k+1|k}$.

Note: The world-frame acceleration values $a_{x,k}$ and $a_{y,k}$ are calculated using an AHRS filter combining data from the IMU. I’ve omitted the AHRS step for brevity.

Next, we update $P$. To do so we need our prediction Jacobian, $F$, calculated by taking the partial derivatives of the above equations:

$$
F=\frac{\partial f}{\partial \textbf{x}}=\begin{bmatrix}1 & 0 & \Delta t & 0 \\ 0 & 1 & 0 & \Delta t \\ 0 & 0 & 1 & 0 \\ 0 & 0 & 0 & 1\end{bmatrix}
$$

Diagonal entries of $1$ mean each value carries forward. The two off-diagonal $\Delta t$s integrate $\Delta x$ via $\Delta\dot{x}$ and $\Delta y$ via $\Delta\dot{y}$ over a single step. We assume constant acceleration between steps.

We then follow the prediction equations defined above to get $\hat{\textbf{x}}_{k+1|k}$ and $P_{k+1|k}$. $Q$ is a tuned matrix of constants.

Step 3: The Measurement Function $h(\textbf{x})$

Now that we have our estimates $\hat{\textbf{x}}_{k+1|k}$ and $P_{k+1|k}$, we need to check our work. Our measurement function is pretty simple:

$$
h(\textbf{x}) = \sqrt{\Delta x ^2 + \Delta y^2} = r
$$

All this does is take our deltas and convert them to a distance comparable to the UWB reading. Taking the partial derivative:

$$
H = \frac{\partial h}{\partial \textbf{x}} = \begin{bmatrix}\displaystyle\frac{\Delta x}{r} & \displaystyle\frac{\Delta y}{r}& 0 & 0\end{bmatrix}
$$

The pair $(\Delta x/r, \Delta y/r)$ is the unit vector from this device to the other. Movement along that direction changes the distance one-for-one; movement perpendicular to it doesn’t change the distance at all. Setting $z_{k+1}$ to our UWB reading, we update with the above equations. Similarly, $R$ is a tuned scalar constant. $R$ isn’t a matrix because the measurement function returns a scalar.

Whenever we want to get what the filter thinks is our current bearing, we run a simple function to extract the values we need, the bearing $\beta$ and the $1\sigma$ uncertainty $\sigma_\beta$, both in radians:

$$
\begin{align*}
r^2 &= \Delta x^2 + \Delta y^2 \\
\beta &= \textrm{atan2}(\Delta y, \Delta x) \\
\frac{\partial \beta}{\partial \Delta x} = \beta_{\Delta x} &= \frac{-\Delta y}{r^2} \\
\frac{\partial \beta}{\partial \Delta y} = \beta_{\Delta y} &= \frac{\Delta x}{r^2} \\
v&= P_{(0, 0)} \beta_{\Delta x}^2 + 2 P_{(0, 1)} \beta_{\Delta x} \beta_{\Delta y} + P_{(1, 1)} \beta_{\Delta y}^2 \\
\sigma_\beta &= \begin{cases}
	\pi &\textrm{if $r^2 < 10^{-6}$} \\
	\sqrt{\max(0, v)} &\text{otherwise}
\end{cases}
\end{align*}
$$

We set $\sigma_\beta = \pi$ (no knowledge of bearing) if the distance is so small that it’s basically impossible to tell, i.e. the filter thinks $r$ is less than a millimeter. Otherwise, we take $\sigma_\beta = \sqrt{\max(0, v)}$, with $v$ being the variance.

Demo

Now we have the entire pipeline! Let’s see what it can do:

Drag the Beacons (multitouch supported), or click the canvas and use WASD for 1 / IJKL for 2 / R to reset.

$$
\hat{\mathbf{x}} = \begin{bmatrix} 0.00 \\ 0.00 \\ 0.00 \\ 0.00 \end{bmatrix}
$$

$\beta$ 0.00° $\sigma_\beta$ 0.00° $\hat{r}$ 0.00 m $z$ 0.00 m NaN resets 0

The colored region is the filter’s belief about where the other Beacon is.

There are tons of applications for EKFs, ranging from robotics to digital signal processing to navigation systems, and it all becomes so much more interesting when you can see how they work through all of the complicated matrix math. They are the perfect solution for Beacons, and I hope you someday experience the joy of using one, too.

Further Reading

I used this explanation of regular and extended Kalman filters extensively when writing this post; I highly recommend reading it yourself if you want to dive deeper!

If you want to read up on a more recent innovation, look into unscented Kalman filters! They turned out to be a bit overkill for my use case, but I would love to use them in the future.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

11. Launch HN: Ardent (YC P26) – Postgres sandboxes in seconds with zero migration

Source: https://www.tryardent.com/
Site: Ardent
Author: Ardent
Submitted: 2026-05-13 16:54 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 76 points · 32 comments
Length: 461 words (~3 min read)
Language: en

Y

Backed by Y Combinator

Use coding agents on real data with no risk

Create copies of any Postgres database in under 6 seconds so coding agents can verify their code works in prod

Stop breakages

Validate code before it reaches production

Let Coding agents test their database code on a 1:1 copy of your production postgres

Book a Demo

Zero blast radius

Test with zero risk to production

Each clone is isolated at both the compute and storage level. Clones never impact production. Ever

Book a Demo

Speed at scale

Cloning that never slows down even at terabyte scale

Clones load in 6s, scale to 0, autoscale compute and do not duplicate storage. Zero management needed

Book a Demo

Data cleaning

Let agents clean, deduplicate and standardize data on an exact copy of production

Migration testing

Backfills

Verify changes

Features

Built to be infinitely scalable and fast

Cloning Speed

30,960X faster cloning per TB

Hours

Traditional

<6s always

Ardent

Traditional

Ardent

Extreme storage efficiency

Only pay for changes made

Traditional

Ardent

Compute that scales with agent workloads

No overprovisioning. Automatic scale to 0

Traditional

Ardent

Comparison

Why AI native data teams use Ardent

Traditional Replica

Ardent

Clone Creation

Hours / Days

<6s

Storage

Entire DB per clone

Only Changes made

Compute

Always on

What you use

Database management

Manual resizing

Autoscale

Clone limit

15-20

Infinite

Git style team collaboration

Need a custom plan?

We can tailor workflows, limits, and infrastructure to fit your team's needs.

Talk to the founder

Branching on your DB without migration

Designed for the providers you already use

Supabase

Support for auth, extensions and more to replicate your supabase instance 1:1

AWS RDS

Connect your RDS Postgres instances with zero config changes. Branch directly against your production data

Planetscale

Branch with full compatibility across planetscale specific extensions and configurations

Customer Impact

Built for teams moving fast with AI at production scale

“We spent hours trying to test AI database code through inaccurate seed files. Ardent lets us and our agents test in seconds with zero drift from production.”

Akshendra Garg

CTO Zennagents

-0%

Downtime

+0%

Release speed

0 hours

Saved per release

What the best say

Trusted by the best in Data

“I think AI will disrupt data engineering in a significant way. I'm investing in Ardent to accelerate that disruption!”

Zach Wilson

Founder of Dataexpert.io

“Ardent is a fundamental complete shift in how agents and developers work with databases. It's as critical as git was for code”

Abhay Singh

Head of Data at Chevron

“Ardent let us move as fast as agents write code. We no longer worry about our agents working on the database layer.”

Pryce Yebesi

CEO at Openledger

Ship fast and don't break things

Make sure coding agents never break your DB.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

12. Xs of Y – roguelike that names itself every run. Written in 4kLoC

Source: https://github.com/nooga/xsofy
Site: GitHub
Submitter: andsoitis (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-10 03:32 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 166 points · 71 comments
Length: 249 words (~2 min read)
Language: en

Xs of Y

A roguelike written in my lisp, where the magic system is a lisp.

Note: This is not finished! It's playable but mild peril and uscheduled explosions are to be expected.

Play in your browser

Every run generates a new title (Gazebos of Mounting Dread), a new quest (retrieve the Spatula of Futility), and a new set of rune mappings. The runes are secretly symbols, spells are s-expressions. You have root access to the dungeon's reality engine but the man pages are in a dead language that changes every boot.

The power curve is inverted - early game is desperate survival, late game is applied theology with inadequate safety margins.

Meanwhile the dungeon is trying to kill you through more conventional means. Spiders shoot web cones that trap you while goblins close in. Slimes split when you hit them. Trolls regenerate. Set something on fire and it panics, runs through grass, ignites the grass, ignites more creatures - it's fine, everything is fine. Push an ogre into lava. Push a goblin into another goblin. Push yourself into a chasm by accident. Chasms are educational.

Written in ~6900 lines of let-go - a Clojure dialect on a Go bytecode VM. Persistent data structures all the way down. No dependencies. 6ms startup. Runs natively or in the browser via WASM.

If you like how this game looks check out Brogue - my main inspiration.

Running

lg main.lg

Get lg from let-go, or:

brew tap nooga/let-go https://github.com/nooga/let-go
brew install let-go

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

13. The US is winning the AI race where it matters most: commercialization

Source: https://avkcode.github.io/blog/us-winning-ai-race.html
Site: Anton Krylov
Submitter: akrylov (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-13 13:53 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 168 points · 479 comments
Length: 860 words (~4 min read)
Language: en

The US is winning the AI race where it matters most: commercialization. Since DeepSeek R1 shocked the market in January 2025, American companies have moved faster. OpenAI pushed harder into agents and Codex. Anthropic turned Claude Code into a business. China has contenders, but the US is clearly ahead in revenue, adoption, tools, and reach.

Trump fits this moment well. He is a salesman at core, and Larry Ellison is too. That helps explain why AI infrastructure is an easy political product. Selling AI today is easier than selling Oracle databases in the 1980s. This time the oracle talks.

DeepSeek matters for a different reason. Its strategic value for China is not mainly commercial. It helps China reduce dependence on Nvidia and push inference toward domestic stacks such as Huawei Ascend. That supports supply chain autonomy. It is not the same as profitable AI leadership.

Christian Klein of SAP has argued that Europe does not need more data centers and that large language models alone are not enough. He is right that models alone are not enough. Europe also spent about $58.8 billion on Indian software services in FY 2023 to 2024 and about $67.1 billion the next year. AI only becomes valuable when it is tied to real data, real workflows, and real products. But his broader view misses the main fact. The United States is winning because it is building every major layer at once: chips, power, data centers, cloud platforms, developer tools, consumer platforms, and enterprise software.

Many people use the wrong scorecard. Papers and engineer counts do not prove AI leadership. The test is who can finance infrastructure, train and serve models at scale, and apply AI across the economy.

Energy is part of that lead. Modern GPU and TPU systems turn electricity into compute. Cheap power lowers model costs. That is why electricity prices matter.

Retail electricity prices in USD per kWh
Country Home Business
Germany 0.436 0.279
United Kingdom 0.420 0.415
Spain 0.282 0.136
France 0.274 0.174
United States 0.201 0.154
Canada 0.125 0.106
Russia 0.087 0.131
China 0.078 0.117

The US is cheaper than the big Western European economies. Canada is cheaper still. China and Russia are lower cost than the US in this comparison. So power matters. But power is not the most important layer.

The decisive layer is cloud infrastructure and data. The US owns the global hyperscalers. AWS, Azure, and Google Cloud give American firms the main channels through which models reach the world. It also owns platforms that generate and organize the data of the AI age. YouTube is a video corpus. Google Drive and Microsoft 365 sit inside daily office work. GitHub sits inside software development. These are distribution systems and data platforms. New models can be pushed into products people already use every day.

That is why electricity alone does not decide the race. A country can have cheap power and still lose if it does not have cloud scale, platform reach, developer ecosystems, and access to large flows of useful data. The US has all of that at once. China has much of it in its large domestic market. Europe does not.

Europe has long had strong engineering talent. But talent is not enough. US hyperscalers already dominate the market, and catching up is slow. Even if Europe decided today to finance real cloud champions, building the infrastructure would only be the first step. Europe would then need to move banks, manufacturers, and public agencies onto those platforms. That process would take most of a decade. By then AWS, Azure, and Google Cloud would be even further ahead in scale, software, and data.

There is one exception. Arkady Volozh is trying to build Nebius into a European AI infrastructure company. But that confirms the rule. Europe is still at the start.

So Klein is right that LLMs alone are not enough. But the lesson is not that data centers matter less. It is that data centers matter inside a much larger system. The US is winning because it has power, capital, cloud infrastructure, and data platforms all working together. Energy is important. Cloud and data are even more important. That is where the American lead is strongest.

There is another frontier: weaponized AI. The next phase may be Country X AI versus other countries' AI in bot networks, cyber campaigns, and autonomous weapons. A provider does not need magic to do this. It is disturbingly easy to tune systems to dehumanize rivals, justify violence, or target entire populations. Once models are embedded into media, networks, and weapons, bias becomes force. The AI race is also a security race.

Models like Anthropic's Mythos point to another shift. The old Linux instinct was many eyes on open code. Frontier cyber models may push states and defense firms toward the opposite logic: security by obscurity, with closed software, closed tooling, closed firmware, and closed chips. If a model cannot train on the code and architecture of a target stack, it will usually have less context and less speed. That does not make systems safe, but it does raise the value of proprietary stacks all the way down to hardware.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

14. S-100 Virtual Workbench

Source: https://grantmestrength.github.io/S100/
Site: grantmestrength.github.io
Submitter: rbanffy (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-13 15:52 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 107 points · 20 comments
Language: en

No extractable content.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

15. Reverting the incremental GC in Python 3.14 and 3.15

Source: https://discuss.python.org/t/reverting-the-incremental-gc-in-python-3-14-and-3-15/107014
Site: Discussions on Python.org
Submitter: curiousgal (Hacker News)
Published: 2026-04-16
HN activity: 206 points · 81 comments
Language: en

No extractable content.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

16. AEPs: API Enhancement Proposals

Source: https://github.com/aep-dev/aeps
Site: GitHub
Author: aep-dev
Submitted: 2026-05-12 12:58 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 7 points · 3 comments
Length: 83 words (~1 min read)
Language: en

API Enhancement Proposals

The AEP Project is an API design specification and ecosystem of clients and tooling for protobuf and HTTP REST APIs.

Overview

See Governance.

Get Involved

There are lots of ways to contribute! See: Contributing

License

Except as otherwise noted, the content of this repository is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License, and code samples are licensed under the Apache 2.0 License.

For the full text of each license, see LICENSE.md. For additional details, see the developer.google.com Site Policies.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

17. Mystery Microsoft bug leaker keeps the zero-days coming

Source: https://www.theregister.com/security/2026/05/13/disgruntled-researcher-releases-two-more-microsoft-zero-days/5239758
Site: theregister
Author: Connor Jones
Published: 2026-05-13
HN activity: 45 points · 8 comments
Length: 729 words (~4 min read)
Language: en-US

REG AD

Security

Mystery Microsoft bug leaker keeps the zero-days coming

Security pros warn YellowKey claim could make stolen laptops a much bigger problem

The anonymous security researcher who has already maliciously exposed three Windows zero-days this year has revealed two more, dropping them just after Microsoft's monthly Patch Tuesday update.

Nightmare-Eclipse, or Chaotic Eclipse, depending on which of their aliases you prefer, released details about YellowKey and GreenPlasma - respectively a BitLocker bypass and a privilege escalation flaw, handing SYSTEM access to attackers.

Experts speaking to The Register warned that both vulnerabilities present serious security concerns, especially since Nightmare-Eclipse released substantial technical information about exploiting them.

REG AD

Nightmare-Eclipse described YellowKey as "one of the most insane discoveries I ever found." They provided the files, which have to be loaded onto a USB drive, and if the attacker completes the key sequence correctly, they are granted unrestricted shell access to a BitLocker-protected machine.

REG AD

When it comes to claims like these, we usually exercise some caution, as this bug requires physical access to a Windows PC. However, seeing that BitLocker acts as Windows' last line of defense for stolen devices, bypassing the technology grants thieves the ability to access encrypted files.

Rik Ferguson, VP of security intelligence at Forescout, said: "If [the researcher's claim] holds up, a stolen laptop stops being a hardware problem and becomes a breach notification."

Despite the physical access requirement, Gavin Knapp, cyber threat intelligence principal lead at Bridewell, told The Register that YellowKey remains "a huge security problem for organizations using BitLocker."

Citing information shared in cyber threat intelligence circles, he added that YellowKey can be mitigated by implementing a BitLocker PIN and a BIOS password lock.

Nightmare-Eclipse hinted at YellowKey also acting as a backdoor, allegedly injected by Microsoft, although the people we spoke to said this was impossible to verify based on the information available.

The researcher also published partial exploit code for GreenPlasma, rather than a fully formed proof of concept exploit (PoC).

Ferguson noted attackers need to take the code provided by the researcher and figure out how to weaponize it themselves, which is no small task: in its current state it triggers a UAC consent prompt in default Windows configurations, meaning a silent exploit remains a work in progress.

Knapp warned that these kinds of privilege escalation flaws are often used by attackers after they gain an initial foothold in a victim's system.

REG AD

"These elevation of privilege vulnerabilities are often weaponized during post-exploitation to enable threat actors to discover and harvest credentials and data, before moving laterally to other systems, prior to end goals such as data theft and/or ransomware deployment," he said.

"Currently, there is no known mitigation for GreenPlasma. It will be important to patch when Microsoft addresses the issue."

Four, five… and more?

YellowKey and GreenPlasma are the latest in a series of five Microsoft zero-day bugs the researcher has exposed this year.

When Nightmare-Eclipse released BlueHammer (CVE-2026-32201, 6.5) - patched by Microsoft in April - they were described as a disgruntled researcher who has since been rumored to be a former Microsoft employee.

According to their maiden blog post under the Chaotic Eclipse alias, the bug leak began after an alleged violation of trust.

"I never wanted to reopen a blog and a new GitHub account to drop code," they wrote. "But someone violated our agreement and left me homeless with nothing. They knew this will happen and they still stabbed me in the back anyways, this is their decision not mine."

In early April, the researcher leaked proof-of-concept code for Windows Defender exploits they called RedSun and UnDefend - another admin privilege escalation bug and denial-of-service flaw, respectively - as well as BlueHammer.

REG AD

Both RedSun and UnDefend remain unfixed, and according to Huntress, the proof-of-concept code released was quickly picked up and abused in real-world attacks.

Ferguson described the exposure of YellowKey and GreenPlasma as the latest in an escalating, retaliatory campaign against Microsoft, and warned of more coming.

"Prior releases include BlueHammer and RedSun, both of which attracted serious community attention and real forks," he said.

"The same post linking yesterday's releases warns of another Patch Tuesday surprise and hints at future RCE disclosures. They claim to have a dead man's switch with more ready to go. This researcher has followed through on every prior threat." ®

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

18. Show HN: Needle: We Distilled Gemini Tool Calling into a 26M Model

Source: https://github.com/cactus-compute/needle
Site: GitHub
Submitter: HenryNdubuaku (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-12 18:03 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 648 points · 184 comments
Length: 446 words (~2 min read)
Language: en

We distilled Gemini 3.1 into a 26m parameter "Simple Attention Network" that you can even finetune locally on your Mac/PC. In production, Needle runs on Cactus at 6000 toks/sec prefill and 1200 decode speed. Weights are fully open on Cactus-Compute/needle, as well as the dataset generation.

d=512, 8H/4KV, BPE=8192
                                  ┌──────────────┐
                                  │  Tool Call   │
                                  └──────┬───────┘
                                        ┌┴──────────┐
                                        │  Softmax  │
                                        └─────┬─────┘
                                        ┌─────┴─────┐
                                        │ Linear (T)│  ← tied
                                        └─────┬─────┘
                                        ┌─────┴─────┐
                                        │ ZCRMSNorm │
                                        └─────┬─────┘
                                     ┌────────┴────────┐
                                     │ Decoder x 8     │
                                     │┌───────────────┐│
                                     ││ ZCRMSNorm     ││
                                     ││ Masked Self   ││
                                     ││ Attn + RoPE   ││
                                     ││ Gated Residual││
                                     │├───────────────┤│
  ┌──────────────┐                   ││ ZCRMSNorm     ││
  │ Encoder x 12 │──────────────────────▶Cross Attn   ││
  │              │                   ││ Gated Residual││
  │ ┌──────────┐ │                   │└───────────────┘│
  │ │ZCRMSNorm │ │                   └────────┬────────┘
  │ │Self Attn │ │                      ┌─────┴─────┐
  │ │ GQA+RoPE │ │                      │ Embedding │  ← shared
  │ │Gated Res │ │                      └─────┬─────┘
  │ │          │ │                    ┌───────┴───────-┐
  │ │ (no FFN) │ │                    │[EOS]<tool_call>│
  │ └──────────┘ │                    │ + answer       │
  │              │                    └───────────────-┘
  └──────┬───────┘
         │
    ┌────┴──────┐
    │ Embedding │
    └────┬──────┘
         │
    ┌────┴──────┐
    │   Text    │
    │  query    │
    └───────────┘


Pretrained on 16 TPU v6e for 200B tokens (27hrs).
Post-trained on 2B tokens of single-shot function call dataset (45mins).

Needle is an experimental run for Simple Attention Networks, geared at redefining tiny AI for consumer devies (phones, watches, glasses...). So while it beats FunctionGemma-270m, Qwen-0.6B, Graninte-350m, LFM2.5-350m on single-shot function call for personal AI, Those model are have more scope/capacity and excel in conversational settings. Also, small models can be finicky. Please use the UI in the next section to test on your own tools, and finetune accordingly, at the click of a button.

Quickstart

git clone https://github.com/cactus-compute/needle.git
cd needle && source ./setup
needle playground

Opens a web UI at http://127.0.0.1:7860 where you can test and finetune on your own tools. Weights are auto-downloaded.

Usage (Python)

from needle import SimpleAttentionNetwork, load_checkpoint, generate, get_tokenizer

params, config = load_checkpoint("checkpoints/needle.pkl")
model = SimpleAttentionNetwork(config)
tokenizer = get_tokenizer()

result = generate(
    model, params, tokenizer,
    query="What's the weather in San Francisco?",
    tools='[{"name":"get_weather","parameters":{"location":"string"}}]',
    stream=False,
)
print(result)
# [{"name":"get_weather","arguments":{"location":"San Francisco"}}]

Finetuning

# Playground (generates data via Gemini, trains, evaluates, bundles result)
needle playground

# CLI (auto-downloads weights if not local)
needle finetune data.jsonl

CLI

needle playground                  Test and finetune via web UI
needle finetune <data.jsonl>       Finetune on your own data
needle run --query "..." --tools   Single inference
needle train                       Full training run
needle pretrain                    Pretrain on PleIAs/SYNTH
needle eval --checkpoint <path>    Evaluate a checkpoint
needle tokenize                    Tokenize dataset
needle generate-data               Synthesize training data via Gemini
needle tpu <action>                TPU management (see docs/tpu.md)


@misc{ndubuaku2026needle,
  title={Needle},
  author={Henry Ndubuaku, Jakub Mroz,  Karen Mosoyan, Roman Shemet, Parkirat Sandhu, Satyajit Kumar, Noah Cylich, Justin H. Lee},
  year={2026},
  url={https://github.com/cactus-compute/needle}
}

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

19. A sentimental tour of late 1990s and early 2000s hacking tools

Source: https://andreafortuna.org/2026/05/13/amarcord/
Site: Andrea Fortuna
Author: Andrea Fortuna
Published: 2026-05-13
HN activity: 52 points · 17 comments
Length: 1.7K words (~8 min read)
Language: en-US

Gather around, children. Put down your Rust-compiled eBPF probes, your Sigma rules, your billion-dollar EDR consoles. Sit on this pile of old floppy disks and let me tell you a story. A story of a time when a 56k modem was a weapon of mass destruction, when your entire operational infrastructure was a Windows 98 machine with a sticky residue on the keyboard, and when the most sophisticated command-and-control channel available to you was a chat room full of teenagers arguing about Linkin Park.

Ai miei tempi, we hacked with character.

The golden age of the RAT

It all started, more or less, in 1998, when a group called Cult of the Dead Cow released something called Back Orifice at DEF CON. The name was a deliberate pun on Microsoft BackOffice, juvenile, precise, and entirely on brand for a group that understood that naming things well was half the battle. It was a Remote Administration Tool that let you control a Windows 95/98 machine remotely: browse files, capture screens, log keystrokes, redirect ports. It ran silently. It required no particular expertise to deploy. And it weighed less than 100KB.

The security establishment predictably lost its mind. Microsoft called it malware. Cult of the Dead Cow called it a demonstration of Windows security failures. Both were right.

Then came Back Orifice 2000, or BO2K, presented at DEF CON in July 1999, released as open source, extensible through plugins, and capable of encrypted communications. At the time, it was more feature-rich than most legitimate remote administration tools on the market.

That same year, NetBus was already circulating. Created in 1998 by a Swedish programmer named Carl-Fredrik Neikter, it shared Back Orifice’s basic premise, silent remote control of Windows machines, but came with a GUI clean enough to feel almost respectable. NetBus became notorious partly because it was used to plant child pornography on a law professor’s computer in Sweden, a case that dragged the tool into actual criminal courts and forced everyone involved to get considerably more serious about what “remote administration” implied. The professor was acquitted. The episode was a preview of legal and ethical discussions that would take another decade to mature into anything resembling policy.

But neither Back Orifice nor NetBus was the most widely deployed RAT of that era. That distinction belongs to Sub7, or SubSeven, written in Delphi by a Romanian teenager who went by the name mobman and first released in February 1999. By 2000 it was everywhere. It had a polished GUI. It had an address book to track which victims were currently online. It had a server editor to customise the payload before deployment, borrowing the idea directly from BO2K. It even supported notification via ICQ when a victim came online, which was unusually polished for malware. The exact origin of the name “Sub7” has never been definitively confirmed by mobman, and the various explanations that circulated on forums were mostly folk etymology. What mattered was that it worked, it was free, and it was trivial to configure.

The Swiss Army knives of the basement operator

RATs were the glamorous end of the toolkit. Below them sat a layer of tools that were genuinely useful, sometimes elegant, and in many cases still in active use today—a testament to how slowly the core infrastructure of the internet has evolved.

Nmap, Gordon Lyon’s network scanner, was already present in this era and was quickly becoming the first thing anyone ran against a target. If you had a subnet and five minutes, you knew exactly what was listening. Netcat was the tool that could not die: read from network, write to network, listen on a port, transfer files, create a rudimentary shell. It was called the “TCP/IP Swiss Army knife” so often that the phrase became a cliché, but the cliché was accurate. Both tools are still on every pentester’s machine in 2026.

John the Ripper handled password cracking. Cain & Abel did everything else on Windows: ARP poisoning, password recovery, network sniffing, VoIP interception. dsniff and ettercap covered the sniffing side on Unix. Hping gave you raw TCP/IP packet manipulation. Aircrack, in its early versions, was beginning to make the case that WEP was not so much an encryption protocol as a polite suggestion.

For web-facing targets, there were scanners and exploit packs of varying quality. Most of them worked by cycling through a list of known CGI vulnerabilities that should have been patched months earlier but were not, because patch management in 2001 was “someone’s nephew will look at it eventually.” Whisker, Nikto, and other vulnerability scanners circulated through the same channels as everything else.

The whole ecosystem ran on the implicit assumption that the target had not updated anything since installation, which, to be fair, was usually correct.

IRC: the command center, the social club, and the crime scene

To understand how everything worked, you need to understand IRC, Internet Relay Chat, and specifically what it meant to spend time on EFnet, DALnet, Undernet, and the various smaller networks that clustered around specific interests. IRC was where the scene lived: in channels like #hack, #warez, #sub7, #bo2k, and several others with names too creative to print here.

Sub7’s IRC integration was not accidental. Starting with version 2.1, the trojan’s server component could connect to a specified IRC channel and listen for commands from the operator, responding like a bot. This was elegant, in a slightly horrifying way: your compromised machines were just IRC clients. Your command-and-control infrastructure was a free chat server you did not control and could not be traced to. Law enforcement had to figure out how to subpoena an IRC network before they could begin to understand what they were looking at.

It was the conceptual predecessor of every modern C2 framework that hides inside legitimate cloud services—the architecture, not the technology, was the innovation. The innovation was not technical. It was architectural: use infrastructure that already exists, that already generates traffic, that defenders are not monitoring because they are focused on more obvious attack surfaces. Today’s threat actors do the same thing with Slack, Telegram, and Google Drive. Ai miei tempi, we did it with a chat room called #r00t on EFnet.

Beyond pure operations, IRC was also a social space with its own culture, rituals, and hierarchy. You proved yourself by sharing information, by having access to tools before others did, by being present when something interesting happened. The channels were chaotic, frequently toxic, and also a brutal apprenticeship in network security for anyone who could not afford a conference ticket. Many people who are now respected professionals in DFIR, threat intelligence, and red teaming learned the fundamentals there.

The Italian scene: creative chaos, interrupted

Italy had its own dimension in all of this. Before IRC displaced everything else, the Italian hacker and smanettone community had built itself around BBS (Bulletin Board Systems) running on Fidonet, with a culture that blended technical curiosity, political activism, and a distinctly Mediterranean attitude toward rules.

Then came May 11, 1994.

On that morning, officers from the Guardia di Finanza knocked simultaneously on the doors of system operators across the country, executing warrants as part of what became known as Operation Hardware 1. Acting on a warrant issued by a prosecutor from Pesaro, they raided 119 Fidonet nodes on the suspicion that two individuals were using the network to distribute pirated software. The strategy was simple and brutal: take the entire directory of Fidonet nodes and raid all of them. Two were suspected; the rest would be a collateral problem. The equipment confiscated included modems, floppy disks, CD-ROMs, audio tapes, and in at least one documented case a power strip, apparently seized as “suitable for reproduction of illicit material.”

The effect on the Italian BBS community was devastating. Many sysops simply stopped. Years of informal knowledge-sharing, file archives, and community-building evaporated overnight. It was a technical community dismantled by a legal action that, in legal terms, barely held up to scrutiny. The two people originally suspected were eventually prosecuted. The hundred-and-some collateral casualties received apologies that landed with roughly the force of a handshake.

The Italian Crackdown did not kill the scene. Within months of the raids, networks like CyberNet saw their user numbers grow, partly from people who had discovered that the internet was harder to raid than a BBS at a fixed phone number. By the time IRC became the dominant medium in the late 1990s, Italian hackers and security researchers were back, distributed across international channels, slightly more cautious about where they stored their files, and considerably more articulate about digital rights.

What we learned

The tools of that era look primitive now. Sub7’s GUI resembles a Visual Basic learning exercise. Back Orifice 2000’s plugin architecture was clever for 1999 and would be immediately detected by any modern endpoint protection product. Cain & Abel stopped being maintained in 2014 and runs only on operating systems you should not be running anyway.

But the mental models were not primitive. The idea that you could use a compromised machine as a relay node, that C2 traffic should blend into legitimate traffic, that operators should avoid reusing infrastructure: these were present in the late 1990s toolkit and they are present in every serious threat actor’s playbook today. The people who built Sub7’s IRC bot integration understood operational security better than many enterprise defenders understood it a decade later.

The Italian Crackdown, for all its legal ham-fistedness, produced a generation of practitioners who thought seriously about the relationship between technical communities, legal systems, and civil liberties. Some became journalists. Some became lawyers. Some became incident responders. A few became all three at once.

Ai miei tempi, you learned by doing things you probably should not have done, in channels you definitely should not have been in, with tools you downloaded from sites that are now digital archaeology. And somehow, out of all that chaos, a profession emerged.

You’re welcome.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

20. Tell HN: Dont use Claude Design, lost access to my projects after unsubscribing

Source: https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=48128003 (Hacker News text post)
Site: news.ycombinator.com
Submitter: pycassa (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-13 21:40 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 200 points · 64 comments

I wanted to try codex after 5 months of claude code max subscription. And then I went back to my previous projects on claude design only to realize I don't have access to them anymore.

This is a first. I never lost access to any of my past sessions because I unsubscribed in any of the LLM apps.

I actually wanted to try out codex previously, but had similar experience with my credits. They gave extra credits equivalent to my montly subscription price, with some time limit because claude has so many issues that month. And as soon as plan ended. I lost access to the credits. Even after resubscribing, I still don't have access to those credits.

I have sympathies towards the engineers, especially the ones that are putting themselves on X. But only when someone with large following has some issue, they sort it out.

Having worked at a billing company, I can see how complex contracts sound good for the growth/sales folks but are also horrible for engineers actually implementing those contracts. Their complex rate limiting which is now a norm, identifying other harnesses to count them against extra usage are all probably not easy to implement without very rough edge cases. But all the "bugs" are just where the user gets screwed is what is problematic.

I just wanted to post this here, after tagging them multiple times on X to alert other users.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

21. Can a Language Model Paint?

Source: https://www.etive-mor.com/blog/can-a-language-model-paint/
Site: etive-mor.com
Submitter: liamlaverty (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-12 07:44 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 7 points · 4 comments
Length: 1.8K words (~8 min read)
Language: en-US

Language models have an uncanny ability to generate images in one-shot from natural language. Given a detailed prompt, you can get a close approximation to any artist, theme, or genre you like. I do find it amazing that, even though language is not the substrate through which paintings are created or reasoned about, a language model can somewaht faithfully reproduce images from text. While it’s technically interesting, though, I find it quite unsatisfying from an artistic view. I have a hunch that some of my dissatisfaction comes from the immediacy of the result, and the way that language models derivatively reproduce concepts.

To test if that’s the source of my dissatisfaction, I’ve built an app which produces LLM-generated images iteratively, rather than in one-shot. A gallery of outputs is available here. While doing so, I found an interesting allegory about the fragility of language model generated artefacts, in how they can collapse into unrecoverable messes, and that the mess can be tracked back to a couple of obvious bad strokes. A phenomenon which is mirrored strikingly well in my day-to-day experiences as a software engineer reviewing LLM generated code.
Claude Opus (4.7) Paints a Monet inspired landscape. Left shows the completed image, right shows the iterative steps through the task

One of my favourite books is Tolstoy’s What Is Art. In it, he argues that art should be accessible, and that high-art is bad art because it is exclusive, and incomprehensible unless you’ve had an education privileged enough to understand it. For art to be good, Tolstoy argues, it must be accessible, and the artist must sincerely convey a unifying moral theme to the audience [1]. I don’t necessarily agree with everything Tolstoy writes in What is Art, but I think it’s one useful perspective from which to consider art.

While a few NVidia H100s in a datacenter summoning a picture of a Chagall-inspired Goat probably does satisfy Tolstoy’s accessibility requirement, it doesn’t satisfy the sincerity angle to my liking. Meanwhile, Chagall himeself painting I and the Village satisfies Tolstoy’s need for sincerity, but misses out on the accessibility side of things (most people’s first impression of a Chagall is “what even is that?”).

I wanted to know if I could produce something that keeps the accessibility of language-model generation, while introducing some form of sincerity. Rather than one-shotting, I wanted to know what happens if language-models are asked to create images through a more human process. By applying strokes one at a time, and spending time during the process considering the piece & progress towards its objectives. I want to know if they produce something that’s more earnest and artistically satisfying under those conditions.

The application I’ve built accepts a few CLI arguments, from which it generates a painting concept, then passes that and the current canvas into a vision language model (VLM). It asks the VLM to consider what the next stroke should be, and applies that to the canvas. I invoke the paint-procedure in a repeated loop to gradually build up the painting, alongside all of the reasoning behind each stroke. Eventually the VLM decides that the painting is “complete” (or it reaches some predetermined maximum number of strokes).

Here’s Claude Opus 4.7 constructing a Chagall inspired Russian Village under moonlight iteratively.
Claude Opus 4.7 paints a Chagall inspired moonlit village 5 strokes at a time

I also built a companion website, which lets you step through the painting step-by-step to see what the language model was considering during each stroke. Here’s Claude Opus 4.6’s attempt at a patchwork elephant in the style of a children’s book illustration. Push the “play” button at the top to see it progress. The reasoning traces are displayed on each iteration on the right-hand panel. At stroke 285, you’ll see Claude’s reasoning “This iteration focuses on the two most impactful elements: the bold elephant silhouette outline and the expressive eye” as it applies a glassy eye to the piece.

Some select results

The quality of the output is… mixed and spiky. Usually it depends on the size of the model + context window. Small models running locally tend towards unrecognisable scribbles. Meanwhile frontier models trend towards recognisable images matching the subject matter. Below, four variants of Claude attempt to produce Patchwork Elephant images:
Illustrations of the language-model produced paintings of a patchwork elephant. Claude Opus is noticeably better than Claude Sonnet

Links to the viewer site for each respective piece:

Claude Opus 4.6 (large model)
Claude Opus 4.7 (large model)
Claude Sonnet 4.6 (medium model)
Claude Sonnet 4.6 (medium model)

If you squint and you’re generous, you can see themes or inspirations in the produced media. It’s a visual way to see that, LLM based task completion suffers from a fallacy-of-composition type effect, where they’re exceptional at one-shotting a task, but they’re relatively much worse at performing the exact same task iteratively in small chunks.

The elephants above are produced by Anthropic’s Claude models, all of which are close to the frontier of current capabilities. Mistral have a year-old model mistral-large available, and the performance difference is noticable, as shown below.
Mistral Large's painting of a patchwork elephant

Mistral’s model is weak when I ask it to proudce in batches of five strokes. When it’s given batches of 50 strokes, it makes something more interesting, and at least directionally-correct for a patchwork elephant. This is my favourite result from the project, because although it’s abstract, it manages to capture the limitations of the medium, while still representing the subject matter. It’s the closes thing to an earnest & sincere piece produced by the project.
Mistral's patchwork elephant when painted in 50-stroke batches as opposed to the standard 5-stroke batches (click to open)

I’ve built the front-end app so that humans and language models can interact with it to produce their own images. If you’re a human, go to the drawing page. Alternatively, point your browser-enabled language model of choice at the API Docs, and ask it to produce whatever you like.

It takes less effort to destroy something good than it took to build it in the first instance

My day-to-day work is in software engineering. While I’m still writing a lot of code by hand, I’m also reading a lot of LLM generated code. Between my own and my colleagues LLM-incanted code, something I’ve noticed about apps built with LLM assistance is that they’ve got a kind of fragility. It’s one which I couldn’t properly pinpoint or articulate until working on this project.

The painting app produces a visual for each stroke, so you can scrobble back and forward through the process, to see the paintings come into existence over time. You can see promising results emerging from the VLM early on, before vanishing beneath a catastrophic failure - usually applied in a single stroke. This has meant that a few times, I’ve been excited that they’re producing something worth looking at. But consistently, the VLM irreversibly destroys the painting, then takes increasingly destructive steps to repair its mistakes.

You can see this in Claude 4.6 creating a children’s book illustration. At around 300 strokes, the painting looks recognisable as an abstract digital illustration of a patchwork elephant in a jungle (not what was asked of it, but interesting nonetheless).
Claude Sonnet 4.6's attempt at a patchwork elephant. The model has used coloured semi-circle shapes to add a stylised digital-illustration of a patchwork elephant (click to open)

Then over the following 150 strokes, it starts to add fine-detail. VLMs are still poor at spatial reasoning, so strokes which would require fine-motor skills from a human are generally garbage from a VLM. At first, it adds a black squiggle, creating the outline of a haunted face. Then it adds a monkey with dozens of eyes, and a parrot whose body is entirely discontinuous.
The Sonnet 4.6 patchwork elephant is noticeably lower quality, with inconsistent scribbles, and nonsensical blobs representing a monkey & parrot (click to open)

While this creates some funny results, I think it brings a visual metaphor to the previously inarticulable fragility I see in codebases & other language model produced artefacts. The models are competent when working on broad-strokes, but they struggle in iteratively applying fine-detail changes (especially near the frontier of their capabilities), where they can be more destructive than helpful.

In both the paintings & codebases, at any given iteration, the language model only sees a small snapshot of the project. It may have access to some hints from previous commits or strategy documents, but since it’s limited to achieving its goal within its context window, they rush towards implementing whatever solves the current problem.

I see this phenomenon a lot PRs for the applications I maintain & contribute to. Lots of good-quality code will go into a repository, but one poorly thought out feature or commit can derail quality across the entire application. Once a repository transitions beyond its fragile state into the broken structure, it’s incredibly difficult to recover it, and get it back to a maintainable state. In most software projects, like in these generated images, new content is mostly additive. They can rarely be taken away or significantly re-architected after release.

Having said that, I do think that this fragility, and the visualisations of it on liamlaverty.com/paint-by-language-model might count as a form of art according to Tolstoy’s What is Art. Watching the VLM struggle to produce a Pelican riding a bicycle is visually interesting; it’s accessible; and it’s certainly not high art.
An LLM generated painting of a pelican riding a bicycle

Personally, I can project meaning onto it, that struggle of conservation over progress is a universal phenomenon. I don’t think that these pieces bring the sincerity I was looking for though. Everything in the gallery still feels like a soulless derivative digital illustration, rather than an art piece. Maybe it’s just my prompts? The results I was able to produce remind me of Anthropic’s cleanroom implementation of a C compiler. The result is kind of directionally correct, but not what I was looking for.

Feel free to point your language model at the drawing canvas, and let me know if you get better results: https://www.liamlaverty.com/paint-by-language-model/draw

A technical write-up of the app is available here: https://www.etive-mor.com/blog/how-the-language-model-painting-app-is-built/
The code can be found on my github at: https://github.com/liamlaverty/paint-by-language-model

Footnotes

[1] It’s fairly ironic that Tolstoy wrote this treatise, given that he also wrote War and Peace - an artwork which nobody has ever described as “accessible” - but he acknowledges this irony, describing War and Peace as “Bad Art”.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

22. Meta won't let you block its AI account on Threads

Source: https://www.theverge.com/tech/929091/meta-ai-threads-account-block
Site: The Verge
Author: Jay Peters
Published: 2026-05-12
HN activity: 132 points · 58 comments
Length: 404 words (~2 min read)
Language: en-US

Jay Peters

is a senior reporter covering technology, gaming, and more. He joined The Verge in 2019 after nearly two years at Techmeme.

Meta announced on Tuesday that it’s testing a Threads feature that lets users tag a Meta AI account to get answers to questions or context about a conversation on the platform. If you’ve spent any time looking at replies on X as of late, this new feature sounds a lot like Meta’s take on people tagging xAI’s Grok. But, as reported by Engadget, Threads users quickly discovered that you can’t block the new Meta AI account, and they aren’t happy about it.

Meta has invested heavily in AI as it works to catch up to rivals like OpenAI and Google, spending billions to hire AI talent. It launched a new AI model called Muse Spark in April, which it said it would bring to its apps and services, and now, it’s showing up on Threads with the new Meta AI account. A pinned video shows how the new feature, initially available as a test in Argentina, Malaysia, Mexico, Saudi Arabia, and Singapore, lets you tag Meta AI to get answers to questions like “why is everyone obsessed with matcha” or “how do you actually pronounce ‘Cannes’?”

But if you go to the three dots menu on the Meta AI profile, there’s currently no option to block it, like you can find on other accounts.

There are many angry replies to posts from Meta AI, the main Threads account, and Threads boss Connor Hayes, and users who saw the option to block the feature reported hitting errors when they tried to do so. Engadget’s Karissa Bell also says that “Users cannot block Meta AI” was a trending topic on Threads with more than one million posts about it, but the trend isn’t showing up for her anymore. I’m also not seeing it.

“Users can manage their Meta AI experience during the test,” Meta spokesperson Christine Pai tells The Verge. “We want to give people a way to quickly gather context before jumping into the conversation, but if you want to see fewer Meta AI replies in your Threads feed you can mute or hide Meta AI replies, or use the ‘Not interested’ option on any Meta AI post.”

Follow topics and authors from this story to see more like this in your personalized homepage feed and to receive email updates.

Jay Peters

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

23. Preserving Fisher-Price Pixter

Source: https://dmitry.gr/?r=05.Projects&proj=37.%20Pixter
Site: Dmitry.GR
Author: Dmitry.GR
Submitted: 2026-05-11 06:52 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 215 points · 44 comments
Length: 41.2K words (~180 min read)
Language: en

Fully Preserving Fisher-Price Pixter TLDR: First ever complete reverse engineering, documentation, emulation, and preservation of all Fisher-Price/Mattel Pixter device series and [almost] all the games.

Table of Contents

Pixter Color

The beginning
Sometimes, you get lucky
Show me the code!
Analysis of the Pixter Color ROM
And find out I did...
The weirdness gets weirder...
Dumping the Color Carts
Getting Emulation Started
"Audio" Playback
Melodies

Communicating with the Melody Chips
Capturing the Music
Internal Melodies
The Strangely Good Screen
Pixter Multimedia
Pixter Classic

Starting with Pixter Classic
The Weird Bus
Dumping a Classic Cart
Another damn VM

KNOWN_GAME_ID
Native Callouts again
What is "Native"? How do you define "Native"?
Dumping the Pixter Classic ROM

How to output with no output devices?
Initial analysis
How memory paging works
Some fun to be had
Identifying the SoC
The BEX bus

Acquiring a GPBA01B
Using the GPBA01B
Melodies on Pixter Classic
Programming the Pixter Classic
The one weird pin on the cart
Resistive Touch Panels on the Cheap
Resistive Touch Panels beyond Cheap
Pixter Plus and Pixter 2.0

Pixter Plus
Pixter 2.0
Pixter Pocket
Preservation

File format
Emulating Pixter Color

How hard could it be to emulate?
Saving images is hard
Making game carts work
Audio is hard
That cursed adapter
Emulating Pixter Multimedia
Emulating Pixter Classic
Emulating Pixter 2.0 and Pixter Plus
Some final challenges

Music Studio
Symphony Painter
Pixter Camera
Preserved and not-yet-preserved Games
Downloads

ClassicDisasm
ColorDisasm
PalmosLauncherMulti
uM23
uARMpixter
uPixter
Appendix A - Pixter Color VM

Pixter Color VM instructions

TYPE A instrs
TYPE B instrs
TYPE C instrs
TYPE D instrs
TYPE F instrs
TYPE G instrs
TYPE H instrs
TYPE J instrs
TYPE K instrs
TYPE L instrs
TYPE M instrs
TYPE E instrs
Pixter Color Cart Header
Pixter Multimedia Cart Header
Pixter Color VM structures

Object Table
Color Tables
4-to-16 maps
Audio Objects
Font Objects
Larger Image
Audio effects
Color UI Layout
UI Settings
Appendix B - Pixter Classic VM

Pixter Classic VM instructions

ALU ops
SPECIAL ops
Pixter Classic Structures

Pixter Classic Cart Header
Classic UI Layout
Classic Image and Sound lookup
Classic Image Format and compression
EEPROM use in Pixter Classic/2.0
Appendix C - connections and pinouts

Pixter Classic cart
Pixter Classic to Color adapter
Pixter Multimedia NAND cart
Pixter Color cart
Comments...

Pixter Color

The beginning

In 2000, the famous American toy company Fisher-Price released a simple drawing-oriented handheld gaming console for kids called Pixter. It featured no brain-rotting social media and focused, instead, on drawing, sketching, and educational games. The initial sales figure from the holiday season of the release was half a million units, which is not too shabby at all. Besides letting kids draw using an included stylus on the 80x80 monochrome display while catchy tunes played on repeat from the speaker, the device also allowed plug-in games to expand the possible activities. There exist 25 known games for Pixter (I had to edit wikipedia to correct their record). Soon after, there was a Pixter Plus, which added more memory and expanded the built-in game. Then there was Pixter 2.0, which added wireless comms. Neither of those radically changed the device itself and all the games remained cross-compatible. One cool feature of Pixter devices was that you could draw an image in one game, using its stamps and tools, save it to internal memory, plug in another game, load it, and draw on top of it. So you could, literally, customize a cool car in "Cool Wheels", save the image, plug in "Barbie Fashion Show" and plop a barbie into your cool car image. What joy this must have been!

In 2003, Pixter Color came out, adding color, 4x the screen resolution, and a new game cartridge connector. An adapter came with it to allow it to run old games, and it ran them all (pixel-doubled) perfectly! Obviously, the old monochrome Pixters could not run new color games. The main purpose of the device remained the same - sketching and stickers with ability to save your compositions in memory, just in color now! Games got more advanced and intricate. There was even a camera attachment! There are 32 games known to exist for Pixter Color. In 2005, Pixter Multimedia came out, which added a better screen (quality-wise, the resolution remained the same) and a yet another game cartridge connector (a superset of the Pixter Color connector), allowing for Multimedia-only carts. Nine of these Pixter Multimedia exclusive game are known to exist.

As I had written before, my friend Josh pointed me at Pixter Color as potential PalmOS porting target, and after a lot of work, I got PalmOS fully working on that device. This is not that story, however! To get PalmOS working, the device had to be understood, a method to run code on it had to be found, and among all that research, a lot of work was done on documenting Pixter Color. Previously, a few places online mentioned that “THERE ARE CURRENTLY NO EMULATORS FOR THIS DEVICE OR PLATFORM. ANY CLAIMS TO OFFER THEM ARE SCAMS!”. This is no longer true, I am happy to report. I am here to present a complete historical preservation of all information pertaining to how Pixter devices work and almost all the games. However, let us go in order...

Sometimes, you get lucky

Pixter Color Slot
1	A0	||	2	D0
3	A1	||	4	D1
5	A2	||	6	D2
7	A3	||	8	D3
9	A4	||	10	D4
11	A5	||	12	D5
13	A6	||	14	D6
15	A7	||	16	D7
17	A8	||	18	D8
19	A9	||	20	D9
21	A10	||	22	D10
23	A11	||	24	D11
25	A12	||	26	D12
27	A13	||	28	D13
29	A14	||	30	D14
31	A15	||	32	D15
33	A16	||	34	PE1
35	A17	||	36	PE0
37	A18	||	38	nCS2
39	A19	||	40	nCS3
41	A20	||	42	nOE
43	A21	||	44	nWE
45	A22	||	46	PG6
47	A23	||	48	PD0
49	PD2	||	50	PD1
51	PD4	||	52	PF6
53	PD3	||	54	PF4
55	PD5	||	56	AUD
57	PD6	||	58	Vdd
59	Vss	||	60	??

As there were no official docs on writing Pixter games or code, the first step of the process was to open a Pixter and see what was inside. It would later turn out that starting with Pixter Color was quite lucky -- its main SoC is the LQFP version of Sharp LH75411. Why is this lucky? Unlike other chips and chip package types, this specific one makes probing individual pins trivial, allowing even careful soldering to them. No other Pixter-family device has this property, but I did not yet know this.

The main board had the main SoC, 128KB of x16 SRAM, and two black blobs. The blobs are of course Chip-on-Board dies of some sort. These are not labeled nor can they be easily probed. In most cases removing the epoxy is destructive. Black blobs are the worst! Sadly, they are common in cheap devices, and Fisher-Price were always kings of cost-cutting. As I went through this project, I, in fact, gained more respect for their cost cutting abilities than I had had before.

First, it is worth taking a moment to talk about the LH75411 and the surrounding chips on the Pixter Color motherboard, from a performance standpoint. I ranted about it already in my PalmOS-on-Pixter article, but in case you missed it, I'll summarize. This is the most minimal ARM7 instantiation I've ever seen. Everything that was optional was excluded, everything that could be sized was configured in the most minimal configuration. The SoC has 16KB of TCM inside, which is pretty fast - single cycle access in fact. There is also another 16KB of SRAM in the SoC, which is accessed using an internal AHB bus, meaning that reads effectively take 2 cycles. There is some SRAM on the board, as I had mentioned - 128KB on a 16-bit-wide bus. It is configured with one wait state (an extra clock of delay to allow signals to propagate and slow/cheap memories to process). A word read from this memory thus takes two bus operations, each using 3 cycles. This is getting slow, as you see. Luckily, this is where cache comes in handy. Cache automatically stores recently-accesses memory close to the CPU for fast access, covering up for high-latency and/or low-bandwidth memory.

At least, it would, had Sharp (the manufacturer of the SoC) bothered to instantiate some cache in the chip. There is none. This is not nearly the end of the performance troubles though. The ROM is also on a 16-bit-wide bus, though luckily without wait states. Due to this, fetching 32-bit-wide ARM instructions would be painfully slow, and almost all of the code in the ROM uses the 16-bit Thumb instructions -- a problem not unlike those faced by Gameboy Advance programmers, and for the same reason.

ARM processors use a table of vectors to handle interrupts and exceptions. The table can be located at one of two addresses: 0x00000000 or 0xFFFF0000. The first option for the address is also the value of NULL, and preferably, there should be no memory at that address to allow easy detection of logic bugs. The problem is that it is uncommon for SoCs to place memory that high in the address space so as to have anything at 0xFFFF0000. Luckily, an MMU can be used to map virtual addresses to physical addresses, and 0xFFFF0000 is a virtual address. All that is needed is to enable the MMU and make the mapping.

There is no MMU in this SoC. Well, OK, fine, I guess we are stuck with vectors at zero, but while an MMU does take up some silicon area and would make the chip slightly more expensive to make, ARM had designed a much simpler option - an MPU. It does not map memory but it allows setting various protection settings on some ranges of it. The Pixter ROM could then configure the memory at 0x00000000 to be only accessible by supervisor mode, and run all software in user mode, thus still trapping accidental NULL accesses. The MPU is such a small cost to implement that of course it should be present, even the very-cost-reduced ARM chip in the NintendoDS has this option enabled.

There is no MPU! There is also no alignment checking, no cp15 coprocessor, no ... anything that is optional at all. Just a chip full of "no". The practical upshot is that it is easy to crash this thing and not even know you did. It will also never be fast. Fine, it was meant to be cheap, not fast or stable. Let's see how the system works...

Show me the code!

I painstakingly dumped a cart's ROMs in a way that I thought would work. This is of no difficulty, once you source the proper $10 ea(!!) connector. Since I knew that the SoC is ARM, I opened up IDA Pro and loaded a game cart ROM. Out of the 2 megabytes of ROM, only about 300 bytes were recognizable ARM or thumb assembly. The rest either looked like bitmaps, or looked like nothing recognizable at all. It lacked the entropy to suspect that it was encrypted or compressed, and anyways the CPU would not be fast enough to support such a scheme. Whatever it was, it surely was not ARM code. Weird... Maybe I had a bad dump? Redoing it proved that I did not. Maybe this one game was weird? Checking another dump showed even less ARM code. Very very strange. At least the first few bytes always matched, which is plausibly the header. Clearly, I was not going to get anywhere that easily. It was time to dig deeper in.

The device can operate without a game cart at all. Thus, clearly, the main SoC needs to boot from somewhere if there is no cart inserted. Itself, the SoC has no flash memopry inside. As there are no other things on the board that can store code, I was forced to conclude that one of the black blobs was a ROM or a Flash CoB (chip-on-board). Not great... Tracing out the traces on board proved that the larger one is indeed wired up to the address bus, the data bus (all 16 bits), and the 0-th chip select line, precisely as one would expect the main ROM to be. So.... How does one read out a blob?

I’ll answer the question with a question: why do they call it a memory bus? Because it is a bus. All the memories are on a shared set of address and data lines. Each one gets its own “chip select” line, all other lines are shared. So ... if I could keep the main SoC from booting to stop it from getting in the way, solder a wire to the 0-th chip select line (nCS0), solder wires to the nOE and the nWE control lines, and then solder wires to the 24 address lines and to the 16 data lines, I could read out the blobtacular ROM. What could be easier than perfectly soldering 43 wires in close proximity? Actually many things, but this turned out to be unnecessary. Buzzing out the connections of the cart slot, it is trivial to find that all the address and data lines are represented there. The convenient part is that those pins are much more spread out than the pins on the main chip itself, making the job easier. Now, it should only be a matter of properly sequencing reads to the blob-ROM chip from a Pi Pico 2. Right?

They say that every complex problem has a beautiful, elegant, easy to explain solution that ... does not work... just like this plan... It so happened that while this SoC is kept in reset, it does not release all the bus pins to float freely as ... all other SoCs I ever encountered do. Luckily, this only affected nOE, nWE, and nCS0, and desoldering just 3 pins carefully is not too hard. That being done, the ROM was dumped. You can grab a copy here. By seeing at which address the ROM repeats, it is easy to conclude that the blob ROM is 2MB in size. That is a lot, but then again, that must include all the graphics, sounds, and logic for the built-in sketch-and-sticker activity, right?

Analysis of the Pixter Color ROM

There are good news here! There is ARM code. Not a lot of it, but a few hundred kilobytes is present. This is much better than a few hundred bytes that each game had. I went off to disassemble the code. Since the LH75411 has no MMU, there is no possible address translation, which makes it easy to sort out at what address this code is meant to live. By referencing the LH754xx User Guide, we know the precise address at which nCS0 (the ROM) is -- 0x40000000. We also know that nCS1 (the onboard RAM) is at 0x44000000, nCS2 is 0x48000000, and nCS3 is 0x4c000000. By tracing the copper on the board we know that nCS2 and nCS3 are wired to the cart slot. By tracing the copper inside game carts, we know that nCS2 goes to the ROM in the carts (blobtacular too, of course). This means that any addresses in the 0x48000000-0x4bffffff range are accesses to the game cart, and looking for that in the disassembly would be a quick shortcut to find out what the hell was going on here...

And find out I did...

The logic was right there, in front of my eyes, but I refused to believe it. Who would do this on an already-very-slow SoC with no cache? Why? But there it was...Fetch a 16-bit value, dispatch on the top few bits, there, dispatch on a few other bits, and there do some operations, jumping back to the beginning in an infinite loop. Some of the operations were weird - including unbalanced stack operations - pushes and pops. It was bizarre. If the code did not look otherwise correct elsewhere, I would have assumed I had dumped something wrong. But it all looked correct. This thing implements a 16-bit virtual machine, being interpreted by the ROM code. The unbalanced stack operations are ... because it is a stack-based virtual machine, and it uses the ... host stack to implement the VM’s stack. No overflow protection, no nothing - ruthlessly efficient and lacking any adornment. This is what Brutalism would look like if it were software. The VM manages to execute most simple opcodes in a dozen cycles or so, which yields about 4MIPS of computation. Curiously, while this is a 16-bit VM, there are in fact no limits placed on each stack-pushed value being only 16 bits wide -- all values are pushed as 32 bits wide. This leads to a lot of easy ways to cause unexpected behavior by pushing values over 16 bits in size and calling opcodes ill-equipped to handle them. Clearly security was not a concern, nor was stability, and honestly, that is fine. This was a single-purpose system and most games, I think, were first-party. I’ll allow it.

The weirdness gets weirder...

There were many signs that this VM was modeled after some real 16-bit processor, or some previous 16-bit VM that was actually pushing 16-bit values. How do I know? There are a few opcodes that are meant to operate on 32-bit quantities, and they always pop two values off the stack when that is needed. But since ARM is 32-bit, they just use one and ignore the other. On a real 16-bit device, you would indeed see two pops, but they would need to be combined. And if this were not modeled after a 16-bit device, there would be no reason to push two values when one would do. Given this, I spent a lot of time trying to locate hardware architectures or software VMs that use this set of opcodes. Sadly, I came up with nothing.

My theory is that before they settled on an ARM SoC, they considered some 16-bit architecture, implemented this VM on it, developed some games, and then switched to ARM. Fearing that they could break logic they are not aware of when it comes to how many values are on stack, they simply converted every push and pop into ARM equivalents, leading to 32-bit values using two stack slots, even when one could accommodate them just fine. Allrightly, so what does this instruction stream look like? Opcodes are always 16-bits in size and little-endian, most of them doing basic ALU things, and one group of 128 implementing Pixter-specific things like drawing and touch.

Those opcodes are prety high-level including things like playing an ADPCM sound, drawing a complete image with transparency, or sorting out which UI button a pen tap was targeting. Cool. I decoded them enough so that one could implement a high-level emulator of Pixter and run games in it. And this is not merely ravings of a lunatic. Once I realized that enough was decoded to do this, I shared them with Nathan Korth, who took on the task, and has produced some pretty cool and very promising results. I have placed more-or-less complete docs of the Pixter Color VM in Appendix A below for you to peruse. Enjoy.

Dumping the Color Carts

Now that I had some basic idea of how it all worked, it was time to start dumping more game carts. I dumped the few that I had on hand using my favourite multitool - Pi Pico 2. Due to the number of pins required to read out the entire x16 flash interface, I dumped in two passes, first the low byte of each word, then the high. The dumps were post-processed on my computer and looked pretty good, but how could I be sure? It is not like there is a Pixter color emulator out there to try them in.

Getting Emulation Started

Indeed there WAS no Pixter Color emulator. Over a few weeks, I added LH75411 support to uARM - my ARM emulator. I emulated all the required hardware blocks of the LH75411 and attempted to boot up the Pixter Color ROM, without any carts. This is perfectly fine since Pixter Color boots into a built-in game that allows sketching and stamping if there is no cart inserted. Fun story - this game is in fact written in the same VM as all the cart games, which is kind of cool.

It did not, of course, work right away, but eventually it worked. As usual, sorting out the resistive touch panel orientation and the range of correct ADC values took a while, but soon enough, it worked! I could now sketch things on a Virtual Pixter Color, and stamp smiley-face stamps all over my sketches! After some work, I even hooked up audio to verify that it worked, which it did, in a way. This emulator, greatly expanded, will be touched upon later, and is published here today!

"Audio" Playback

Pixter Color does not have a traditional audio codec, or really any sort of a proper DAC at all. Two PWM units in the SoC are used to output sounds to a speaker, via a cheap audio amplifier chip. The way the two PWM units are used is quite curious. How would you do it? Well, normally one would use a single PWM unit fed with unsigned samples, AC-coupled to an amplifier. That is indeed a sane way to do it. If you wanted more output swing, you could use two PWM units, one outputting an inverted signal, but as there is an actual amplifier, this would be a waste of effort. How best to use two PWMs units then? Well, you could use them to extend your range. As it happens, these PWMs are configured with a period of 128, and thus this are effectively 7-bit DACs. 7 bits is not much for audio, so you could scale the output of one by 1/128, mix it with the other, and thus get 14 bits of output resolution for better quality. I've seen this done before with great success. There are a few other options too, with varying trade-offs.

Pixter Color does none of the sane things. Instead, I suspect that its designers fundamentally misunderstood PWMs, audio amplifiers, and ... life. Every audio sample is evaluated. If it is positive, it is used as duty cycle for PWM0, while PWM1 is set to duty cycle of 0. If the sample is negative, PWM0 is set to a duty cycle of 0, while PWM1 gets the sample (negated) as its duty cycle. Then, PWM0's output is fed into the audio amp's positive input, while PWM1's into the negative input. Effectively this just gets them one extra bit of output resolution, at a cost of confusing the fuck out of us all, overcomplicating the code, and accomplishing little else.

Considering that all these audio machinations happen in an interrupt handler at 8KHz on a slow ARM SoC with no cache, where every cycle counts, I cannot justify any of this at all. My guess is that someone who had never dealt with audio read that an amp has a negative input, and instead of simply tying it to GND decided they need to provide it some input ... and did.

Melodies

My emulated Pixter Color worked well. Dumped games as well as the built-in ROM game worked well, but while the audio effects were there, the ever-present background music was missing. I went looking and found nothing wrong in the emulator. I also found no trace of any such music in the cart ROMs. Considering how long some of the songs were, I would have expected them to take considerable space, and yet they were nowhere to be found. I knew for sure that there were no more ADPCM playback paths and no more methods of outputting analog values out of the SoC. It had to be something else. It was time to, once again, trace copper on the motherboard. What else went into the audio amplifier?

Communicating with the Melody Chips

The second black blob on the motherboard connected to the amplifier, as did one of the pins on that cart connector (pin 56). Both were also pulled down to ground with 620 ohm resistors. Well, this is a bit weird, but not all that hard to check. I connected my trusty Saleae Logic Pro to the blob's output(?) pin and captured some analog traces as the Pixter played the background music for the built-in activity. Well, I'll be damned! There was my music! This blobtacular chip was producing music, somehow! When a game cart was connected, the audio came from pin 56. That explains why most carts had at least two blobs onboard - a ROM and a Melody Chip. The music sounded very MOD-like - it was some sort of a collection of samples that could be played back at various rates to vary the pitch and mixed a few "instruments" at a time. But there was no code to send notes to anywhere that I could find. What gives?

The blob chip onboard had only a few traces going to it, as did the ones in the game carts. Capturing them was not very difficult. It turned out that a two-wire interface controls the Melody Chips. And besides the audio output it had one more output - a digital one that was high while playback was ongoing, and low otherwise. Two control wires, so logically they'd use some sane two-wire protocol, right? Maybe it is bidirectional UART? Nope! Perhaps i2c then? That one is also nice. Nope! Well, OK, the Melody Chip probably does not need to reply to anything, so maybe it is simple clock and data, a-la SPI? Nope. That would make too much sense, definitely not allowed!

The protocol is a godawful design that features requirements to maintain tight timings while also providing no edges for proper signal capturing. What more could one ask for? I designated one line as "clock" and another as "data", because one was used as a clock and the other as data, more or less. They idle low. Before a command is set to the chip, the lines must be idle for at least 20ms (determined experimentally -- value may only apply at room temperature, 1atm of pressure, moon 3/4 full, mercury in retrograde). After that, a start signal is sent. To send the start signal, the data line needs to go up for 16 ms, then go down and wait another 16 ms. Clock stays low this entire time. After this, the bits are sent, MSB first. How many bits? Well, this can vary, as per disassembly. At least 4 bits are needed to represent a valid command. The top bit (sent first) is high to loop playback. This means playback will not stop until a new command is sent - when the melody ends it will restart. The next two bits sent are volume with 0 being the lowest (which is still audible, not muted), and 3 being the highest. The remaining bits (at least one) are the melody index to play. The last melody index representable in whatever bit length is used is reserved and must not exist. Thus it is used to stop playback. A one is sent by data going up, then immediately clock going up for 8 ms and then both down for 8 ms. A zero is sent by only the clock doing the same dance while data stays low.

In Pixter Color, there is a setting that the game must set using the SET_UI_SETTING opcode to tell later PLAY_AUDIO opcodes that target the Melody Chip how many bits to use for MelodyID. In reality, almost all games use very similar Melody Chips and use 6 bits for Melody ID, allowing for 63 possible melodies and thus using 9-bit-long commands. No game features that many distinct melodies, though. This also explained why GPIO PF6 is often checked by the games via the GET_MISC_SETTING opcode. It may seem obvious to you with the docs I am providing, but to me it seemed quite non-obvious at the time. The built-in game instead checks PF1. It is checking the "is playing" state from the Melody Chip. The external one in the cart is connected to the cart slot pin 52, which is indeed wired to PF6. The internal one inside Pixter Color is wired to PF1. It all makes sense.

Capturing the Music

At this point in time, my project goals had expanded and now encompassed properly emulating Pixter Color and preserving its entire game library for posterity (how can we, as a civilization, afford to lose such era-defining games as "Barbie Fashion Show"?). I had already dumped many carts, and Josh was scouring eBay for more, buying them, and sending them to me to be dumped. And I had just learned that all of my dumps made up till now had been incomplete. I had dumped the digital parts of the games -- the ROMs, and could emulate them, but the melodies were in an entirely different place that I did not and could not reach easily. I searched and searched online for any company that made chips that did any such thing with similar interfaces, but found nothing. I suspect these are likely very cheap 8-bit MCUs with large ROMs and some hardware assistance for music-production. Really all that would be needed would be 8 PWM units, maybe with DMA feeding them, and an 8051 core. In any case, they had no external wires that could possibly be used for programming, and the protocol did not seem to have any way to read them out. Digital capture of the source material seemed unlikely, although I would love to have one of these decapped and imaged, just to see what the hell it is anyways.

My first attempts to command Melody Chips in carts proved to be fruitless. The active line went high for the correct duration, but the output line would float around 3.3V and only show a few mV of ripple -- no sign of music. I beat my brain against this for a while, until I decided to try doing it while the cart was inserted into a Pixter Color. "What was the logic behind that?" you might ask. Unknown unknowns. I knew of no logical reason that this should matter, but I did not know that I knew of all the things that might or might not matter. I was still powering the cart's Music Chip externally, of course. What happened? Music! Remove cart - no music. Re-insert -- music still playing. What gives? Using kapton tape I started isolating pins and eventually got to a point that only two pins needed to be connected to the Pixter Color for audio to work - the audio out pin and ground. What the hell? I started tracing out the motherboard again. I had forgotten that a few weeks ago I wondered why there was a random 620 ohm resistor from that pin I had not yet understood to ground. That pin was audio out. I added a 620 ohm resistor to my dumping rig and audio flowed out. Evidently the audio chip is so cheap, they could not be bothered to put a full complementary pair of transistors to drive the output, there is only a transistor to pull the output up - it needs an external pulldown to work. Well, there were a few days I won't get back!

The audio quality in Pixter is not exactly symphony-hall-like. So I decided to simply command each cart's Melody Chips to play each melody in turn, capture them at the analog output, and be done with that. Just like numbers have a concept of "significant figures", audio should (if it does not yet) have a concept of "significant quality". If this does not exist, I hereby propose it, and propose to measure it as a value approximately equal to the sampling rate times the sample bit depth squared. Why this aside? Because there is simply no point capturing chiptunes played via a cheap speaker at 96KHz with a 24-bit ADC. Medium-quality-at-best audio deserves medium-quality-at-best capture. I captured the audio at 22,050KHz, 12 bits per sample using my trusty Pi Pico 2. The captured tracks were volume-normalized and downconverted to 8 bits per sample, producing a reasonable size capture. I went over all the carts again, dumping their audio this time. A few gave me troubles, but that is a story for later. As each cart had a different number of melodies of different lengths, dumps become different sizes at this point in time, having all previously been precisely 2MB or 4MB.

Internal Melodies

There is a Melody Chip inside the Pixter Color itself too. It plays the melodies needed by the built-in game. Capturing its melodies was a bit harder, since I could not simply command it from an RP2350 as I could a cart's Melody Chip. I first thought I could write a very simple Pixter VM program to play them, but after checking the disassembly, I noted that the VM will only play melodies from a cart's Melody Chip when a cart was noted to be the source of the VM program, and will only play melodies from the internal Melody Chip when the internal game is the VM's program source. So, there was no simple way for an external cart VM program to play an internal Melody Chip melody. Pity. Well, option two it is -- a simple cart VM program that escapes to native ARM code, and then twiddles the GPIOs manually to ask the internal Melody Chip to play. That works and the melody plays. Cool! But where to capture it? The simplest option, of course, would be at the speaker, but this would be after amplification and addition of the noise of the very very cheap amplifier chip and whatever other sources of noise there are. I, instead, soldered a wire to the output trace of the black blob, and then wrote code to play each melody in turn, wait for the "is playing" GPIO to go low, and then play the next. I captured the whole thing (digital command lines and analog output line) using my trusty Saleae Logic Pro 16. I exported the analog capture into a CSV file, processed using a script to normalize and cut into tracks based on the Melody ID in the digital capture, resampled to 22,050 samples per sec, and converted to unsigned 8-bit samples. The final result - melodies form the Pixter's internal Melody Chip are captured. Since the Console ROM is stored in the same PCI file (more on that in "File format" section) as dumped games, including the melodies in there was trivial.

The Strangely Good Screen

At some point during this work, I did encounter a Pixter Color with a strangely good screen -- too good, in fact. After it failed to boot my PalmOS build, my suspicions were confirmed -- something was different. The device actually did boot, based on the UART log from my PalmOS build, but the display was not working. Since it booted, I was able to get it to dump its own ROM to the SD card without any of the machinations that were needed to dump the initial Pixter Color ROM back in the beginning, what with the trace cutting, wire soldering, and the agony. Much more civilized: write one tiny PalmOS program, make it auto-run when SD card is inserted, wait a few mins, grab file from SD card. Awesome! The dumped ROM differed in only a few ways, all of them having to do with the screen initialization. Looking at what was being configured in disassembly, I realized that it is configuring the screen as a TFT, not as an STN. This would turn out to be the same screen as the Pixter Multimedia has.

Pixter Multimedia

Pixter Multi Slot
1	A0	||	2	D0
3	A1	||	4	D1
5	A2	||	6	D2
7	A3	||	8	D3
9	A4	||	10	D4
11	A5	||	12	D5
13	A6	||	14	D6
15	A7	||	16	D7
17	A8	||	18	D8
19	A9	||	20	D9
21	A10	||	22	D10
23	A11	||	24	D11
25	A12	||	26	D12
27	A13	||	28	D13
29	A14	||	30	D14
31	A15	||	32	D15
33	A16	||	34	PA5
35	A17	||	36	PA4
37	A18	||	38	nCS2
39	A19	||	40	nCS3
41	A20	||	42	nOE
43	A21	||	44	nWE
45	A22	||	46	???
47	A23	||	48	PA0
49	PA3	||	50	PA1
51	PB6	||	52	PA2
53	PB7	||	54	PH3
55	PB0	||	56	AUD
57	PB1	||	58	Vdd
59	Vss	||	60	??

Pixter Multimedia was a followup on Pixter Color. It used the LH79524 SoC, which was the followup on LH75411. This one, luckily, has an MMU and cache. Now now, contain your excitement, it is just 8KB of cache, and there is still the 16KB of eSRAM, so the total amount of SRAM in the chip dropped from 32KB to 24KB, but the cache covers all memories, and thus helps performance a lot. This is not even negated by the lower clock rates! The board has 4MB of SDRAM on board as well, which is super nice. There are also some buttons: a 4-way pad and A/B buttons. The display is a TFT which means that it actually has contrast, viewing angles, and can show colors other than washed-out-grey and blurry-ish-brown-ish which were all that the STN screen in Pixter Color could manage. The SoC can actually display 65536 colors onscreen, though due to how it actually works, 32768 is more realistic. While literally everyone in the world and their grandma all agree that 16-bit-color means RGB565, LH79524 asks you to hold its beer and goes for XRGB1555. The top bit acts like the LSB for all channels at once. So indeed it can show 65536 colors, but any sane use of the chip would simply ignore that top bit. Well, who needs compatibility after all?

There is a real audio DAC onboard as well, so that now DMA can be used to playback real audio. Most of this hardware was well utilized by my PalmOS port to the device. It has the same slot as the Pixter Color and runs all Pixter Color games. Its slot, though, has a cutout, which allows Pixter-Multimedia-exclusive carts to be inserted. Those have a special plastic protrusion on their cart which prevents their insertion into the Pixter Color. A few Pixter Multimedia exclusive carts are known, and most featured video content.

Those special Pixter Multimedia carts are curious in their own right. First of all, they are the only cart type so far that has no Melody Chip inside. Secondly, their interface and command set are precisely what you'd expect of NAND. They use the existing cart data bus (D0..D7) as the data interface, and three more pins (57, 53, 51) as control signals. None of the carts I saw had actual NAND, though I imagine for development such carts existed. They all used a chip from a company called Matrix Memory. They specialized in read only memory that was NAND compatible. I guess we finally know what a sample use case for read-only-NAND might be. These carts were the largest - 32MB or 64MB each. They were also the easiest to dump using my trusty Pi Pico 2. It was only a matter of 13 wires and a bit of time. I dumped not only page data but the "spare area" that all NAND chips have. Matrix Memory chips seem to report all spare bytes as 0xff.

As NAND does not allow direct execution, how do these games work? Well, this is why Pixter Multimedia has 4MB of SDRAM. The cart header is much simpler here, and it basically just describes an offset and a length for data to be read out of NAND into SDRAM and then jump to. The header details are in Appendix A. Once this first copy is made, it usually takes over the device and loads more data from the cart to SDRAM. None of the Pixter Multimedia titles use the Pixter Color VM. They are all native code, and based on the strings I found in them, they all use Micrium RTOS. There are no ROM routines that they use. Once the cart is loaded, no more accesses to the ROM are observed, it is a complete device takeover. Well, why not?

I did create my own version of this too. I implemented a build of PalmOS that boots entirely in-RAM on the Multimedia. It works pretty well, as expected. I have it load from cart, and the cart can then be removed.

There is, however, an internal Melody Chip in the Pixter Multimedia, and its melodies were captured using the same method as the ones in Pixter Color were.

Pixter Classic

Starting with Pixter Classic

Pixter Color was merely the first of two second-generation Pixter devices. Long before it, there was the first generation, comprised of three devices, each an upgrade(ish) on the last. Pixter Color can play their games in a backwards-compatible way, but they cannot play its. There was no reason to exclude them from the newly-expanded scope of preserving all things Pixter.

The first Pixter was simply "Pixter" and it featured an 80x80 monochrome black and white display, a resistive touch panel on top of it, and a tethered plastic stylus with a hole to tuck it into. The base activities were the same as on Pixter Color - sketch things, stamp things, and draw things while catchy music plays in the background and sound effects of "splat" are heard as you stamp something with a stamp onscreen. I can only imagine how much less fun this was on a black and white screen without even any shades of grey. Inside, it only has black epoxy blobs. Not promising.

Pixter Classic also supported game cartridges and a number of games existed. The cart slot is similar but much shorter -- 20 pins instead of 60. The pinout (now that I figured it out) is shown in Appendix B. But initially I did not know the pinout, of course, and I was rather confused. The games were quite rich, with lots of sounds and graphics. I was not sure what sort of an interface would support that over only 16 pins (what is left after removing "power", "ground", "audio out", and "audio active" from 20). Even if the interface was only 8 bits wide instead of 16, once you add in nWE, nOE, and nCS, there are only 5 bits left for address, allowing addressing of only 32 bytes - definitely not enough. Yeah.... The bus had to be multiplexed in some way. This was also difficult to believe -- multiplexed busses are not common on simple systems nowadays.

Luckily, since Pixter Color can run Pixter Classic games, I could disassemble Pixter Color ROM some more and see what it does. But where to even find the code that handles this? The existing VM code only read its instructions from 0x48000000, and we already concluded that the connector was too narrow to fit a real parallel bus. There is, however, even more luck to be had here. Pixter Classic carts connect to Pixter Color via an adapter. I had a bunch of them, so it was not at all troublesome to cut one open and see what is inside. Maybe there is a chip that talks over the x16 parallel bus on one end and on some weird bus on another?

The cut-open adapter revealed no chips, no passives, no anything -- just plain copper wires. Most of the 20 pins from the Pixter Classic connector were wired to pins on the Pixter Color side. The wiring is detailed in Appendix C. To my great surprise, some of the 20 pins were not connected at all, indicating that even fewer than 20 pins are actually used! Curious. The next thing that is notable is that none of the Pixter Color-side pins used were address or data pins of the parallel bus. Clearly some other interface was used here, and Pixter Color clearly spoke it natively, no magic chip in the adapter. The pins used were all GPIOs, some in port C, some in port D, some in port E, and some in port F. No rhyme or reason as to which as far as I could tell. But I had a lead! Either those pins were uses as GPIOs and I would see them twiddled with code, or they were used as some ... function, in which cease I would at least see them configured as such and would get a hint of how they work based on the function used.

The Weird Bus

The pins were used as GPIOs. I found a function that took an 8-bit value and wrote each bit of it unto one of 8 GPIOs all of which were used by the adapter. It was often called from a few places, each of which before and after it, after some delays, twiddled two more pins. There were two of those wrapper functions. One accepted a 16-bit value and an 8-bit value, it wrote the high and then the low bytes of the 16-bit value to the GPIOs, with intermittent toggling of other pins, then wrote the 8-bit value to the GPIOs and twiddled the other pins some more. The other one accepted a 16-bit value, also wrote the high and then the low bytes of the 16-bit value to the GPIOs, with intermittent toggling of other pins, then READ the same 8 GPIOs in the same order and assembled a byte out of them, and then twiddled the other GPIOs some more. Do you recognize what it happening here? We have an 8-bit-wide multiplexed bus with 16-bit address and 8 bit data, where two control signals are used to set bus operation/state!

OK, so what kind of bus is this? I searched in vain for anything that looks like this and found nothing. I would eventually find docs for this bus and even learn that I understood it perfectly from my reverse engineering, but this was quite a bit later. I had to figure it out from the code at first, and from bus traces. Anyways, I arrived at the assumption that those two functions were effectively u8 bitbangedBusRead(u16 addr) and bitbangedBusWrite(u16 addr, u8 val), I first sought to understand the bus, so that I could capture it with my Saleae Logic analyzer for better analysis. There were two control signals used, clearly, they are labeled E0 and E1 in the pinout and most of my notes. Why? Because they are GPIOs 0 and 1 in port E on LH75411 in the Pixter Color and I needed to give them names! The 8 data pins are labeled DQ0..DQ7, and sorting out which GPIO was which pin was easy from seeing which bits of data went to which one.

The control lines idle high. Here is how a READ bus transaction looks: first, the high 8 bits of the address are put on the bus, after a small delay, E0 is taken low and another small delay is observed. Then the low 8 bits of the address are placed on the bus, now E1 is taken low while E0 is taken high. Another small delay is observed. Then the bus is put into input mode, data is sampled, and then E1 is returned to the high state. The WRITE transaction is similar: first, the high 8 bits of the address are put on the bus, after a small delay, E0 is taken low and another small delay is observed. Then the low 8 bits of the address are placed on the bus, now E1 is taken low while E0 stays low. Another small delay is observed. Then the data value is driven onto the bus, and after a small delay, E0 and E1 are both taken high, returning the bus to idle. So pretty much it is clear that: On E0's falling edge the high byte of the address is sampled. On E1's falling edge, the low byte of the address is sampled, shortly after that, E0 can be sampled to determine if this is a read or a write. Based on that, the bus is either driven or read by the target. It is all nice and clean except for that "small delay" part. It is not at all clear when the bus turns around from being driven to being read. But since the bus is driven pretty slow (3MHz), capturing it and making sense of it was not too hard.

I made a number of captures and the results were bewildering, there was traffic on the bus with reads and writes showing nonzero values even when there was no cart inserted. However, there was a lot more traffic when a cart was inserted than when one was not, so I captured a number of instances of both, cleaned up the data, calculated the differences and found what I believed to be the reads targeting the cart. The first two were reads of two bytes that looked like magic values from 0xbf00. The values were 0xAA, 0x55. Now, I was getting somewhere! But where?

Dumping a Classic Cart

The bus was understood. It was time to dump a cart. At least so I thought... The cart did not reply to my bus access cycles, despite the timing perfectly matching the Pixter's when accessing it. What gives? I captured analog samples and verified that it was not driving the bus at all during my read cycles. It was ignoring me! How dare it?! I guess that there was some init sequence that was necessary. There was no way to know which of the transactions I saw on the external bus were necessary and which were not, which pin toggles were needed and which were not. The latter was solved by kapton tape-ing over contacts and seeing if the cart was still detected. The former... well I just captured all the transactions before reading of the magic number from the cart, and then replayed it using my Pi Pico 2 to a cart. Huzzah! It responded and the magic number was readable!

Well, the address space is 64KB, let's dump it all. Here, things, again, went sideways... Reads in the range 0x0000 - 0x1fff mostly produced a floating bus. Reads in the range 0x2000 - 0x3fff produced data in some carts and lots of 0xff in others. Reads in the range 0x4000 - 0xbfff produced plausible reproduceable data in all carts, and reads in the range 0xc000 - 0xffff produced a floating bus. What does this say? It looks like only 40KB of the 64KB address map has data, sometimes only 32KB. That seems VERY little to store a game with sounds and images. There must be something more here! Even I am not good enough to fit Cool Wheels into 32KB with audio effects and all those car parts. But...the magic number was there, which means my reads were working.

Another damn VM

Back to the Pixter Color ROM I went, to see what it does with those Pixter Classic games. Now that I knew what the bus operations looked like, I was able to find the code that read the magic number, and the code that followed if it was found. Before long, it was another "fetch-dispatch-do some things-fetch again" loop. Yup! Another VM! This one used 8-bit instructions and 8 bit data. Again, it is clear that stack layout was a concern, and thus even though (again) the host stack was used to represent the VM stack, 32 bit quantities were pushed when only 8-bit values were used. Again, no masking was used so it is possible to confuse the VM in a number of ways. Some things in this VM were reminiscent of the other one, but it is definitely simpler. I guess the story here is that Pixter Classic used this VM, and it was deemed insufficiently powerful for color games, necessitating a new VM be designed. However, for backwards compatibility, all new color devices needed to support the old VM to run old games. That all makes sense.

I detailed the new VM in Appendix B, there is more than enough detail to implement an HLE, and Nathan Korth is already on it. Same as before, much of the decoding space was used by normal ALU operations, and a smaller amount was used by very complex operations like image drawing and sound playback. Image compression differs, of course, since compression of monochrome images is necessarily a different beast compared to compression of color images. The audio format was still ADPCM, with the same decoder being used. Curiously, there was an option to play back ADPCM at sample rates other tan 8KHz, but I suspect this was never used in games and was thus removed from the Pixter Color VM's abilities. Comparing what the two VMs can do provides some intriguing technological archeology exercises, some of which I followed up on, and many more of which I leave to the reader.

KNOWN_GAME_ID

Before starting the Classic VM, the code first read a few specific locations (the initial PC value for the VM) in the cart ROM and then looked up their values in a table. If found, it then recorded the index in a variable I termed "KNOWN_GAME_ID". If not found, the value was set to 13, then it checked another location for a value of 0xAA, and if so, another table was consulted additionally. If there was a match there, "KNOWN_GAME_ID_2" was set to the index plus one, else it was set to 0. Why all this? The answer is obvious - clearly some games did some questionable things on the old Pixter Classic hardware that needed game-specific handling on the new Pixter color hardware. This is not unexpected, really. Backwards compatibility, given enough "backwards" and enough "compatibility" always ends up looking like if (app_is_x()) { allow_insane_thing_Y(); add_custom_handler_Z(); }.

It is worth remembering that in the Pixter Color VM, there were two opcodes that allowed the games to break into native ARM code. It would not be unreasonable to assume that that Pixter Classic VM has something similar. This is a great example of something that might need game-specific handling on Pixter Color. Why? If we assume that the old Pixter Classic did not use the same exact LH75411 SoC (which it very much does not), then native code for it might not properly run on Pixter Color. It is also logical that most games would have game-specific native code, and thus need game-specific handlers.

Native Callouts again

With a well formed theory that there is very likely to be an opcode that allows one to break out into native code on Pixter Classic, I went looking. Naturally, the place with the highest concentration of looking at "KNOWN_GAME_ID" was the place to look. I found it. For handling opcode 0x96 (now called NATIVECALLOUT) there was a complex dispatch table based on "KNOWN_GAME_ID" and then based on one of the values popped off the stack, making it look like it was customary for the native callout (or what I assumed was it) to have two parameters and one reply, with the first parameter being as selector and the second -- an actual parameter. But... what is this... it actually got a lot more interesting. There was a path through that table that resulted in running ACTUAL NATIVE ARM code. What?! Yup. To reach that path, the game had to have been identified as "KNOWN_GAME_ID" 13 which means that it is not known by the first table, the second lookup must also fail, setting "KNOWN_GAME_ID_2" to 0. If that is the case, the code path is taken that might lead to native ARM execution on Pixter Color. The first popped value (the selector) must be 0xc8. When that happens, a little-endian 16-bit value at cart location 0xbf40 is used as a source address, the little-endian 16-bit value at cart location 0xbf43 is used as end source address. Then, the byte-sized value at 0xbf42 is inexplicably written to address 0x0000 on the cart interface (I'd later learn what this is for, see appendix B). After that, the size described by the above-mentioned start and end addresses is copied from the cart to host's memory at 0x60003000. This is the end for this opcode. The code is not run... yet. To trigger that, we need another NATIVECALLOUT call. Here, the "selector" needs to be 0xc9 or greater. 0xc9 is then subtracted from it, and the result is left in r0. The code in RAM is then jumped-to. No checking is done if any code was loaded, you could be jumping to garbage. YOLO. On Pixter Multimedia, this works too, except 0xd0 is the value instead of 0xc9.

This indicates that some more Pixter Classic games came out after Pixter Color came out, they had (or at least could have had) native ARM code in them, and Pixter Multimedia needed to custom-support those selectors as the exact shipped code would not work on Pixter Multimedia. Cool - more digital archeology. Classic games I know to include ARM code: Monster Shop, Music Video Creator, Rocket Power, SpongeBob, Toy Designer, Word Factory. Curiously, all but the last two in that list have the same exact offsets and lengths for ARM code: 50 bytes from page 0x0f addr 0x7f00. The code is the same too. It implements only two selectors (thus 0xc9 and 0xca). I'll let you explore it. "Toy Designer" has a more substantial ARM chunk at 784 bytes. It implements 5 selectors (thus 0xc9..0xcd). Also kind of cool. "Word Factory" features 336 bytes of ARM, implementing 7 selectors (thus 0xc9..0xcf). This effectively explains the 0xd0 in Pixter Multimedia's ROM and basically proves that NO Pixter Classic games came out after Pixter Multimedia was out, and that no Classic Game ever ran a single instruction of native ARM code on Pixter Multimedia (until I did, of course). Fear not! This was all only moderately reckless -- the Pixter Color ROM did have a table of function pointers to various useful functions at a hardcoded location, so the later TFT-screened Pixter Color with a slightly different ROM could still properly support this insanity.

What is "Native"? How do you define "Native"?

I still did not know what architecture Pixter Classic SoC was. I knew that there are not that many black-blob ARM SoCs around, and there were even fewer in the year 2000, so ARM was unlikely. This is made further likely by the fact that EVERY Pixter Color game used native callouts for at least a little bit of work. It is logical to assume that Pixter Classic games are similar. And yet, the halfwords at 0xbf40 were much more often 0xffff than not in the ROMs I read out. Earlier-released games did not have these at all. Of the 25 dumped games, only 6 had ARM code. So ARM native code is not common, and thus some other architecture must run Pixter Classic. But which? I did not have a way to read out Pixter Classic's ROM to try to guess it from that. Another approach was needed.

Let us reason logically. First, the VM must be implemented in code. Second, when the NATIVECALLOUT is run, it must somehow run native code. Third, the code must somehow come from the cart. Fourth, the game VM instructions also come from the cart. Fifth, I know how to snoop on that bus non-destructively. Hey, wait now! All I need to do is wait for a game to execute the NATIVECALLOUT opcode and see where things fetch from. I captured a long session of playing Action Art using my trusty Saleae Logic Pro. I then searched for 0x96 which is the opcode for NATIVECALLOUT. Many were false positives or address bytes and not data bytes, but eventually, I did hit upon a fetch that was definitely from the cart address space 0x4000-0xbfff with the value of 0x96. Before that, a few other opcodes were fetched, at about 200KHz rate each. Just after the fetch of NATIVECALLOUT, much faster reads from the cart came, for a few hundred bytes, then it was back to the sedate 200KHz fetches of the VM, resuming at the very byte past the 0x96 of NATIVECALLOUT. There it is, I found it! Indeed it was not anything from 0xbf40.

[0xBF0C] -> 4C 00 BD [0xBD00] -> A5 60 0A AA BD DE BC [0xBCE2] -> 3C [0xBD07] -> 85 62 BD DF BC [0xBCE3] -> BC [0xBD0C] -> 85 63 6C 62 00 [0xBC3C] -> A5 61 85 62 A9 A6 85 65 A9 28 85 61 20 FC BB [0xBBFC] -> A9 00 85 67 E6 67 F0 08

The sequence of bus reads I was looking at was bewildering. And you, dear reader, do you see it? I am willing to bet that anyone over the age of 50 who has played with home computers in youth will immediately recognize the bytes. I recognized them because long ago I spent a weekend writing an emulator for this specific CPU. Going once...twice...sold! It is 6502! Yes, that 6502. What is it doing in a blob-chip in a kids' toy from the year 2000, I did not [yet] know, but there it was. It seems like the VM's handling of NATIVECALLOUT on Pixter Classic is to jump to 0xbf0c. There, is expected an absolute jump to the real NATIVECALLOUT handler. I loaded the few carts I had dumped into IDA in 6502 mode, set up a proper memory map, and indeed, every time 0xbf0c had an absolute jump to a handler of some sort. Given the fetch rate on the bus, it looked like the toy was run by a 3MHz 6502. Some games, somehow, instead ran the CPU at 6MHz, which is pretty speedy. Compared to other old 8-bit designs, 6502 is actually relatively performant per-cycle. This is a nontrivial amount of computation ability. But still, this not the 1970s, what is the 6502 doing here, and what time machine did it crawl out of? Fair, there are some old cores commonly used today in cheap places, like the i-wish-it-would-already-die-but-it-will-outlive-me shitshow that is the 8051, but this is the first I've seen of a modern tapeout of a 6502. What. The. Hell?

Dumping the Pixter Classic ROM

So how did I plan to dump the Pixer Classic ROM? Again, I used my Pi Pico 2. I programmed the PIO to properly act as a slave to this weird bus, and to reply as best as I knew how. After some debugging with my trusty Logic analyzer, It seemed to make the console happy, and it got past reading the magic bytes and on to more reads from the cart. At that point in time, it was a triviality to redirect the "initial VM PC" at 0xbf06 to a random address of my choice (in my case, 0xbf80), where I placed a single VM opcode: NATIVECALLOUT. I placed a valid 6502 JMP at 0xbf0c, jumping to 0xb800. There I placed some test code. Initially, it was just an infinite loop, to verify that I got that far (by watching the bus). I did. Next was the task of actually dumping the ROM.

How to output with no output devices?

I did not know anything about the SoC, so using a GPIO was out. I had no idea how to draw to screen, so that was out too. But, I could issue bus accesses! What if I dedicated a bus area only for this use and no other? I decided to use 0x8000..0x80ff. I would thus, in a loop, do *(0x8000 + *addr++). I would then capture the bus, filter for reads from that range, and get myself a dump. This was very very very fragile. Too fragile to work reliably, actually. I missed bytes sometimes and sometimes I saw accesses that were not mine. I guessed they were caused by some interrupt handlers in the Pixter Classic's ROM code.

*(0x80a0 + ((addr >> 12) & 0x0f)); *(0x80a0 + ((addr >> 12) & 0x0f)); *(0x80b0 + ((addr >> 8) & 0x0f)); *(0x80b0 + ((addr >> 8) & 0x0f)); *(0x80c0 + ((addr >> 4) & 0x0f)); *(0x80c0 + ((addr >> 4) & 0x0f)); *(0x80d0 + ((addr >> 0) & 0x0f)); *(0x80d0 + ((addr >> 0) & 0x0f)); *(0x80e0 + ((*addr >> 4) & 0x0f)); *(0x80e0 + ((*addr >> 4) & 0x0f)); *(0x80f0 + ((*addr >> 0) & 0x0f)); *(0x80f0 + ((*addr++ >> 0) & 0x0f));

I went with a slower but less error-prone option. I would, instead, emit a nibble at a time, twice for easier tracking. I would also emit the address, tagged as such, also twice. Basically, it looked as shown here. This is dense but simple. Now every access's address's low byte has a tag in the top nibble and a value in the bottom. The tag of 0x0a is "top 4 bits of addr", 0x0b => "addr bits 8..11", 0x0c => "addr bits 4..7", 0x0d => "addr bits 0..4", 0x0e => "data top nibble", 0x0f => "data bottom nibble", each being sent twice. This was slow, but I was able to capture a read of the entire 64KB address space this way, after a few tries.

Initial analysis

As expected, the address space contained the unknown things in the beginning, the cart ROM in the middle 32KB, and the Pixter's built-in ROM at 0xc000-0xffff. Again, I know there must be more to this, since the built-in game, its sound effects, and a whole VM will not fit into 16KB. However, I did have a lot of 6502 code to analyze. It is a start. Same as any other 6502, this one had vectors at 0xfffa: NMI vector, reset vector, and IRQ vector. Those looked sane. For some reason, there was a second set of vectors at 0xfff2. Analyzing those, it seemed like they were also: NMI vector, reset vector, and IRQ vector. Strange, but that can be dealt with later. I found the VM loop relatively easily, and from that, I was able to figure out most of the internal structure, since I knew what the high-level opcodes did. I found the memory buffers, framebuffer, etc. As a test I even put together a little 6502 demo that showed Conway's Life onscreen on the Pixter Classic, served from a fake cart that was really a Pi Pico 2.

Now that I had a handle on this thing a little bit, it was time to dig in more. Where was the built-in game? I found the code that read the magic number from the cart, and looked as to what it does when that fails. It then, still, read the address at 0xbf06, and still went on to interpret opcodes. That made no sense! That is cart address space, and that read would produce garbage with no cart inserted. How does this not crash? Then I noticed, that before reading the cart magic number, the value 0xc0 is written to the address 0x0000, and that value is not replaced if a cart is found and the VM runs cart code. If the cart is not found, before reading 0xbf06, the value 0x00 is written to the address 0x0000. Bank switching between cart and internal ROM? That could be. I searched the code and saw other values written to that register. In the irq handler, the value was read, replaced, and then restored, implying that it is important to current execution context. When that is done, it is often masked with 0xe0. All of this paints a picture: The low 5 bits of this register are a bank number, and the top 3 are a device selector. Or at least that is what I concluded. This might explain why writes to low addresses appear on the external cart bus - if there is bank switching, it must be done by the cart itself, and thus it must see those writes.

I modified my dumping tool to try to flip to the internal ROM before dumping, by writing 0x00 to 0x0000. No output. It took me a few hours of beating my brain against the issue until I realized that I was an idiot. My code ran from the cart, in that same address space. If my bank switch indeed worked, I would expect all further fetches to come from the internal ROM, and thus execute garbage, or perhaps not garbage but definitely not my code. As the idea hit me, I was able to trivially verify this - the external bus went dead after the write to 0x0000. Hmm.... Well, I knew where the framebuffer was in RAM, and I was not using it, so presumably I could copy my code there. Assuming some sanity in the device design, the framebuffer is unlikely to be banked and would thus be a good place for code that bank-switches. It did not work. I banged my brain against the problem some more until I realized that I was still being an idiot. If I switch to internal banks, my fake accesses went there too... I needed to switch banks back and forth between reading the ROM and emitting my fake accesses. This worked, and I was able to dump the 32KB of ROM that lived at 0x4000..0xbfff. Curiously, the bytes 0x4000..0x7fff were the same as 0xc000..0xffff. I then got more ambitious and tried pageflipping, dumping the full 64K of address space for every page from 0 to 31. This took a while but worked too....

How memory paging works

From what I figured out up to this point, there are 3 windows into ROM, each 16KB in size. WindowA is 0x4000..0x7fff, WindowB is 0x8000..0xbfff, WindowC is 0xc000..0xffff. There is a register at 0x0000 which I called BANKSEL. At any given point in time, WindowC shows internal ROM at offset 0x4000. What WindowA and WindowB show varies based on BANKSEL. The bottom 5 bits of BANKSEL select the bank (each 32KB in size). WindowA shows the higher 16KB of that bank, WindowB shows the lower 16KB of that bank. This explains, also, why the bytes 0x4000..0x7fff were the same as 0xc000..0xffff when ROM bank 0 is selected, and why 0xc000..0xffff did not change as I varied the bank index.

The top 3 bits of BANKSEL select the device to be mapped into WindowA and WindowB: 0b110 selects external (cart) ROM, 0b000 selects internal in-Pixter ROM. Given this, I re-dumped all the carts using my Pi Pico 2 setup, now dumping all the pages and finding out that most games were 512KB in size (except Word Factory which was 1MB). Now that I understood the addressing, I recombobulated the Pixter internal ROM, removing paging artefacts, and found it to also be 512KB in size. You can grab a copy here, if curious. Now I was mostly sure that these dumps were complete. The size matched with what they contained in terms of gameplay and sound richness. Fun sidenote: all VM code by necessity must fit in page 0. The VM always resets the page to 0 before reading code. Images, sounds, and other data may exist in any other page and are always addressed with a {page, offset} tuple.

Some fun to be had

Since native callouts differ between 6502 and ARM, it is possible to tell if you are running on an ARM or a 6502 Pixter. On ARM ones, there is a register that distinguishes LH754xx and LH795xx. This means that a single cart can behave quite differently based on the hardware. And indeed I implemented such a classic cart as proof-of-concept. On the black-and-white Pixters, it shows a black and white image. On Pixter Color, it shows a high-resolution color image, and on Pixer Multimedia, it decompresses its payload to internal RAM and boots PalmOS, since there is enough RAM. Source code for this perversion is provided below.

Identifying the SoC

While complaining about this unidentified 6502 to a good friend, he told me that there is a chinese company that makes cheap 6502s - Sunplus (later renamed to Generalplus). He told me that they are often sold as bare dies and would thus be seen in a product as black blob. Well, it could be... I went to look for a user's guide for some of these chips, but found none in the usual places. Google has gotten quite useless at actually finding anything nowadays, so this was not a surprise, sadly. Yandex to the rescue! I found a few datasheets and user's guides for a few different Sunplus 6502-based SoCs. Their memory maps kind of did fit what I was seeing. None were a perfect, but some were definitely close. Sunplus had chips with LCD controllers, like the SoC in question had, but not for the same row and column count. They had chips that did not support external bus that I knew this chip did have, and so on. But, in the end, I concluded that the Pixter Classic is built around a chip that closely resembles the GPLB3x series. There are differences. Pixter's SoC lacks nibble and mirror byte accelerators, which sucks, and it lacks SPI and watchdog features. The clocking is clearly different too, as is display control. Additionally, Pixter SoC's memory map differs a bit in terms of how the range 0x2000..0x3fff is treated. But having a vague but-somewhat-close-to-accurate user guide was a LOT better than having nothing. As the GPLB3x came out after Pixter Classic, the lack of a few of the cooler GPLB3x features makes sense. Pixter likely uses its predecessor, whatever that was called.

Now that I had at least some docs, I was able to sort out which GPIOs went where. It helps that many Sunplus chips are similar internally (as gleaned from very incomplete datasheets). I found which GPIO went to the "calibrate" button in the back, made it an output, and bit-banged 9600 baud 8n1 serial port out of it. Now I had a better way to talk to the outside world than my messy method of fake bus transactions. I no longer had to capture megabytes of data and postprocess them. I could just watch text scroll by in my minicom window! Creature comforts FTW!

I could run code and I could talk. It was time to experiment. I quickly tried various GPLB3x features to see which were present and which were not. I played with the register I thought controlled clocking (0x0004) and better understood it. The bottom 5 bits seem to always be written to 0b01100 but the top 3 bits seem to control the CPU clock divider from the RC oscillator that is used to generate it. The nominal RC clock rate in Pixter Classic is 6MHz, and the CPU clock is the RC clock divided by a value set by the top 3 bits of register 0x0004. It is not linear, and some values seem to simply halt the CPU. The values that work are: 0 (RC / 4), 1 (RC / 2), 2 (RC / 1), 5 (RC / 32), 6 (RC / 16). Most games run at RC / 2 = 3MHz. They can request double-speed if their carts support fetching at that rate. Internal ROM also runs ar RC / 1 = 6MHz.

The display controller was also quite unlike GPLB3x. Experimentation showed that the top bit of 0x0005 enabled the LCD, the lower 7 bits, when multiplied by 16 represent the framebuffer address in the SoC's RAM. If the resulting value is larger than the RAM amount in the SoC, it wraps around, as one would expect. I have no idea if this theory is correct, but all tests I did backed this theory. It is also possible that the mechanism is entirely different while the results are entirely indistinguishable from what I propose. In any case -- this is how it actually works. The register at 0x000E sets the number of display columns, when multiplied by 16. Pixter Classic configured it to be 5, as the display is 80 columns wide. Changing this to be less causes fewer columns to be driven, as one would expect.

GPLB3x-ness of the chip also explains the secondary vectors at 0xfff2. This is for factory testing, and tracing out that code actually helped me understand things a bit more. And of course this also explained the weird external bus.

The BEX bus

So, evidently this is the external bus that many Sunplus chips support. I did not find a name for it, so I am calling it "BEX bus" since its stated main purpose is "bus extension", often shortened "BEX" by Sunplus. This is a very very very poorly designed bus. Why? Observe that usually one would want to capture signals on edges. That makes digital design nice and clean, and allows one to not depend on random delays. From the diagram, it is clear that "AH" - address high byte is captured on the falling edge of MC0 (what I had called E0). That is good. "AL" - address low byte is captured on the falling edge of MC1 (what I had called E1). This is also good. But, if you are the master on this bus, when is it safe to sample the bus for a read? Who knows?! You do not know. It is NOT on the rising edge of MC1, cause you control that, and you do not know how much time you need to give the chip before then to produce the data! And for write, when will the chip sample the written data? Here, it might be argued that the rising edge of one of the MC signals is the proper time, but ... this is not what the chips do. If you try this with a BEX chip you'll end up writing garbage -- I tried. It is also not clear how soon after the end of a transaction it is safe to start another. I had to find out experimentally too. It turns out that data is valid and data is sampled "some time" after the falling edge of MC1. "Some time" is the equivalent of a recipe telling you to "add salt to taste"! It is meaningless, it is bad design, and Sunplus should feel bad! Fun side note: some later-found docs list some timings for the bus. Neither Pixter nor any carts meet them.

That being said, It is now clear why the init sequence was needed for the cart to start talking - it needed to be told its "Volume ID" in BEX speak. How do I know that? Carts just have two blobs, so how could I possibly know? Well, Sunplus have a chip you can buy that speaks BEX on one end and provides normal memory interface on the other. With some searching on Yandex, we can even track down a user's guide. Now, I have no reason to suspect that this is precisely the chip under the blob in the carts. Actually, I have reasons to suspect that it is not, but it is closely related and the registers all line up, and that is a help already! This chip supports a number of modes, detailed in Table 7.6.1 in the guide. Pixter Classic configures it by default for mode 0b110. These chips can also be chained, and this works - I experimented with this. Up to seven chips can be chained on the bus, each allowing up to 4MB of memory to be connected. It is rather fancy, in a perverted sort of way.

The way it works is like this: after reset, each BEX chip is in "initial" state wherein they ignore all writes except writes to address 0x000d. The first nonzero write that is seen to that address is absorbed by the first chip in the chain. It remembers this address as its VolumeID. It then releases the next chip in the chain from reset. The host can then issue a write to 0x000d again. The next chip remembers that new value as its VolumeID. Assigning the same VolumeID to multiple chips is not a good idea as their output drivers will fight and at least one chip will release the magic smoke. In any case, when a nonzero write to 0x000d matches a BEX chip's remembered VolumeID, it will consider itself active, while all non-matching ones will consider themselves inactive. As VolumeID is a 3-bit value, we get our 7-BEX-chip limit on the bus. Pulling the reset line low again will cause the first BEX in the chain to reset itself and pull its output reset line low, resetting the next one in the chain, and so on until they are all reset and ready to be reconfigured.

Acquiring a GPBA01B

Sunplus say that this chip is only available as a bare silicon die, which you need to wire-bond to a board and put black epoxy over (making it a blob). But, for some reason, I found a random chinese website claiming to sell this chip in a TQFP44 package. Officially no such package exists for this chip, but I was curious enough to throw a few bucks at the problem to find out. As is usually the case with such websites, it is 50/50 if you ever hear from them after placing an order. In this case, I did hear back, with a message that "unfortunately the listed price was wrong and in reality it costs more". How fucking convenient! Somehow it never "unfortunately" costs less. Fine, I'll pay the extortion-level prices ($9 ea) just to satisfy my curiosity. The chips even arrived...eventually.

But what is the pinout? The seller, predictably, had no docs, and Sunplus do not even claim to have such a chip in this package. However, they do have a die photo in the datasheet, showing 44 wirebonding pads. Now, there is no reason to assume that the pin order of a 44-pin chip would map perfectly to the die pad order, but there is also no reason it would not - it would be the simplest thing to do. Still, that does not guarantee anything. However, it is possible to verify this guess nondestructively. To protect from electrostatic discharge (ESD) almost all modern chips have built-in diodes from every i/o pin up to VCC and down to GND. The idea is that any voltage higher than VCC will get clipped to VCC, and anything lower then GND will get clipped to GND thus avoiding bad things. By using the "diode" setting on a multimeter, one can thus find VCC and GND pins on most modern ICs by finding to which pins most pins have the same diode-voltage-drop. This check showed that a 1-to-1 mapping of die pads to pins is likely. George laid out a board, my favourite board house JLCPCB made the boards, and I built one. This board had space for an SD card (bit banged using free pins), 1MB of ROM, and 2x 1MB of SRAM.

Using the GPBA01B

I soldered on a 1MB NOR flash behind the BEX chip. But how to flash it? My Pi Pico 2 to the rescue again! This time, instead of being a BEX slave, it is BEX master, and by issuing the proper BEX commands, flash writing commands can be issues through it. It works! George even designed a nice board to make this all easier for me to do! I wrote my dump of "Arcade" game to the NOR and the Pixter Classic happily ran it. The game worked! How cool is that? This proved that my dump was correct and complete, and that the grey-market BEX chip really works! It is notable that the game ran with sound effects but without background melodies, same as for Pixter color, melodies were yet a separate thing to handle...

The memory map documented in the datasheet confirms what I had deduced precisely, with one additional detail that I had missed. I did not know what 0x2000..0x3fff mapped to, and the datasheet for GPBA01B clearly states that in mode 0b110, it maps to "last 8KB of memory". It is fascinating to note that this line of documentation matches neither the game carts I dumped nor the chips I bought, and they mismatch identically! In dumped carts, 0x2000 always mapped to 0x7a000 (or 0xfa000) offset into the flash (24KB from flash end). In the chips I bought, it mapped in the same way. Why does this extra window matter? Many games run without emulating it at all, but some break quite spectacularly. We'll get back to this later.

Melodies on Pixter Classic

I expected the Melody Chip to work the same way on Pixter Classic as on Pixter Color. Why would it not? Since I knew which opcodes in the Classic VM were used to start melody playback from my Pixter Color ROM disassembly, it was merely a matter of finding the handling for those opcodes in the Pixter Classic ROM. The code distinguished whether we are playing a game from the external cart or from the internal ROM. For in-Pixter ROM game, the Melody Chip (of course there is one here too) interface was quite similar, using GPIO D2 for data and D3 for clock. Curiously, there is no "is playing" status for the internal Melody Chip. I guess the built-in game does not need it. The blob on the board that is the Melody Chip DOES have that output, but it only goes to a test point.

There are not enough pins on the connector to expend two for Melody Chip control. The "is playing" pin is on the connector, and it goes to GPIO D6 though. So how does the Melody Chip in a cart get controlled? Via the BEX chip, of course. The chip can be reconfigured in various modes (see the user guide I posted above). In one of the modes, its pins are GPIOs. When Melody Chip commands are to be issued, this mode is entered, a command is sent, and then the BEX chips is commanded back to memory controller mode. "But," you might ask, "how do random memory accesses not trigger command by accident?" The pin used for data is BEX chip's P05, a pin that is not used when it is in the normally-used memory controller mode (mode 0b110). Without the data line being raised or lowered, there is no "start" signal in the Melody Chip bus protocol, and the twiddling of the clock line is meaningless as it is peacefully used as the ROM chip's 19th address line.

Now that I knew how to control the Melody Chips in Pixter Classic Carts, I used my trusty Pi Pico 2 based melody-dumping tool to dump those melodies too, completing the full dumping of the Pixter Classic games. The Melody Chip in the Pixter Classic itself was dumped in much the same way as I did on the Pixter Color. Since I knew how to run native code and I knew how to control the Melody Chip inside, it was only a matter of finding which of the traces coming out of the black blob was output. Luckily, there were not many, and soon the internal Melody Chip's secrets were mine! Mwahahahaha!

Programming the Pixter Classic

I ported PalmOS to Pixter Color. What cool programming could I do for Pixter Classic? Well, there are no good C compilers for 6502, and I really am quite over writing assembly for 8-bit MCUs, preferring either 32 bit ones or 4-bit ones. I had one cool idea, but it required being able to handle interrupts, and in Pixter's SoC, interrupts always use the vector table at 0xfffa in ROM that I cannot change. Or can I? The manual for GPLB3x mentions that there is a bit one can set to map 0xc000..0xffff to the external BEX bus instead of the internal ROM. This would allow me to take over interrupts! I just need a minimal game-like header to do that, and then the interrupts are mine!

This worked with my Pi Pico 2 based BEX slave emulator, but it did not work with my GPBA01B-based real Pixter Classic carts. Why? Well, GPBA01B is not designed to map that address range, it ignored it, the bus was left floating, and the CPU fetched garbage. Each vector is 2 bytes long, and only one vector matters after boot - IRQ. What if I added weak pulls to the bus on my cart? Then, when the GPBA01B leaves the bus floating, the Pixter Classic's SoC will read from the bus a value determined principally by those pull resistors. Initially this did not work as I overestimated the output strength of the GPBA01B and my 1KB pull resistors overpowered it. Switching to 100KB pull resistors worked. By necessity, every unmapped address will read as the same byte value. So what byte value would work for me? It needs to map to an address range I control. I chose to pull up DQ5 and pull down all other data lines. This causes the floating bus to read as 0x20, causing the SoC to read the IRQ vector of 0x2020, pointing to memory that IS mapped by the GPBA01B. Awesome!

So what did I program? If you have been following my projects enough, you'll probably guess - I've done this a few times before to underpowered devices. Yup, I wrote a full Cortex-M23 emulator with access to display, PWMs, UART, and even interrupts. It can be flashed on a cart and run. Most of the cart's 1MB of flash is left free for ARM code, and you can even populate a 1MB SRAM on the cart, with the RAM available to the virtual ARM core, thanks to GPBA01B being able to address multiple memory chips.

This Cortex-M23 emulator is downloadable in source and binary forms on the bottom of this page.

The one weird pin on the cart

There was one pin on the Pixter Classic cart slot whose meaning was still eluding me. Some games toggled it sometimes, some did not touch it. It was always operated as a GPIO. But why? I opened a cart to see where it went. Bewilderingly, it went ... nowhere. There was a SOIC-14 footprint on the board that was unpopulated, and the signal went there. Only there. I opened another cart whose game toggled that pin. Same story! What the hell? Who needs to toggle a pin that goes nowhere. Why? Lacking any better ideas, I traced where other pins of that unpopulated SOIC-14 went. All but one were uninteresting. The interesting one went to "write protect" pin of the NOR flash that is used to save game state. Hm. Maybe the SOIC-14 was some sort of a logic gate, and its purpose was to protect the flash from accidental writes? I checked again when the pin toggled, and indeed it went high before saving and low after saving. I guess the intent was that, but after a while they found the cost of the SOIC-14 logic chip not worth it, but the game logic stayed. Well, toggling an unused pin is harmless, after all.

Resistive Touch Panels on the Cheap

Resistive touch panels come in two major varieties: 4-wire and 5-wire. At least I keep hearing this. In reality, I have literally never ever seen a 5-wire system. Every chip that supports resistive touch panels seems to support both of these systems, and I strongly suspect this is a conspiracy to make me think I am crazy. Has anyone ever really seen a 5-wire resistive touch panel, or is it more that you keep hearing that it exists but never see any evidence? It is like the Loch Ness Touch Panel! Anyways. Pixter's touch panels are all 4-wire like all others I've ever seen. The theory of operation of these is not complex, and I'll walk you through it, since understanding it is key to understanding the insanity of how Pixter Classic makes it work.

Imagine a sheet of plastic, coated with a conductive clear coating. It has moderately high resistance, but it is also quite uniform, which is important. On two opposing sides, make a conductive low-resistance contact. Now imagine a second such sheet, rotated 90 degrees from the first, so that if the first's conductive contacts were on the left and right sides, this one's are on top and bottom. Now, place them on top of each other with a spacer between them around the edges, such that they are not touching. We now have four wires coming out of this sandwich. Imagine that the user uses a stylus to press on the screen somewhere. The top sheet bends and contacts the bottom one at that point. Let us consider all the things we can do with them and all the things we could measure. Say we connect the LEFT pad to +3V, and the RIGHT pad to GROUND. this means that the voltage at the contact point is proportional to how far along the left-right axis the touch is. We use either of the TOP or BOTTOM contacts to measure this value using an ADC -- we have found the X coordinate of the touch. Note that which one we sample with does not matter since the resistance of the sheet is negligible compared to the input resistance of a typical ADC, so the resistance of the TOP-BOTTOM sheet is immaterial to this measurement. Also note that it does not matter whether LEFT was +3V or RIGHT, just as long as we know which one was.

Now, instead, we connect TOP to +3V and bottom to GROUND. We use our ADC to sample LEFT or RIGHT contact. Again, it does not matter which we use. The voltage at contact is now proportional to the position of the touch along the top-bottom axis. We have thus calculated the Y coordinate of the touch. Cool. What would these measurements have produced if there was no touch at all? Most likely -- noise since there would be nothing at all connected to the sampled plate. So then how do we detect if there is a touch or there is not? Well, imagine now that we connect, say, LEFT and RIGHT both to GROUND, we apply a very weak pullup to TOP or BOTTOM, and we sample it. If there is no touch. we'd see a high value since the pull up pulls the plate high and nothing pulls it low. If there is a touch, the value would be low, since the resistance through the plates to GROUND would be lower than our weak pullup. In fact, the stronger the pressure of the stylus (or the larger the contact area), the lower the resistance through the plates and the lower our sampled value. This is usually referred to as a Z-measurement and it can approximate pressure or contact area roughly. But also, it can be used to detect whether there is a touch at all. Note, that you can even use this method to generate a pen-down interrupt without needing to check actively. Just connect the plate to a GPIO and interrupt on the falling edge. Again, note that the same could be done by flipping which plate we drive and which we sample, and the levels could also be inverted (drive the plate to VCC, use a weak pull-down). With some loss of precision on the pressure measurement, you could even only drive one side of the other plate instead of both.

Generally, this is how one drives a 4-wire touch panel (again, the only kind I am 100% sure actually exists, I swear I am not crazy). You set it up for Z-measurement and interrupt on falling edge. When you take the interrupt, you sample X, then you sample Y, then you sample Z. If Z indicates that the pen is still pressed, you process (x, y) as a point through whatever pipeline you have for this data, then you repeat the X, Y, and Z sampling. If, instead, Z-sample tells you that the pen is no longer down, you tell your processing pipeline that the pen is now up, and you re-enable the interrupt and reconfigure your panel for Z-interrupt.

It is notable that while chips exist that do this for you, and many SoCs have special units to do this for you, this is not too hard to do manually either. Let's design a minimal way to do this. You'll note that in most cases each plate needs to be driven to at most one level. So: we'll have a P-FET (call it Q1) to allow us to drive "RIGHT" to VCC, a P-FET (Q2) to allow us to drive "TOP" to VCC, an N-FET (Q3) to drive "LEFT" to GND, an N-FET (Q4) to drive "BOTTOM" to GND, and another P-FET (Q5) in series with a high-value resistor to allow us to drive "RIGHT" to VCC via this resistor. We'll connect "TOP" to ADC input 0, and "RIGHT" to ADC input 1, "RIGHT" also connected to an interrupt pin "INT". This is the minimal manual 4-wire system. FETs are used since they do not have the voltage-drop issue that BJTs do, making the math simpler and more linear. Let's prove that this is complete. Note that an N-FET is turned on when the gate is high, a P-FET is turned on when the gate is low. I will just say "on" to mean "whatever the gate needs for the transistor to open".

Wait for pen down: Q5 on, Q4 on, "INT" enabled for falling edge. Q4 makes the top-bottom plate ground, Q5 weakly pulls up left-right plate. If there is a touch, "INT" goes low as top-bottom plate overpowers the resistor. If there is no touch, "INT" is high still.
Z-sample: Q5 on, Q4 on, ADC input 1 sampled. Q4 makes the top-bottom plate ground, Q5 weakly pulls up left-right plate. If there is a touch, ADC value is low as top-bottom plate overpowers the resistor, pressure and touch area determines the contact resistance and how low the ADC value is. If there is no touch, ADC sees a high value as pullup keep the plate potential high.
Y-sample: Q2 on, Q4 on, ADC input 1 sampled. Q2 and Q4 create the VCC-to-GND gradient on the top-bottom plate, we sample the left-right plate to find Y position.
X-sample: Q1 on, Q3 on, ADC input 0 sampled. Q1 and Q3 create the VCC-to-GND gradient on the left-right plate, we sample the top-bottom plate to find X position.

Resistive Touch Panels beyond Cheap

Allright, now that you know how one should do this, let me tell you how you should not, by which I mean, let me tell you what Pixter Classic does, because it is both sickening and clever at the same time. First of all, it has no ADCs, so there isn't a way to directly sample the analog values. If that was not enough of crotch-punch, in a desire to cut more costs, they decided to save $0.000001 per device and used the cheaper BJTs instead of FETs. This means that instead of the voltage on each plate spanning almost the entire range of VCC-to-GROUND, it now spans a range that depends on the voltage drop of the particular transistors used in this particular device. Even BJTs made on the same production line in the same way can differ quite a bit in their voltage drop, and a difference of 0.1v can be a difference of 10 pixels onscreen - quite big when drawing. Bold choice.

How do you sample an analog voltage without an ADC? Well, you can use a comparator and a DAC. You output a varying voltage and see when the comparator output flips, that is approximately your input voltage. This is a useful hack because comparators (and any op-amp is a comparator if you wish it to be) are cheaper and more available then ADCs. But now you need a DAC. Pixter Classic's SoC does not have one of those either. It does have PWM units, which can be used as a DAC, with some filtering, but they are both used for other purposes and are unavailable. It does have a lot of GPIOs. So... they used the 8 GPIOs of PortA in a R-2R configuration as a shitty low-quality 8-bit DAC. The problem with R-2R DACs is that the more bits of precision you want to get out of them, the more precise resistors you need. For 7-bit precision you already need 1% accurate resistors -- not cheap. For 8-bits as we have here, you'd need 0.4% accurate resistors -- even more not cheap. And when making the Pixter Classic, Fisher-Price was very much trying to be cheap. So ... they just used cheap +/-5% resistors -- the embodiment of YOLO.

A dual-comparator is used -- one per touch plate. The other inputs are both connected to the R-2R ladder. Binary search is used to "measure", first the input value is compared to 0x80. If input is higher, next guess is 0xc0, else next guess is 0x40. You get the idea. In 8 comparisons, the precise matching value can be found. For some very loose definition of the word "precise". The same is done for the other plate, and for Z-sample. There is no interrupt mode here. Pixter Classic just polls the pen when the current game asks for it.

The manual for the device tells you to calibrate the touch panel as soon as you put in new batteries, and with the per-device variance in the BJTs it makes sense. The calibration is saved in EEPROM and remains good until you choose to recalibrate. But it would be a shitty out-of-box experience if this really was required. Here is where some perverted cleverness happens. There is no normal 4-wire-panel operation mode where you drive the same point as you sample, but Pixter Classic does this. They drive-and-sample both of the points to ground and to VCC and thus can calculate the voltage drop of the transistors in this particular device and can thus approximate a valid-ish calibration out of the box. This is done if the EEPROM calibration area is empty. I have many doubts that the extra engineering hours needed to come up with this cleverness cost less than the savings on the FETs. I suspect Fisher-Price lost money on this tradeoff. But it is a cool hack, and like all cool hacks, it is very nice once you understand it, and infuriating when you are reverse engineering and simply cannot grok why someone would use an ADC to sample the voltage at the collector of an open transistor.

Pixter Plus and Pixter 2.0

After Pixter Classic (which was actually just called "Pixter", but I needed a better name for it and now that you've spent an hour reading my article and are invested, I am sure you'll adopt my nomenclature too), there were two follow-on products. Curiously, while they both are upgrades compared to the Pixter Classic, neither of them is an upgrade on the other. I would have guessed that they came out the same time, and consumers had to choose which feature set they liked more, but that is not how history played out.

Pixter Plus

Pixter Plus came out a year after Pixter Classic. It featured a very similar physical shape, played the same games using the same cart slot, and had a similar number of those infuriating indescript black blobs on its motherboard. What it did have over the Classic is a hole in its front plate where one could insert a new "lightbulb" attachment, which was literally a tiny incandescent lightbulb on a flexible stalk. Its main purpose was to make your parents buy batteries for your Pixter at twice the normal rate, but it also had the side-effect of allowing you to somewhat see the screen in the dark. The number of built-in activities was also increased to include a few games in addition to drawing activities. Additionally, Pixter Plus has 128-times the storage of Pixter Classic, allowing more than one image to be stored in memory. Another cool feature was that you can customize the power-on animation of your Pixter Plus by picking it out of a large set of options, and adding your name or another text to it. I guess kids do love customizing their things. Some of the extra NOR flash memory is spent on this new functionality. The user interface limits the number of stored images to less than 163, but there is space for 163 images, if one were to pack them optimally. Of course no such packing is done. The memory chip somewhat resembles the SST39SF010A, but is not exactly a perfect match. Naturally, the chip is behind an internal BEX, since the SoC still lacks any way to address such a large memory directly.

From a technical standpoint, the SoC is upgraded, now it has 4KB of RAM instead of the 2KB that the Pixter Classic SoC had. This allows for a few more temporary buffers for the software to use, and thus a few more effects are possible, like flood-fill and some image rotations. The cool animations the Pixter does for erasing are also improved, adding a few new ones. The number of melodies in the internal Melody Chip also grew -- while Pixter Classic has just 2, Pixter Plus has 9. Just like Pixter Classic, Pixter Plus runs its SoC at 6MHz, and other than a few changes to which pins do what, it is not much different internally. Dumping the internal Melody Chip was done in much the same way as for Classic.

Pixter 2.0

This one came a year after the Plus, and it is not quite a direct upgrade. As before, some pinouts change. The Melody Chip here also has 9 melodies, but they are distinct from the ones that Pixter Plus has. No idea what the thought process on the melody changes was. The RAM amount stays at 4KB, same as 2.0, the CPU is now at a slower frequency of 5.48MHz, and I guess the extra BEX chip and the 128KB of flash were costing too much -- they are gone like they never existed, Nikolai Yezhov would understand. The hole on the front of the device for the flexible light is gone too, but the feature remains, it is just that the hole is now on the side of the device, since the top of the device now has something else....

The marketing copy claimed that Pixter 2.0 has capabilities to "wirelessly exchange images". Normally, the world "wireless" would imply some sort of ISM radio, but this does not fit into the price profile of the Pixter series, which (as is surely evident by now) was always engineered to cost "as little as possible, minus an extra 10 percent for good measure". But, indeed, Pixter 2.0 has ability to send images wirelessly ... on the 320THz band. Yup... They used a cheap infrared LED and a phototransistor+filter package to send images wirelessly, precisely as promised. How did it work? A PWM unit creates a carrier frequency, and a UART unit frames the data. Connect one pin of a LED to one, the other to the other and you get UART-modulated-carrier-modulated IR blinks. On the receiving end, the phototransistor with a frequency filter, like the kind used in TV remote receivers (such common, so cheap, much economies of scale, wow -- I bet Pixter team was happy) receives the signal and detects that it is modulated by the correct carrier frequency. If so, it will be output on a pin and that goes into the UART's RX input. With some luck, this system can work.

Ideally, if you were designing an IR data exchange protocol, you'd want to add some forward error correction and maybe negotiate the data rate to match conditions. But, that would require a lot more engineering effort than the Pixter team was willing to put into this. I guess we should feel lucky that they at least had the decency to use checksums to avoid receiving random noise as images. Now that Pixters could "communicate", they also can be named. In the save/load dialog there is now a button to give your Pixter a name, and when you send someone an image, they will see who it is from. I suppose the Pixter team imagined a world where there are so many kids around with Pixter 2.0 devices that you would not otherwise know who sent you an image, over the enormous range of "12 inches or less".

The VM had a few opcodes added to it for IR sending and receiving. I worked out some of them, but not all, since it was not necessary. There was a way for games to use IR too. There are two more native callouts (at 0xbf12 and 0xbf15). Again, I did not decode it all, just enough to understand what it is and what it is for. There is more to understand here. Another exercise for the reader. Enjoy!

Pixter Pocket

These each had only one game in them, no cart system, and no IR, preventing any sort of arbitrary code execution on them. They were also non-touch-screen, instead having a D-pad and 3 additional buttons for interactivity. After a lot of searching, I did manage to get my hands on one, but the display was broken, which is not unexpected in a cheap product after 20 years. Opening it showed a board with LABELED black blobs! If only I had known, I would have saved myself some guessing. The main SoC is labeled SPL130A, which is definitely not what runs Pixter Classic (too small of a RAM, etc), but it would have given away the family name and that it is a 6502. The other two black blobs are the row and column drivers for the LCD. There is no Melody Chip here - the device only does simple beeps. In any case, nothing more to be done with this device -- it cannot be programmed and without decapping the chip it cannot be dumped. A later though caused me to read up on a few other family members of this chip, and I suspect that Pixter Classic's SoC might be the SPL133A. The way the datasheet talks about the register 0x000e sounds reminiscent of my discoveries with regards to it. But, of course, I am unable to find the "programming guide" for the SPL13x series, and the datasheet lacks detail. If you have a copy of the programming guide, please reach out. I know the good old PUDN website had it, but sadly ... RIP PUDN.

Preservation

File format

Now that I had decided to properly preserve all things Pixter, I had a few decisions to make. First of all, there was no proper file format for Pixter cart dumps, since until now, nobody had figured out how to dump them properly and completely. This meant that I could define my own. What are the things that every file format needs? First of all, it needs a recognizable magic sequence of bytes as early as possible for easy file type detection. Then, it needs ability to store a file version for future extensibility. Additionally, it should be little-endian since approximately all modern desktop machines are such. Finally, it needs extensibility to represent all types of the thing it proports to store. What does a file format NOT need? Hard-to-parse-in-C nonsense like XML or ZIP. Well, OK, on with my format...

The first 15 bytes of the file are the magic sequence. It is the ASCII string PIXTER CLASSIC! for a dump of a Pixter Classic cart, PIXTER COLOR!!! for a dump of a Pixter Color cart, and PIXTER MULTI!!! for a dump of a Pixter Multimedia cart. Next comes a byte that versions the file format. Currently it must be precisely 0x01. Then comes a 32-bit value representing the number of Melody Chip melodies in this dump. Then come that many 32-bit offsets (from file start). If an offset is zero then this melody does not exist (the list of melodies need not be dense). Each melody runs until the start of the next thing in the file (next melody, code, or file end). After these melody offsets come three more offsets. The first is for "code 0", the second is for "code 1", and the third is for file end. If the file is valid, the very first nonzero offset in the file should point to just past all of these offsets, and the very last offset will be equal to file length.

Melodies are stored as unsigned 8-bit samples at 22,050Hz, mono -- trivial to play. Now, what is "code 0" and "code 1"? For Pixter Color and Pixter Multimedia, there is no "code 1". There, "code 0" contains the complete dump of the cart's ROM. For Pixter Classic, "code 0" is the dump of the entire cart ROM, "code 1" is the dump of the area that the cart presents in the address range 0x2000..0x3fff. Since technically, there is no requirement that this memory area be present in the main ROM, it is dumped separately as well, for proper emulation.

I use the same file format to dump the consoles' ROMs themselves. You can grab all the console ROMs here. I did not host the cart ROMs on my site, my tiny little VPS will not handle it, so grab your bittorent client and click the magnet link. You can also find everything on the Internet Archive: here

Emulating Pixter Color

What good are dumped carts, even if in a fancy new format, if there is no emulator to use them? Well, I suppose you could make more carts, and indeed I did demonstrate that, at least for the game ROMs. I do not know how to replicate the Melody Chips, but I did program an RP2350 to act as one successfully, playing the 22,050Hz samples from an SD card. Still this is not of much use, since Pixters themselves will, over time, become rare. And how will the world go on without the masterpiece that is "Barbie Fashion Show"?! No, this would not do!

How hard could it be to emulate?

Pixter Color, being an ARM device, and the one I had encountered and understood first, was the first to be emulated. I based it on my previous work emulating ARM SoCs for PalmOS 5 devices - uARM. I added support for LH75411, and its various hardware blocks. The built-in ROM booted relatively easily. Getting the touchscreen to work was not easy, though. Pixter ROM's touch code was very touchy about how fast the ADC unit should become busy and how fast it should complete measurements. It took a lot of annoying evenings and a lot of swear words to get it to work. But once it worked, it was glorious! Along the way I learned a bit more Pixter Color history. At boot, a GPIO (PE6) is read. Based on this, the clocking and various timeouts are set. Evidently they considered using a 17.7456MHz crystal in the Pixter Color, and setting that pin high changes all timers and such to make that work. Setting it low sets timers for 18MHz, which is what the Pixter Color final boards have. The one and only button on the Pixter Color (the pinhole "calibrate" button on the back) is mapped to the ENTER key in my emulator.

I spent a lot of time puzzling out how the contrast adjustment that was possible on the Pixter Color via the "save/load image" dialog worked. There was a slider there and it affected the real screen contrast. On an STN screen, such a thing is accomplished by varying an analog voltage provided to the screen. I did not know which VM opcodes were used to do this (yet), and had no way to find easily. I did want to figure it out though. I guessed that it is likely a special opcode. So I added code to uARM to log every opcode run by the VM and build a histogram. Then I ran the emulator a while. I then did the same but also dragged that slider a lot. I then compared the histograms, looking for opcodes that were not in one but present a lot in the other. After some cleanup of the data, I found the SETCONTRAST opcode, and was able to trace where it goes and what it does. It seems that the lower 4 bits of GPIO port H are used to set it. They always output low and their direction setting is what is changed (they are externally pulled up). Trying this on a real Pixter Color proved the theory correct. I also added this to my PalmOS build, which could then also adjust the screen contrast! I did not bother emulating contrast adjustment in the emulator though, since I do not emulate the depressing realities of the display itself. There is no way to emulate the poor viewing angles, the shitty color reproduction, and the questionably-present-at-all contrast of a bottom-of-the-quality-and-price-barrel STN display such as the one in the Pixter Color. You need to experience it yourself! Accept no substitutes!

Saving images is hard

There is flash memory inside the Pixter Color for saving your drawings. It is a normal-ish NOR flash chip that mostly follows JEDEC standard commands, though it differs from the JEDEC spec in how it shows itself to be busy during writes and erases. I deduced the behaviour from disassembly, and confirmed by running my own code on the device. During write or erase it will read as a byte with the top bit clear. Once done, it will read ONCE as a byte with top bit set, after which it will return to read mode and the reads will return actual data at the read address.

Of course, things were never going to be that simple! If you recall from the LH75411 user guide (you DID read the 515-page user guide I linked to, right??), the chip only has 4 external chip select signals. That means (to an approximation) that it can address 4 external memory chips. The first is the internal ROM. The second is the on-board RAM. The third and fourth are wired to the cart slot. So that leaves us with ... zero chip selects still free. I counted them. Twice. So now we need to connect this flash to the SoC. Well, one option is to simply bit-bang it. It is 128KB in size, 8 bits wide. So this would use: 17 address wires, 8 data wires, and 3 control wires (chip select, write enable, read enable). 17 + 3 + 8 = shit ton (that is a shitload in metric, for my european friends)! We cannot just throw GPIOs around like that. We'll run out too fast. So what to do? Well, when all you have is a hammer, every problem looks like a nail. And when in all your previous devices you used the BEX bus, well, I imagine it starts looking pretty attractive as a solution to any problem. Luckily, in this case, it is not an absolutely terrible solution. BEX only needs 10 wires, and can address this NOR flash chip well. Pixter Color does precisely this. It has a BEX bus that has a BEX expander on it which has this 128KB flash behind it. Perverted? Yes? Slow? Also yes!

I wrote an emulator for a BEX expander, wired up an emulated flash behind it, and after some tweaking and tuning, my emulated Pixter was able to save drawings and load them again from virtual NOR flash. I went to take a shower soon after to wash all of ... this... off of me!

Making game carts work

The emulator would not initially even try to detect external carts, even when I attached them to the proper address. It took a little while to find that GPIO PG6 (connector pin 46) had to be high for Pixter to even try. It also checked this pin before every VM instruction. My guess is that this allows detection of cart removal while playing the game. Well, I emulated the pin to be high and it started trying to read the cart.

Adding support for external carts with games took only a little more work after that, since they are just another ROM at 0x48000000. Just as I was done congratulating myself on how easy this was, how well it worked, and what a genius I was, I noted that some games failed to save progress. Hmm... Well, it makes sense that the in-Pixter NOR flash is not used to save game state. True, it can be used to store an image in one game, and load it in another, but this is merely for one image. Game-specific state by definition differs per game, and there is no sane way for them (and all future not-yet-written-at-the-time) games to share the same space. It is after all, not a filesystem, but just a NOR flash. OK. Most games (like Arcade) do not need memory at all. Some do. How was this handled? Hm, this might explain why some carts had another tiny chip inside. It as not labeled, but after some more disassembly, some probing, and some ripping-out-of-hair, it became clear. They use an i2c EEPROM inside the cart to save game state. A fine solution indeed. However, LH75411, being a minimally-featured-at-best chip, which would have omitted the ALU, had the ARM spec allowed it, has no i2c unit. This is no disaster - i2c can be bit banged, and indeed this is what most Pixter Color games that wish to save state do. GPIO D2 is used as SDA, D1 is used as SCL. They are available on the cart connector and, I guess, this use does not conflict with their other potential uses. Figuring this out was 90% of the work. Emulating a bit-banged i2c EEPROM correctly enough to fool the bit-banging code in the games was the other 90% of the work. In any case, it worked...eventually

There were i2c bugs in their bit-banging code. I did not realize this right away, so I spent a lot of time sorting out why my i2c EEPROM emulator was misbehaving. Turns out it was not, their bit-banging code was. It works in the real world due to luck - real EEPROM chips ignore shorter-than-a-byte transmissions, and they can live without a STOP at all, since every START will just become a RESTART and that is weird but likely OK. Here I show you the code that is used to read from an EEPROM. Do you see the issue? Yup... SDA is not made to be an output before signaling STOP, and thus SDA stays high the entire time and no STOP is signaled. I verified this on a real device as well. It is just lucky that their chosen i2c EEPROM - 24C02 is to tolerant of their carelessness. As an extra aside, you'll note that no semblance of ABI is respected in this code. It is not customary in ARM to return status in the Z flag, and yet here we are...

It is also notable that the i2c bit-banging was done in native code by every cart. So how can it work on Pixter Multimedia, where the SoC differs and so does the cart pinout? This was considered. The native callouts use opcode NATIVE_CALLOUT_2C, with selectors 0x06..0x07. Pixter Multimedia's VM, when it sees those selectors used does not call native code in the cart, instead doing the work itself using the proper pins. Thus it is evident that Fisher-Price allocated these numbers in some orderly fashion, to allow this future-proofing. Actually, not bad!

Audio is hard

I wanted audio to work as well. I did not spend weeks reverse engineering those Melody Chips, and more weeks dumping those melodies out of them only to have that all go to waste! In all my previous years of writing emulators, I had never bothered emulating audio fully. Usually I'd only take it far enough to make the emulated SoC happy. This generally means emulating the DMA to get the data from the buffers, and firing properly-timed interrupts on the status of the transfers. Playing actual audio out the host speakers was always something I did not bother with. Mainly, this is because I do not like noise, but also (in no small part) this is because audio is a pain in the ass and I am lazy. You see, the basic primitive of audio playback in modern OSs is not "output this PCM value, until I give you another", while at the emulator's level that is what you'd ideally want. This desire is redoubled when your audio output is fake, like Pixter's. There is no internal DMA unit reading a series of samples from RAM. It is literally code setting PWM registers whenever it wants. No fixed sample rate, no nothing! Stick that into your audio API and see what comes out! OK, fine, in actuality while there is code in the ROM to play back audio at sampling rates not equal to 8KHz, I have found no evidence of that code path ever being used.

Well, I decided to grit my teeth and once and for all figure out how to emit audio using SDL2 (my preferred UI toolkit). Imagine my surprise and elation when I learned that SDL2 indeed has a "output this PCM value, until I give you another" API! The name is less prosaic, of course, but I guess you can never really get ALL that you want. The API is SDL_QueueAudio. Now, queueing one sample at a time is very much NOT performant, efficient, or even sane. But my goal was not to produce an emulator that can be described with any of those adjectives. I am very much producing a reference on how Pixter works and how to emulate it. Someone else, who is more tolerant of audio headaches and emulator frameworks can take this info and spin up a nice MAME module for it. Maybe even you, my dear reader?

In any case, on a fast-enough machine, audio output worked and sound effects in games started playing the proper sounds. Very cool! Melody Chip output does not go via the PWM units, however, it is produced by the Melody Chips directly and mixed into the audio amplifier inputs. Luckily, SDL lets us open multiple output streams and can mix them for us. SDL2, I love you! I wrote an emulator for the Pixter Color Melody Chip, hooked it up to the proper GPIOs for the in-cart Melody Chip (D0 = clock, D1 = data, F6 = isPlaying). Instantiated another one for the in-Pixter one, hooked that up to the other emulated GPIOs -- the ones that are meant for that (F0 = clock, F2 = data, F1 = isPlaying). It worked ... right away, for once! Games now looked and sounded like they did on the real device. At least they did on my fast MacBook, YM*W*V.

That cursed adapter

I knew that emulating Pixter Classic games running on the Pixter Color through the adapter, like the real device can, would be a pain. The whole situation just had that feel of "I know they hacked it together in some terrible way to make it work, it worked, and they never dared to touch it again" that all legacy compatibility situations have. I was not wrong. As you'll recall, Pixter Classic carts expose the BEX bus and a "isPlaying" pin for the Melody Chip. Elsewhere in this increasingly-booklike-article, I noted the pinout of the Classic-to-Color adapter. The BEX bus is all GPIOs to the LH75411. Golly, just what I wanted, more code to write for watching an emulated CPU toggle GPIOs and then trying to decode what it meant or implied by that! One curiosity here that I did not expect was that the internal BEX bus used for the savegame NOR is the same one as the external one used to talk to Classic Carts. They used the chaining ability of the BEX chips to do this. I would probably have appreciated the cleverness of this approach a lot more if it had not taken me so long to finally figure it out. Games started working once I debugged away all the bugs in my GPIO-to-BEX adapter code.

Luckily, Pixter Classic games did not bit-bang any i2c on any GPIOs for their state savings -- the Classic connector had too few pins for that. So instead they included a NOR flash in the cart and wrote to it ... also through the BEX chip. All the carts I opened (a very destructive process, which at this point in time I admit I was beginning to enjoy) used AT29LV010 for this purpose. Seeing an actual labeled chip and not a blob of black epoxy was euphoric, believe me. At this point in time I had had a lifetime's fill of black blobs on green board with no labels! Emulating AT29LV010 was not hard, and Pixter Classic games that saved state started working too!

With some investigation, it was able to find the analog input that the battery voltage goes into for low battery detection (AN8), as well as the divider ratio used (0.24). I then wired up a virtual always-full battery there. You're welcome. The volume knob on the side of the device was also an interesting thing. Now, you would expect that to be an input into the audio amp to set the gain somehow, right? Or simply used to scale audio amp's inputs. NOPE! It is an analog input into the SoC's ADC. The software occasionally samples it and multiplies the output samples by the value. Why? Honestly, I am at a loss for words, this saves no cost, saves no software complexity, and really accomplishes nothing at all. But oh well. The emulated device always sees that knob as being set to maximum volume. I dare say that the Pixter Color emulator was getting close to complete, or at least as close to complete as I cared to make it.

Emulating Pixter Multimedia

This was not a hard task given that Pixter Color was already done. The SoCs are similar, so the main additions were buttons (trivial), a new I2S peripheral in the SoC, and the new DAC. The gods had taken mercy on me, and the DAC was not a black blob, but a nicely laser-labeled TLV320DAC26. It uses I2S for audio data transport and SPI for configuration. The LH79524 has one peripheral that can do SPI. They call it the SSP. Buuuut... it is also the only peripheral that can do I2S. And it supports DMA making audio much saner. So they, predictably, use the SSP to send I2S data to the DAC. The configuration SPI, in a continuation of their tradition of bit-banging everything, is bit banged. The pin usage for this SPI "bus" is M4 = nCS, A6 = MOSI, H2 = MISO, and A7 = CLK. As for the buttons, the "calibrate" button is still mapped to ENTER. Arrow keys map to arrow keys, and "A" and "B" map to .. "A" and "B".

The analog bits are not too complex here either. The ADC/touch controller is similar to the one in LH75411. The battery measurement is multiplied by 0.27 and is applied to AN9 analog input. The volume knob is still merely an analog input as well, it goes to AN4. Curiously, pin 46 on the connector is not polled here. Pixter Multimedia's VM seems to not at all care if the cart is inserted, nor if it is yanked out during play. Curious, but irrelevant in the grand scheme of things.

The new NAND-style carts that are unique to Pixter Multimedia are supported by using the data bus's low 8 bits for data and nWE, nOE, and nCS for control. Basically, they just configure the external ROM interface as x8 and it magically works. NAND needs two more signals actually: CLE and ALE. Cleverer designers than what Fisher-Price could afford usually connect those two signals to some of the higher address bits, and thus all NAND interface becomes writes to one of 3 addresses and reads from one. These guys did not think of that, so instead GPIOs are used. B6 is CLE, B7 is ALE. The "ready" signal is on B1. It is important that the NAND bus idle high and so does the "ready" signal, else the early init code in the Pixter Multimedia ROM will hang. It waits for NAND to be not busy and then issues a ReadID command. If it gets a reply that is not 0xFFFF, it assumes a NAND game is inserted and goes down that path. Else, the previous logic of detecting a Pixter Classic game in an adapter or a Pixter Color game ROM is used.

Despite having a real DAC and DMA to feed it, Pixter Multimedia still has an internal Melody Chip, as I had mentioned. My guess is this was due to institutional inertia, since there is no other sane reason to do this. The game writers, evidently, did get the memo, and all of the NAND-based games that target Pixter Multimedia directly do not have Melody Chips.

Another curious thing that changed is that the shared BEX bus with chained BEX chips is gone. I guess that the BGA package had enough pins to not need this. There is an internal BEX bus used to talk only to the savegame NOR flash, and an external one used to talk to the Classic Cart through the adapter. Why they did not just instead bit-bang the NOR interface directly using those very same extra pins, I do not know. It would have been simpler, faster, and more elegant.

Of course with the switch to the new SoC generation and from a TQFP to a BGA package, the pin assignments for many things changed. The internal BEX bus uses I0..I7 as the data pins, H0 as MC0, H1 as MC1. Very straight forward. The external BEX bus uses A4 as MC0, A5 as MC1, and the data lanes, in LSB to MSB order are: A3, B7, B6, B0, B1, C4, C5, C6. Do not even ask.

Emulating Pixter Classic

This, I did expect to take some time, mostly since I was starting from scratch and not from a ready-built scaffolding of uARM. The initial bits did not actually take long, after all, a complete 6502 emulator in C is just 300 lines on a good day. The periphery of it all took longer. Luckily, I already understood BEX and the datasheet for the GPLB3X, while not being perfectly accurate for Pixter's chip, did help a bit. A lot of experimentation was done on the Pixter Classic itself to help me understand registers that did not match GPLB3X. Once I was able to run native code, I spent a lot of time trying things. This is how I figured out the RAM size, the display configuration registers, and GPIO mappings. I also verified that the chip acts like it has a UART, and self-test code even uses it, but no external trace exposes the UART output signals, implying that likely those pads are not wire-bonded to anywhere. Sad. The one button, same as in Pixter Color -- "calibrate", was wired to the GPIO port bit that it needed to go to.

Of course, the Sunplus 6502 has no i2c interface hardware, so the i2c bus is bit-banged. As before, this is just a tedious exercise of watching GPIOs twiddle and extracting intended meanings out of that. Tedious but not challenging. It took me a while to come to terms that the i2c EEPROM used to store user-drawn images across power cycles was not what it appeared. This chip would respond to four sequential i2c addresses and present a different 256-byte memory array to each. I guess this chip was easier to buy in bulk than a normal garden-variety 2KB EEPROM that does not have split personality issues? Once I understood this, some searching told me that this is likely some clone of 24C08-style EEPROMs, which popularized this sort of perversion.

As mentioned earlier, Some Pixter Classic Carts used an AT29LV010 NOR to save state, and I ported my AT29LV010 emulator code from uARM to here in a few minutes. The shape of the code necessarily changed since in this emulator I let each addressed thing deal with BEX-chip mapping, while in uARM I made a separate BEX module. It did not work right away. Instead I saw jumps to outside of the normal cart ROM map range of 0x4000..0xbfff. I went back to GPBA01B docs, and realized what the 0x2000..0x3fff map is for. Do you see it? It always maps to the first chip select! Even if the current page selects another chip. So when you need to write the NOR flash in the cart, you must select it, thus deselecting the cart's ROM. But then how do you run code to do the write? You could copy it to RAM, but there isn't much RAM. That second window that always maps to the ROM helps here! Adding support for that to the emulator fixed the issue. Story Composer correctly saved and loaded saved stories now. Imagine all the fun you could now have playing it in it 80x80 monochrome glory! I went back and added this to Pixter Color's BEX emulator too, as the same need applied there.

Melody Chip support was more or less the same as in the Pixter Color emulator, as was the general audio support. Again, it was just a matter of seeing the values written to the PWM units and giving those values to SDL_QueueAudio. This got me far enough to see the boot screen, hear the boot jingle, and hear the main menu melody. Touch did not yet work. I did not yet know that it would be more than a week before I would unravel how it was meant to work and emulate it properly.

I described earlier in this page the details of how it works so I will not repeat myself. Let us just say that there were five or six times along the way when I felt like "oh, NOW I get it" only to implement the thing that I "now got" and find that it still did not work. Of course, I could have cheated -- detected that the Pixter ROM is reading pen, and just fake the proper values, but what fun would that be? Instead, my emulator actually emulates the comparator correctly by calculating one input based on the R-2R GPIOs and the other side based on a model of a touch panel and the pen location. This level of emulation detail is unnecessary, but I can be forgiven for having a bit of fun. The practical upshot is that it works, it self-calibrates, manually calibrates, and it is pixel-accurate. I did *not* emulate the 5% resistors' inaccuracy, though.

After 26 years, there is now a fully functional Pixter Classic emulator -- uPixter!

Emulating Pixter 2.0 and Pixter Plus

Not terribly much to say here, actually, since they are quite similar to Pixter Classic. My emulator can be built to emulate either of them and faithfully does that. I really wanted to make sure I understood the IR comms correctly, and what better way to do it than to emulate them? So, if you launch two copies of uPixter with Pixter 2.0 ROMs on the same machine, they will be able to beam images to each other. I did not want to make a UI to configure it, nor add any command line options for it, so, whenever uPixter starts in Pixter 2.0 mode, it will try to listen on UDP port 19180. If it succeeds, it will consider any bytes received as IR data and will send replies by UDP to port 19181. If it fails to listen on 19180, it will listen on 19181 and reply to 19180. Thus two virtual Pixters can beam images to each other. Was this not what you were waiting for your whole life? Ability to draw tiny 80x80 monochrome images in one tiny window, to then send them to another tiny window, as both play the same background melody slightly out of sync with each other? Imagine the hours of fun that could be had!

In all seriousness though, same as with uARM's emulation of Pixter Color and Pixter Multimedia, uPixter is meant more as a reference on how Pixer device work and how to emulate them. I did not seek (and actively continue to NOT seek) to write a full featured and well-UIed emulator. It works, now someone with more forte for writing proper MAME modules can take the info and run with it. Bug you favourite MAME developers and maybe soon you'll have better Pixter emulation options than my barebones emulators

Some final challenges

Emulator development and cart dumping were actually parallel processes, since it took some time and effort to track down all the games. This means that there were many points in time when I thought I was done, only to find yet something else that did not quite work. So it came to be that two games refused to play all their melodies when asked by my melody dumping tools. There was one Pixter Classic game "Music Studio" and a Pixter Color game "Symphony Painter". Both are music related, both have quite a rich set of sounds -- much more so than regular games. A coincidence? I think NOT!

Music Studio

I tackled "Music Studio" first. It played some melodies, but clearly not all since it failed to play a lot of sounds in emulation. I traced the bus and saw that it sometimes asked the Melody Chip to play Melody 0x3c, but no such melody existed. And indeed when it did that, no playback occurred, but then the Melody Chip control bus got weird, with strangely long commands. I simply could not understand what was going on from merely watching the bus. I had to understand the game logic. But, it was written in the weird PixterClassicVM language, for which there was no disassembler. Was... I wrote a disassembler for PixterClassicVM, and you can download it at the bottom of this article. I also wrote one for PixterColorVM, sensing that it would become needed too.

The disassembled code cleared things up a little bit. It seems that to make this very musical game work, they made a custom Melody Chip. It works like a normal one, until it gets asked to play Melody ID 0x3c. Then it switches modes. Lacking any text to draw upon, I simply called this "advanced" mode. The volume requested from the 0x3c command is saved and used for all future playback. From this point on, commands are no longer 9 bits long, as normal commands are. Normal commands are ignored in this mode. Commands are now 24 bits long. Those are logically split into four groups of 6 bits. There is no "loop" mode bit here, and, as I mentioned, no volume setting per-command. Anytime a new advanced command arrives, up to four sounds are played at once. They are mixed together, and the volume scaled by dividing by their number. This avoids overflow when mixing, I guess. The "isActive" bit out of the chip stays active until all four instrument sounds have finished. If some are shorter than others, the longest one determines play time. Of course, a new command can interrupt playback. Sending an advanced command made of precisely 4 requests to play instrument 0x3c exits advanced mode. The precise value of that command is 0xf3cf3c, if you're curious.

You'll note that there are no actual musical notes at play here. The only thing this new mode gives is ability to play a few of a collection of approximately 60 musical-instrument-like sounds concurrently. It is not a fully controllable synth. Still, much more advanced than the usual "play this pre-canned melody" of most games. Now that I understood how to command this chip to give up its secrets, I captured each of the 60-ish samples separately. How to represent this in my file format? How to signal to the emulator that a cart does this? I decided on a simple solution. As all normal carts have at most 63 melodies, melody indices above that are never used. A game that uses such "advanced" Melody Chip stores each of the "advanced" samples at indices starting at 0x100. Recall that the chip also had basic normal melodies, and they occupy normal indices starting at zero.

The emulators (both Classic and Color emulators can play Classic games, so the code has to be in both) detect that a game dump has melodies with indices in the 0x100..0x13b range and emulate an advanced Melody Chip. I found no other games using such a chip, and this actually made me sit down and think some more about the Melody Chips in general. This custom kind of chip further makes it likely that none of the Melody Chips are a stock item. More and more I believed that they are some sort of a Sunplus MCU as well, focused on reproducing music using canned samples and basic math. Sunplus even had such demos in the past. We'll never know, unfortunately, unless someone from Fisher-Price who worked on the Pixter wants to chime in? Or....unless someone decaps and photographs the chip. Want to do that? Let me know!

Symphony Painter

OK, I admit that this one kicked my ass for a few days before I made any useful progress. My previous code that understood the Melody Chip interface was easily able to adapt to the "advanced" Melody Chip of "Music Studio"'s longer 24-bit commands. But here, it was seeing nonsensical variable-length commands, and that is not all. Generally when I write emulators, I will write my code to test any assumption I had made, and to fail very visibly if one is violated. One of the Melody Chip protocol assumptions was that DATA is captured on the rising edge of CLOCK. it has no business changing between there and the falling edge. None at all, but here it was, doing precisely that, causing my emulator to throw up its metaphorical arms and self-destruct. This led me to the solution, eventually...

Some disassembly and brain-against-the-wall-beating later I concluded that indeed this was intentional The data transfer here was DDR - both edges of the clock signal were used. Also, it was much faster that the normal or the advanced Melody Chips, which took 16ms per bit (62bits per second effective rate). The clock for this Melody Chip, which I had started calling MelodyChipXL ran at 1.72KHz - 28x faster. As before, there was a start pulse on the DATA line, but this time it was shorter too. It was only 305us of high state and the same of low. Then the data came, captured both on the rising and the falling edges of the clock. A LOT of data! Each command was 72 bits in length! Thanks to the faster data rate and the DDR transmission, however, it only took 1/7 the time of a normal Melody Chip command. It was not obvious to me at the time why there was a need for such drastically increased data rate.

Having understood the basic structure of the physical layer, I taught my emulator to capture the proper commands, and I also spent some time playing the game on a real Pixter Color, capturing the commands and the produced audio. In fact I think that a few hours of play and capture was required to refute or verify the various theories I had had. Eventually, I was able to convince myself of what was going on. This chip is the REAL deal! It can play up to 8 notes concurrently using a selection of a dozens of instruments, and it can play different notes in each instrument. This is basically a mini-synth! It was not until I had it play me "Yankee Doodle" under my command in a bugle voice that I convinced myself that I was correct. But I was!

If this was not enough, this chip also had two modes. In one mode, it acted a normal Melody Chip, where it plays long melodies automatically, outputs "isPlaying" signal, and acts mundane in all other ways. Even in this mode, it only accepts commands in the DDR 72-bit format, thus distinguishing it from the "advanced" chip discussed before, whose modes included different comms protocols. It can be switched into the MIDI mode where it plays musical notes on various instruments using a special command. It can be switched out of the MIDI mode too, of course. In the MIDI mode, the "isPlaying" signal instead is used for synchronization and toggles every "time unit" of music played. What is a time unit? It is the length of a 1/16th note. Other note lengths possible are 1/8, 1/4, 1/2, and full notes. But how long is a 1/16th note? That can also be varied. Like I said - it is quite fancy!

The structure of the command is pretty straightforward (easy to say now that I understand it). The 72-bit command is made of 8 pieces, each 9 bits long. Each describes a note to play, an instrument to use, and the note duration. The first slot is also special in that it may contain commands. Anything command-like in any other slot is ignored. The parsing of the command slot is also quite strange. I'll describe it in detail. If it sounds weird reading this, believe me, it sounded even weirder sorting it out. And if along the way you say "there is no way someone designed this like this, surely you got it wrong?" Well, I tested everything I write here and verified it. Why it was done this way, I do not know however. I know of no sane person who'd do this.

First, the chip considers the top 6 bits of the command -- a command with the top 6 bits set to all ones, will switch modes. If the lower 3 bits are zeroes (command 0x1f8), the chip will switch into normal Melody Chip mode. Any nonzero value in the lower 3 bits switches into MIDI mode.

In melody mode, only the first piece is used, all others are zeroes. The top 6 bits are the MelodyID to play, and the bottom 3 are settings. 0b001 = play in a lop, 0b111 = stop playback right now, any other value will be treated as "play once"

In MIDI mode, the lower 3 bits are considered first. If they are 0b111, then this is a speed-change command. The upper 6 bits are the new speed. While 6 bits can represent a lot of values, only values 0..6 are used. I tested others as well, though. They all produce unique speeds, but I suspect that after index 5, the chip is just reading garbage past the end of its "speed table". That explains the index 6 being out of range. And indeed in the game, the speed slider does cause a slightly slower playback at speed 6 than 5. A bona-fide bug! The folowing table shows the duration of one "time unit" for each speed setting I bothered testing. Values were captured 8 times and averaged. Note that the Melody Chip has no precise oscillator nor is there a clock input, so the base timekeeping is likely an RC-oscillator which drifts with supply voltage, temperature, and the phase of the moon.

SETTING 0	1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9	10	11	12	13	14	15	16	17	18	19
TU length(us) 246.423	197.213	197.213	147.938	134.411	123.319	197.279	412.185	406.767	401.544	396.100	390.860	385.587	380.101	374.853	369.606	364.179	358.900	353.633	348.174

Assuming that speed "6" is an error, the other numbers look round enough. Assuming further that 246ms was meant to be 250ms, and assuming common music BPM values, we can theorize that speed 0 is 60BPM and speed 5 is 120BPM. the others line up (ish) to be 80, 90, 100, 110.

If the last 3 bits of the command are 0b110 instead, this command assigns an instrument for each channel of the 8 that there are. The top 6 bits from each channel's data piece are the instrument ID to use. Nonexistent instruments are silent, and due to the encoding, at most 63 instruments are possible. Only 40 actually exist. I am not a musician so I did not attempt to identify instruments by sounds. You can download the PCI file, split out the sounds, and go wild doing that.

If the last 3 bits of the command are 0b101, this command causes all notes currently playing to stop right now!

If none of the above conditions are matched, then the packet of data is a note for each channel to play. The top 6 bits are the note, with zero meaning "none". The bottom 3 bits are the note duration, where zero means "one time unit" aka 1/16th note, 1 means "two time units", aka 1/8th note, and so on till 4, which represents a full note, 16 time units in length. Values between 5 and 7 produce nonsensical lengths, again, I assume we simply are causing the chip to read past its internal "note length table". I measured them nonetheless. A duration request of 5 produces a note of 188 time units, a duration request of 6 produces a note of 141 time units, and a duration request of 7 produces a note of 2 time units. Note that durations of 5, 6, and 7 are only possible on channels 1..7, on channel 0 they will be treated as commands and cause the behaviours I described earlier instead.

To allow for some jitter in Pixter code, the next note to be played in any channel can be loaded in advance, but only during the very last time unit of the current note. Any notes loaded before this time are simply ignored. If no note is queued when the current note ends, the current note will keep playing for 15 more time units, but if no notes are queued for any channels, the "isPlaying" sync signal stops toggling every time unit. It can be thought to toggle only if a scheduled note or a piece thereof was played.

WOW, so how to capture all of this correctly and how to emulate this? It might be tempting to say that capturing one note of each instrument is enough, and it can be then resampled to play various notes, since the only difference between notes is the frequency, right? Not even remotely! Every key on the piano produces a different-pitched sound, but they all die down at the same rate. If we captured a low key and played it 2x to move it up an octave, it would also die down 2x as fast, which is wrong. Speed of playback, however, should not affect this, but will affect note lengths themselves. Proper synths store a waveform per-instrument as well as an envelope (a volume-per-time table basically). I was NOT going to attempt to reverse engineer how this black blob of a chip synthesized its instrument sounds. There are only 63 possible instruments, and 63 possible notes for each. Why not simply capture each one. This completely eliminates any guesswork and allows emulating this chip across all possible inputs. But how long should each capture be? Well, the longest possible time unit that is not a glitch is 246.423ms. The longest possible note is 16 time units long, and if no command is sent in time, it will play for 15 time units longer. Thus the longest possible duration needed is 7.6 seconds. How much data would that be exactly? 7.6 sec * 63 instruments * 63 notes * 22050 bytes/sec = 634MB. Ooof! However, while the 15 time units of playback past deadline is a verifiable fact, I never saw the game use it, so I decided that capturing 6 seconds per instrument-note is enough (500MB), so I did that. So sue me!

The normal melodies were also captured. How is THIS stored in the PCI file? Well, the idea is the same as for "advanced" Melody Chips. The base index is now 0x200, while the non-instrument melodies are stored, again, at index 0 and on. To make math easier, each instrument is allocated 64 slots, so the Nth note of the Mth instrument is always index 0x200 + 64 * M + N melody in the PCI file. The logic to implement the MelodyChipXL was quite complex, but after all this, the game worked perfectly, which is awesome!

Same as before, I found no other carts using such a Melody Chip, and with how fancy this one is, and how it parses commands, I again caught myself thinking that this is clearly not a purpose-build piece of hardware but a microcontroller-in-hiding. Surely, purpose-build hardware would have been designed more competently. Who would design a chip for sale that parses commands as: first consider the top 6 bits, if not a specific value, consider the bottom 3, if not one of specific values, again consider the top 6 bits. How would the sales people for such a hypothetical product show their faces in public? How would the FAEs avoid apologizing profusely? No! This is almost certainly an MCU designed by the Pixter team, or for them. There is one problem with this theory. I would expect the output to be a mix of some PWM channels, since real DACs are uncommon in cheap MCUs. Since it is nontrivial to implement a large capacitor on silicon, and I saw no capacitors near this chip's output, I would have expected to see the PWM-as-a-DAC characteristic output, but the output was real analog without any high-frequency artefacts. Yeah... I don't know.

Pixter Camera

There was also this one cart that would be extra-hard to emulate, I knew -- the Pixter Camera. Officially billed as a "color" camera, I had no way to ascertain it since the Pixter Color's screen is barely able to display anything at all. I had hoped that I could try on the TFT Pixter Color. The camera cart did not work on it! I tried on the Pixter Multimedia! No joy either. It seems like the Pixter Camera only works on the original Pixter Color. This was a curious failure in the ecosystem which was clearly well designed for backwards compatibility. On one hand, it makes sense, Camera is a complicated hardware device which must be interacted with natively. On the other hand, i2c was like that too, and they found a way to make it work on Pixter Multimedia. What gives?

The Pixter Color Camera cart seems to have a lot of VM code and looks normal in all ways, except ... on boot it immediately jumps to native code and never again runs the ROM VM interpreter. What? Why? Then why have all that VM code in the cart? More research followed. So... the cart loads its own code to RAM and then runs it. Its own code is ... seemingly the very same VM interpreter, with a few opcodes added and slightly different setup. Why not just use NATIVE_CALLOUT_28 and NATIVE_CALLOUT_2C? Can you guess? The normal VM always runs in 8-bits-per-pixel paletted mode. But camera needs real colors. LH75411 can display 12 bits per pixel color. As the stock VM does not at all expose that capability, a new VM was needed. Also this is why it is incompatible with other hardware. Both the TFT Pixter Color and the Pixter Multimedia set up their display controllers entirely differently. The hardware is newer than the code in the cart and thus the code knows nothing about driving the new hardware. Again, a depressing failure.

Curiously, this cart COULD be updated. Unlike all others, the ROM in this one is actually a garden-variety NOR flash chip. I found no evidence that any such updates ever existed, but surely this was intended, since the NOR flash is more expensive than the blob-mask-ROM chip that all other carts have.

Well, we can at least discuss how the camera should and could work: There are two chip-select pins going into cart. One must necessarily go to the ROM, the other is for "other uses". Camera is such use. Logical so far... I did not reverse engineer more in this direction, since emulating the camera is somewhat meaningless. Emulating a readable memory at 0x4c000000 is enough for the ROM to run. Perhaps someone else will take it further? (wink wink)

Preserved and not-yet-preserved Games

Which carts are Dumped? Thanks to Josh's efforts -- almost all of them. Along the way he even found what was (I think) was a marketing cart - complete outside, but entirey unpopulated untouched inside. Since the PCB is part of what holds a cart in the Pixter, a dummy cart still needed a PCB. What a rarity!

Pixter Classic

Action Art
Arcade
Art Safari
Barbie Fashion Show
Cool Wheels - Car Creations
Crazy Word Factory
Dinosaurs Dino Draw
Discovery Kids Dinosaurs
Disney Fun
Enchanted Princess
Learning Fun
Learning Fun 2
Maze Mania
Monster Shop
Music Studio (this one has a special Melody Chip)
Music Video Creator
On the Go Games
Rescue Heroes Mission Masters
Rocket Power
SpongeBob SquarePants Aqua Adventure
Sports Software
Story Composer
The Powerpuff Girls
Toy Designer
Pixter Color

Mucha Lucha!
Alphabet Forest (melody 6 never ends, even if not asked to loop)
Color Arcade
Arthur's Birthday
Arthur
Color Barbie Fashion Show
Barbie 2 Writing
Cars
Clifford
Digital Camera
Creative Genius
Cyberchase
Color Dinosaurs DinoDraw
Dora the Explorer
Global Passport
Hot Wheels
Just Grandma and Me
Math Mansion (melody 6 never ends, even if not asked to loop)
Pet Shop
Mazes, Puzzles & Games
Color Rescue Heroes Mission Masters
Scooby-Doo
Spongebob Squarepants 2: Math Mania
SpongeBob Squarepants Color Aqua Adventure
Starter Learner Game
Symphony Painter (this one has a very special Melody Chip)
Teen Titans
The Fairly OddParents
Word Island (melody 17 never ends, even if not asked to loop)
Pixter Multimedia

The Best of Dora with Cartoon Creator Software
The Best of Monster Jam World Finals 4 with Video Creator Software
The Best of SpongeBob SquarePants with Cartoon Creator Software
The Best of Winter X Games with Video Creator Software
Walking with Dinosaurs with Scene Creator Software
Winx Club with Scene Creator Software
The Best of Yu-Gi-Oh!

Which games are not yet dumped? Only a few -- the ones that seem to never pop up on eBay, somehow. If you have one of these, or another game not listed in the list above please reach out.

Pixter Classic

Pirate's Treasure
Pixter Color

Atomic Betty
The Angry Beavers
Pixter Color

The Best of Friday Night Nicktoons with Cartoon Creator Software
The Best of LazyTown with Video Creator Software

Downloads

In addition to the various things linked to directly in the article, here is a code drop. Inside you'll find a few directories, each with its own license file.

ClassicDisasm

This is the disassembler for the classic games. It needs a raw binary flash dump. You can get that out of a PCI file. It produces output similar to the following. It is passable for game analysis and debugging.

0049e8: sub_0049e8: 0049e8: 47 MEMRD8 [0x07] ;CALL from loc_00506f ;CALL from loc_007aee ;CALL from loc_00691e ;CALL from loc_006917 ;CALL from loc_0061c9 ;CALL from loc_0061c2 ;CALL from loc_005a8d ;CALL from loc_005a86 0049e9: 00 PUSHIMM8 0x00 0049ea: c8 IS_EQ8 0049eb: f2 9f 4a BEQZ loc_004a9f 0049ee: 48 MEMRD8 [0x08] 0049ef: f3 01 02 4a SWITCHJMP 0x01, loc_004a02 0049f3: 03 PUSHIMM8 0x03 0049f4: ae PLAY_ADPCM 0049f5: 04 PUSHIMM8 0x04 0049f6: 9f SPECIAL_9F 0049f7: 00 PUSHIMM8 0x00 0049f8: 16 PUSHIMM8 0x16 0049f9: b0 MEMWR8 0049fa: ff DROP_TOP 0049fb: 04 PUSHIMM8 0x04 0049fc: 21 PUSHIMM8 0x21 0049fd: b0 MEMWR8 0049fe: ff DROP_TOP 0049ff: f0 9c 4a BRA loc_004a9c 004a02: loc_004a02: 004a02: f3 02 15 4a SWITCHJMP 0x02, loc_004a15 ;BRANCH from loc_0049ef 004a06: 03 PUSHIMM8 0x03 004a07: ae PLAY_ADPCM 004a08: 05 PUSHIMM8 0x05 004a09: 9f SPECIAL_9F 004a0a: 00 PUSHIMM8 0x00 004a0b: 16 PUSHIMM8 0x16 004a0c: b0 MEMWR8 004a0d: ff DROP_TOP 004a0e: 04 PUSHIMM8 0x04 004a0f: 21 PUSHIMM8 0x21 004a10: b0 MEMWR8 004a11: ff DROP_TOP

ColorDisasm

This is the disassembler for the color games. It needs a raw binary flash dump. You can get that out of a PCI file. It produces output similar to the following. It is passable for game analysis and debugging.

480052ba: sub_480052ba: ;CALL from loc_48007b92 480052ba: 0000 PUSHIMM #0x0000 480052bc: 297f 0087 NTV_CALL_2C #0x0087 ; push(i2_EEPROM_READ(pop())) 480052c0: 0aa6 IS_EQ push, pop, #0x00a6 480052c2: 00be PUSHIMM #0x00be 480052c4: 297f 0087 NTV_CALL_2C #0x0087 ; push(i2_EEPROM_READ(pop())) 480052c8: 0a6a IS_EQ push, pop, #0x006a 480052ca: 2960 AND 480052cc: f061 BEVEN loc_48005390 480052ce: 0001 PUSHIMM #0x0001 480052d0: 297f 0087 NTV_CALL_2C #0x0087 ; push(i2_EEPROM_READ(pop())) 480052d4: 24ff 0202 STH MEM16[#0x00404] 480052d8: a800 STRH #0x00, LOCAL_VARS16[#0x00] 480052da: loc_480052da: ;BRANCH from loc_480052e6 480052da: 2d00 RD_LOCAL LOCAL_VARS16[#0x00000] 480052dc: 0e20 IS_LT push, pop, #0x0020 480052de: f013 BEVEN loc_48005306 480052e0: e003 BRA loc_480052e8 480052e2: loc_480052e2: ;BRANCH from loc_48005304 480052e2: 2ec0 PUSH LOCAL_VARS16[#0x00000]++ 480052e4: 297e DROP_TOP 480052e6: e7fa BRA loc_480052da 480052e8: loc_480052e8: ;BRANCH from loc_480052e0 480052e8: 6502 MUL16 push, LOCAL_VARS16[#00], #0x02 480052ea: 0602 ADD push, pop, #0x0002 480052ec: 297f 0087 NTV_CALL_2C #0x0087 ; push(i2_EEPROM_READ(pop())) 480052f0: 0008 PUSHIMM #0x0008 480052f2: 296e LSL 480052f4: 6502 MUL16 push, LOCAL_VARS16[#00], #0x02 480052f6: 0603 ADD push, pop, #0x0003 480052f8: 297f 0087 NTV_CALL_2C #0x0087 ; push(i2_EEPROM_READ(pop())) 480052fc: 2964 ADD

PalmosLauncherMulti

This builds a cart image for a classic cart that demonstrates running different code on different hardware revisions. On Classic-like devices it shows an image and infinite loops. On Pixter Color it shows a high-res compressed image that is not pixel-doubled as a classic game would normally appear. On Pixter Multimedia it unpacks a huge package to RAM and jumps to it. This can be used as an inspiration for multi-system games that take advantage of all capabilities available in each system safely.

uM23

This builds a cart image for a classic cart that emulates Cortex-M23, and demonstrates a small ARM program that will then run in the emulator on the Pixter Classic/Plus/2.0. Since this is native 6502 code, it will, of course, not work on the Pixter Color/Multimedia. This is considered fine as (1) this is a proof of concept and (2) you do not need to emualte ARM on those - tey are alrady ARM devices.

uARMpixter

This is the ARM emulator for Pixter Color and Pixter Multimedia. You determine which one is emulated by uncommenting one of the lines in the Makefile

#pick a device DEVICE += $(PIXTER) $(LH754XX) devicePixterColor.o #DEVICE += $(PIXTER) $(LH795XX) devicePixterMultimedia.o mmiodev_PixterGpioExpander.o mmiodev_GPIONAND.o nand.o vBitbangedSPI.o i2s_spidev_TLV320DAC26.o

The usage is simple, the first param is the console ROM file (downloadable above in the article), then thefilename for the EEPROM that represents the in-Pixter memory. The file will be created if it does not exist. Then, optionally, a cart ROM to run that game, and then the eeprom name for cart save, if any. SDL2 is needed. Enjoy

The emulator does not draw the under-screen buttons, but they are there and clickable, you just have to imageine them

uPixter

This is the 6502 emulator for Pixter Classic/Plus/2.0. You determine which one is emulated by uncommenting one of th elines in the Makefile

#pick one!!!! CC_FLAGS += -DPIXTER_CLASSIC #CC_FLAGS += -DPIXTER_PLUS #CC_FLAGS += -DPIXTER_2_0

The usage is simple, the first param is the console ROM file (downloadable above in the article), then thefilename for the EEPROM that represents the in-Pixter memory. The file will be created if it does not exist. Then, optionally, a cart ROM to run that game, and then the eeprom name for cart save, if any. SDL2 is needed. Enjoy

The emulator does not draw the under-screen buttons, but they are there and clickable, you just have to imageine them

Appendix A - Pixter Color VM

What follows is my documentation on the VM. This is accurate enough to produce an HLE and to understand/interpret/modify games. Here are some important notes:

immXe this means an X-bit immediate that is extendable. If the value represented by the bits is anything other than all ones, the value given is the value meant. If the value represented is all ones then the very next instruction stream halfword is the value. This makes the instruction longer and allows any 16-bit immediate to be represented by such fields. If an instruction is documented to be two halfwords long already, this extension halfword comes BEFORE the second halfword of the instruction. This is important!
All stack locations are internally stored as 32-bit words and work that way except where specified otherwise. This means that pushing a 32-bit value is possible, but many operations only operate on 16 bits anyways
When used in pseudocode here, push() and pop() are direct stack ops, 32 bits in size. peek() looks at the top 32-bit stack value but does not pop it
popFirst(), popSecond(), popThird(), and so on are pop() operations, named such to make it clear the order of operations. The same applies to push ops with similar names
When used in pseudocode here, MUL16() explicitly and on purpose truncates its results so that only the lower 16 bits are produced..., MUL() does not do that. Other ops not explicitly stated to truncate, do not...
All comparisons are done as unsigned numbers
Memory:

Data memory layout is: [global memory] [local mem of top level func] [local mem of next level func] [local mem of leaf func]
Notation such as MEM16[x] literally means *(uint16_t*)(((char*)MEM) + x), as in a 16 bit vaue as BYTE offset x. this is simpler than multiplying/dividing by 2 everywhere
MEM[] ops addresses global memory
LOCAL_VARS16[] ops address local memory
Function call hides local mem from called func, giving it a new clean sheet starting at zero
Function return unwinds the above
The start of global memory is MEM_START, and is equal to &MEM[0]
The size of global memory, in bytes, is 2 * the value in word pointed to by the word at offset 0x14 from cart start. More on cart headers later
All pointer math depicted in this document is done as if memory was "char-addressed", so &arry_of_u16s[1] - &arry_of_u16s[0] will be 2, not 1 as it would be in normal C. This simplifies explanations.

Pixter Color VM instructions

How to use the opcode table: match an instruction halfword with this table top to bottom till you find a match among the listed bit values. More specific decode options are higher up. This gives you instruction format. The scroll down to the docs for that instruction format to see what the instr is.

TYPE/BITS	15	14	13	12	11	10	9	8	7	6	5	4	3	2	1	0
TYPE A	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	imm9e
TYPE B	0	0	0	op	imm8e
TYPE C	0	0	1	0	0	op	imm8e
TYPE D	0	0	1	0	1	0	0	0	imm8e
TYPE E	0	0	1	0	1	0	0	1	0	op
TYPE F	0	0	1	0	1	op	imm5e
TYPE H	1	0	1	0	op	imm5	imm6
TYPE J	1	0	1	1	imm12e
TYPE K	1	1	0	imm13e
TYPE M	1	1	1	1	1	imm11
TYPE L	1	1	1	op	imm11
TYPE G	op	mode	B	A

TYPE A instrs

There is only one TYPE A instruction - PUSHIMM. It pushes a given immediate unto the stack.

TYPE B instrs

Type B instructions are mostly ALU ops with immediate or memory right-hand-side operands.

op	name	use	notes
00010	AND	push(pop() & imm8e)
00011	ORR	push(pop() | imm8e)
00100	EOR	push(pop() ^ imm8e)
00101	UMOD	push(pop() % imm8e)
00110	ADD	push(pop() + imm8e)
00111	SUB	push(pop() - imm8e)
01000	MUL16	push(pop() * imm8e)
01001	UDIV	push(pop() / imm8e)
01010	IS_EQ	push(pop() == imm8e)
01011	IS_NE	push(pop() != imm8e)
01100	IS_GT	push(pop() > imm8e)
01101	IS_GE	push(pop() >= imm8e)
01110	IS_LT	push(pop() < imm8e)
01111	IS_LE	push(pop() <= imm8e)
10000	LDW	load word	push(MEM32[imm * 2])
10001	STW	store word	MEM32[imm * 2] = pop()
10010	AND	push(pop() & MEM16[imm8e * 2])
10011	ORR	push(pop() | MEM16[imm8e * 2])
10100	EOR	push(pop() ^ MEM16[imm8e * 2])
10101	UMOD	push(pop() % MEM16[imm8e * 2])
10110	ADD	push(pop() + MEM16[imm8e * 2])
10111	SUB	push(pop() - MEM16[imm8e * 2])
11000	MUL16	push(pop() * MEM16[imm8e * 2])
11001	UDIV	push(pop() / MEM16[imm8e * 2])
11010	IS_EQ	push(pop() == MEM16[imm8e * 2])
11011	IS_NE	push(pop() != MEM16[imm8e * 2])
11100	IS_GT	push(pop() > MEM16[imm8e * 2])
11101	IS_GE	push(pop() >= MEM16[imm8e * 2])
11110	IS_LT	push(pop() < MEM16[imm8e * 2])
11111	IS_LE	push(pop() <= MEM16[imm8e * 2])

TYPE C instrs

Type C instructions do memory loads or stores, loads load from memory and push to stack, stores pop from stack and store to memory. You'll note that address generatation for these is the same for both laods and stores and the "is store" bit is the top of "op"

op	name	use	notes
000	LDH	load halfword	push(MEM16[imm * 2])
001	LDHi	load halfword indexed	push(MEM16[imm * 2 + pop() * 2])
010	LDHd	load halfword dereferenced	push(MEM16[MEM16[imm * 2] * 2])
011	LDHdi	load halfword dereferenced indexed	push(MEM16[MEM16[imm * 2 + pop() * 2] * 2])
100	STH	store halfword	MEM16[imm * 2] = pop()
101	STHi	store halfword indexed	MEM16[imm * 2 + popFirst() * 2] = popSecond()
110	STHd	store dereferenced	MEM16[MEM16[imm * 2] * 2] = pop()
111	STHdi	store dereferenced indexed	MEM16[MEM16[imm * 2 + popFirst() * 2] * 2] = popSecond()

TYPE D instrs

There is only one TYPE D instruction - PUSHLONG. This is a two-word instruction, it pushes the value equal to the immediate encoded in the instruction (extended as needed), shifted left 16, plus the value of the very next inbstruction stream halfword. This means that many 24-bit constants can be pushed using 4 bytes of instruction, and any 32-bit value can be pushed using 6 bytes of instruction. Recall the ordering of the extended first instruction halfword vs the second halfword.

TYPE F instrs

This format encompases more ALU ops, mostly targeting global memory and locals. It also includes some indexing helpers

op	name	use	notes
001100	PREINC_MEM	++global	push(++MEM16[imm5e * 2])
001101	PREDEC_MEM	--global	push(--MEM16[imm5e * 2])
001110	POSTINC_MEM	global++	push(MEM16[imm5e * 2]++)
001111	POSTDEC_MEM	global--	push(MEM16[imm5e * 2]--)
010000	AND	MEM16[imm5e * 2] &= pop()
010001	ORR	MEM16[imm5e * 2] |= pop()
010010	EOR	MEM16[imm5e * 2] ^= pop()
010011	UMOD	MEM16[imm5e * 2] %= pop()
010100	ADD	MEM16[imm5e * 2] += pop()
010101	SUB	MEM16[imm5e * 2] -= pop()
010110	MUL16	MEM16[imm5e * 2] *= pop()
010111	UDIV	MEM16[imm5e * 2] /= pop()
011000	getLocalAddr	pointer-ish math	push((&LOCAL_VARS16[imm5e * 2] - MEM_START) / 2)
011001	getLocalAddrIdx	push((&LOCAL_VARS16[imm5e * 2] - MEM_START) / 2 + pop())
011010	AND	push(pop() & LOCAL_VARS16[imm5e * 2])
011011	ORR	push(pop() | LOCAL_VARS16[imm5e * 2])
011100	EOR	push(pop() ^ LOCAL_VARS16[imm5e * 2])
011101	UMOD	push(pop() % LOCAL_VARS16[imm5e * 2])
011110	ADD	push(pop() + LOCAL_VARS16[imm5e * 2])
011111	SUB	push(pop() - LOCAL_VARS16[imm5e * 2])
100000	MUL16	push(pop() * LOCAL_VARS16[imm5e * 2])/td>
100001	UDIV	push(pop() / LOCAL_VARS16[imm5e * 2])
100010	IS_EQ	push(pop() == LOCAL_VARS16[imm5e * 2])
100011	IS_NE	push(pop() != LOCAL_VARS16[imm5e * 2])
100100	IS_GT	push(pop() > LOCAL_VARS16[imm5e * 2])
100101	IS_GE	push(pop() >= LOCAL_VARS16[imm5e * 2])
100110	IS_LT	push(pop() < LOCAL_VARS16[imm5e * 2])
100111	IS_LE	push(pop() <= LOCAL_VARS16[imm5e * 2])
101000	RD_LOCAL	read local	push(LOCAL_VARS16[imm5e * 2])
101001	RD_LOCALi	read local indirected	push(LOCAL_VARS16[imm5e * 2 + pop() * 2])
101010	RD_LOCALd	read local dereferenced	push(MEM16[LOCAL_VARS16[imm5e * 2] * 2])
101011	RD_LOCALdi	read local dereferenced indirected	push(MEM16[LOCAL_VARS16[imm5e * 2 + pop() * 2] * 2])
101100	WR_LOCAL	write local	LOCAL_VARS16[imm5e * 2] = pop()
101101	WR_LOCALi	write local indirected	LOCAL_VARS16[imm5e * 2 + popFirst() * 2] = popSecond()
101110	WR_LOCALd	write local dereferenced	MEM16[LOCAL_VARS16[imm5e * 2] * 2] = pop()
101111	WR_LOCALdi	write local dereferenced indirecte	MEM16[LOCAL_VARS16[imm5e * 2 + popFirst() * 2] * 2] = popSecond()
110000	RWLOCALW	read local word	push(LOCAL_VARS32[imm5e * 2])
110001	WRLOCALW	write local word	LOCAL_VARS32[imm5e * 2] = pop()
110010	NOP
110011	NOP
110100	PREINC_LOCAL	++local	push(++LOCAL_VARS16[imm5e * 2])
110101	PREDEC_LOCAL	--local	push(--LOCAL_VARS16[imm5e * 2])
110110	POSTINC_LOCAL	local++	push(LOCAL_VARS16[imm5e * 2]++)
11011	POSTDEC_LOCAL	local--	push(LOCAL_VARS16[imm5e * 2]--)
111000	AND	LOCAL_VARS16[imm5e * 2] &= pop()
111001	ORR	LOCAL_VARS16[imm5e * 2] |= pop()
111010	EOR	LOCAL_VARS16[imm5e * 2] ^= pop()
111011	UMOD	LOCAL_VARS16[imm5e * 2] %= pop()
111100	ADD	LOCAL_VARS16[imm5e * 2] += pop()
111111	SUB	LOCAL_VARS16[imm5e * 2] -= pop()
111110	MUL16	LOCAL_VARS16[imm5e * 2] *= pop()
111111	UDIV	LOCAL_VARS16[imm5e * 2] /= pop()

TYPE G instrs

op	operation
00110	AND
00111	ORR
01000	EOR
01001	UMOD
01010	ADD
01011	SUB
01100	MUL16
01101	UDIV
01110	IS_EQ
01111	IS_NE
10000	IS_GT
10001	IS_GE
10010	IS_LT
10011	IS_LE

This format encompases more ALU ops, they do not touch the stack. They are a fast way to operate on low-numbered locals and globals, those thus being "faster". These also can encode small immediates in the instr. Each instr has an "A" field and a "B" field. Those are used differently based on the "mode" field. Actual ALU op is chosen by the "op" field.

mode	functionality
000	#b *op* MEM16[a * 2]
001	#b *op* LOCAL_VARS16[a * 2]
010	MEM16[b * 2] *op* #a
011	MEM16[b * 2] *op* MEM16[a * 2]
100	MEM16[b * 2] *op* LOCAL_VARS16[a * 2]
101	LOCAL_VARS16[b * 2] *op* #a
110	LOCAL_VARS16[b * 2] *op* MEM16[a * 2]
111	LOCAL_VARS16[b * 2] *op* LOCAL_VARS16[a * 2]

TYPE H instrs

This format allows easily loading a small immediate into a global or a local variable.

op	name	use	notes
0	WR_IMM_MEM	global = val	MEM16[imm5e * 2] = imm6
1	WR_IMM_LOCAL	local = val	LOCAL_VARS16[imm5e * 2] = imm6

TYPE J instrs

There is only one instruction of this format. It loads a constant with a given index from the constant table and piushes it onto the stack. The actual operation is push(CONSTANTS16[2 * imm12e + 2 * pop()])

TYPE K instrs

There is only one instruction of this format -- it is the subroutine call. This is a two-halfword-long instruction. The second halfword is composed of two 8-bit fields. The high byte is "A" and the low byte is "B". Note that the first halfword has an extendable immediate, so the second halfword of the instruction might in fact be third. The VM supports function calls with quite a lot of handholding, so the full operation of this opcode is shown here. The field I call "A" determined how many of the values currently on stack are parameters to the called funcrtion. The field "B" is how many locals the calling function has. That the pushed return address is the address of the last instruction halfword is interesting, but actually it makes sense - the return code needs these two values again, so storing the pointer to them is logical. so, what does CALL do?

push(full 32-bit address of last instr halfword)
vPC = CONSTANTS + imm13e * 2 //yes this is correct, constants table will have a jump instr in it
increment LOCAL_VARS pointer by B * 2 (this should hide all local vars of this func from the callee)
move top value on the stack (our return address) BELOW "A" stack slots (those are params)

TYPE L instrs

These three instructions are relative branches. Two are conditional and one is not. A curious fact is that unlike what many CPUs do: "branch on zero" and "branch on non-zero", these are instead "branch on odd" and "branch on even". That is to say that they are "branch on zero" and "branch on non-zero", but they only consider the lowest bit of the stack value. Some interesting uses of this are possible. The encoding of the branch offsets is also interesting. There is no way to encode an offset of zero, and thus no way to encode a one-instruction-long infinite loop. The offset calcultion is as follows: first, sign-extend the 11-bit immediate, then, if it is not negative, add one, this makes the range backwards and forwards symmetrical. Then add twice the resulting value to the address of the current instruction to calculate the destination address.

op	name	use
00	BRA	branch always
01	BODD	branch if pop() & 1
10	BEVEN	branch if NOT pop() & 1

TYPE M instrs

This instr format is used to implement CASE - a switch()-like construct. This instruction format also uses two halfwords, with the entire second one storing the compare-to-value. The actual logic that this instruction executes is as follows. Clearly, the idea is to build a sequence of these to jump over every possible case until the correct one is found, with the switched-on value being on the stack. The jumps can only be forward, further making this the likely intended use-case.

if (peek() != compare-to-value) { vPC = adr_of_this_instr + 2 + 2 * imm11; } else { pop() }

TYPE E instrs

This instr format is used to implement variosu Pixter-specific things, since you noticed that all other instructions are completely generic and have nothing to do with Pixter. Also in here are no-operand opcodes, like RET. Many lines of pseudocode here will references other pseudocode lower down. As 127 possible instrucions are encodeable in thius format, I give their "op" values in hex instead of binary. some instrs are clearly doing nothing useful, and most of those are never called by any game. "USED" columsn lists if an instr is known to be used by any known game.

op	name	used	notes
0x00	PUSH_COLOR_HW_REV	YES	pushes 0 on first rev Pixter Color (STN screen), 1 on second rev (TFT screen)
0x01	???	NO	push(0x105a) - the value is an accident, on multimedia it is 0x02A3C4
0x02	???	NO	nop on color. on multimedia pushes an average of some 4 values in RAM
0x03	???	NO	push(0x1060) - the value is an accident, on multimedia it is 0x02A3DE
0x04	GET_PEN	YES	addr = pop(); MEM16[addr * 2] = x; MEM16[addr * 2 + 2] = y; if (pen is up) {push(0); } else if (pen is onscreen) {push 0xff; } else (pen is in soft buttons) {push softbutton id (1-based)} reset_idle_counter();
0x05	DROP_SECOND_FROM_TOP	YES	tmp = popFirst(); popSecond(); push(tmp);
0x06	DROP_TOP	YES	pop();
0x07	DROP_TOP_TWO	YES	pop(); pop();
0x08	SAVE_FILE_PIECE	YES	push(partial_save(pop())); iterative saving func. allows to show progress. writes flashBuf to offset 0x4000 into internal flash (size 0x6000) broken into pieces to allow UI for "saving". pass bank number (1-based) to begin pass 0 for "continue previous op" returns 0 when done, nonzero when not done
0x09	FLSH_RD_4000	YES	//flashBank = pop(), read 0x6400 bytes from flash offset 0x4000 into flash buffer 0. Each bank is 64KB, it is 1-based (param of 1 produces bank 0 signal to flash)
0x0A	PLAY_AUDIO	YES	type = popFirst(); index = popSecond(); if type is 2, ADPCM is played from object of given index (mask 0x8000 to use ROM object). Else the Melody Chip is controlled and "type" is a bitfield. 0x01 = loop, 0x04 = inPixter (else cart's chip). melodyID number of bits is given by UI setting 8
0x0B	GET_MISC_SETTING	YES	switch(tmp = pop()) { ase 0: push(VOLUME); case 1: push(Melody Chip status /* mask: 0x80 - playing, 1,2,4 - state of sending command and any is as good as any*/); case 2: push (ADPCM_STATE /* nonzero if playing */); case 3: push (global 4-to-8 clut obj idx set by 0x290c); default: push(tmp); }
0x0C	SET_GLOBAL_4_to_8_CLUT	YES	load object with given index (pop()) as the global 4-to-8 CLUT which will be used when none is specified or when it is told ot ignore per-image 4-to-8 clut
0x0D	GETPIX	YES	which = popFirst(); row = popSecond(); col = popThird(); buf = {framebuffer, flashBuf0, flashBuf1, flashBuf2}[which]; push(buf8[row * 160 + col]);
0x0E	SCROLLBUF	YES	val = pop(); which = val / 2, toTheRight = val % 2; scroll {flashBuf0, flashBuf1, flashBuf2}[which] right or left 4 pixels, leftover area unchanged
0x0F	SLOW_DROP_TOP	NO	reads MEM16[pop() * 2], but does nothing with it
0x10	PEEK	YES	push(*(u32*)((popFirst() << 16) + popSecond())) //this directly accesses the HOST memory as a WORD read //on pixter multimedia, only access to GPIO regs is allowed //on pixter color - any addr
0x11	POKE	YES	*(u32*)((popSecond() << 16) + popThird()) = popFirst(); //this directly accesses the HOST memory as a WORD write //on pixter multimedia, a whitelist of two addrs is only allowed //on pixter color - any addr
0x12	SLOWER_NOP	NO	push(pop()); //slower NOP basically
0x13	DROP_TOP_TWO	NO	popFirst(); popSecond();
0x14	BUFFER_LOGICAL_OP	YES	op = popFirst(); numHalfwords = popSecond(); rowStart = popThird(); colStart = popFourth(); srcBuf = {framebuffer, flashBuf0, flashBuf1, flashBuf2}[popFifth()]; dstBuf = {framebuffer, flashBuf0, flashBuf1, flashBuf2}[popSixth()]; offset = rowStart * 160 + col; while (numHalfwords--) { srcHW = dstBuf16[numHalfwords]; dstHW = dstBuf16[numHalfwords]; switch (op) { case 0: dstBuf16[numHalfwords] = srcBuf16[numHalfwords]; break; case 2: dstBuf16[numHalfwords] &= srcBuf16[numHalfwords]; break; case 3: dstBuf16[numHalfwords] |= srcBuf16[numHalfwords]; break; default: dstBuf16[numHalfwords] =~ srcBuf16[numHalfwords]; break; } }
0x15	DRAW_OBJ_IMAGE	YES	flags = popFirst(); dstBuf = {fb,buf0, buf1, buf2}[popSecond()]; row = popThird(); col = popFourth(); objIdx = popFifth(); //image obj is LargerImage*; flags bits: // 0x40 = use in-ROM image instead of cart // 0x80 = use per-image 4-to-8 clut form hear, else current // 0x02 = draw mode is 2 (all others use draw mode 2) // 0x01 = use transparency (taken from "UI setting 2") //draw mode determines the effect of each drawn pixel unto the "DIRTY BUFFER". // mode 0 means no effect // mode 1 sets corresponding bits for each drawn pixel in dirty buf // mode 2 clears them //dirty buf selection is: dstBuf == buf0 ? buf4 : buf3
0x16	NOP	NO	-
0x17	DROP_TOP_THREE	YES	popFirst(); popSecond(); popThird();
0x18	DRAW_CIRCLE	YES	takes 4 params from stack: x0 y0 x1 y1 (x0,y0) is a point on the circle, (x1,y1) is the center
0x19	DRAW_LINE	YES	takes 4 params from stack: x0 y0 x1 y1
0x1A	DRAW_RECT_FRAME	YES	takes 4 params from stack: x0 y0 x1 y1 - corner coords
0x1B	SET_UI_SETTING	YES	settingVal = popFirst(); settingIdx = popSecond(); if (setting < 11) set the given setting (each a u16), see "UI SETTINGS"
0x1C	DRAW_PIX_AND_SET_DIRTY_BUF	YES	drawBuf = {framebuffer, flashBuf0, flashBuf1, flashBuf2}[popFirst()]; drawBuf[popThird() * 160 + popFourth()] = popSecond(); //ALSO update the selected dirty buffer based on current draw mode
0x1D	DRAW_LINE_CONTINUE	YES	takes 2 params from stack: x0 y0 line drawn from newly given coords to coords from previous call to DRAW_LINE_CONTINUE or (x1, ya) of DRAW_LINE
0x1E	GET_PEN_2	YES	same as GET_PEN_2 but does not reset idle timeout
0x1F	MANUAL_CALIBRATE	NO	read 4 halfwords starting at MEM16[pop() * 2] and use them as pen calibration slope/intercept values instead of those calculated from user calibration
0x20	DROP_TOP_THREE	NO	popFirst(); popSecond(); popThird();
0x21	FLOOD_FILL	YES	targets framebuffer. color=popFirst(); row = popSecond(); col = popThird();
0x22/td>	UI_PROCESS_TAP	YES	LayoutID = popFirst(); penLoc = popSecond(); X = MEM16[penLoc * 2 + 0]; Y = MEM16[penLoc * 2 + 0]; if (!LayoutID) push(0) else layout = UI_COLOR_LAYOUT_TAB[LayoutID - 1]; if coordinates in a button described by the Layout, push that button index (1 minimum), if none, push 0
0x23	DROP_TOP_THREE	NO	popFirst(); popSecond(); popThird();
0x24	DROP_TOP_THREE	NO	popFirst(); popSecond(); popThird();
0x25	DROP_TOP_THREE	NO	popFirst(); popSecond(); popThird();
0x26	DROP_TOP_THREE	NO	popFirst(); popSecond(); popThird();
0x27	PUTCHAR	YES	draw a character onscreen using a selected font and coordinates given by SET_TEXT_POS (which will be updated) horizontally only
0x28	SET_TEXT_POS	YES	set text output position: row = popFirst, col = popSecoind(), in pixels
0x29	SET_TEXT_FONT	YES	font used by PUTCHAR is set to peek() - this is an object index
0x2A	CR_SUB_IMG	YES	srcBuf = {framebuffer, flashBuf0, flashBuf1, flashBuf2}[popFirst()]; height=popSecond(); width = popThird; srcRow = popFourth(); srcCol = popFifth(); create a valid LargeImage in flashBuf1 (header width and height as specified, flags 0x88) it contains data form source buffer copied from the supplied rect. Yes indeed this will break if srcBuf1 is specified and source image start row is 0. Also copies-and-inverts the same rectangle from buf4 to buf 5. not sure why
0x2B	SET_TWO_BUFFERS	YES	idx = popFirst(); val = popSecond(); dst1 = {flashBuffer2,flashBuffer3,flashBuffer4}[idx - 1] dst2 = {framebuffer, flashBuf0, flashBuf1, ELSE (incl -1): flashBuf2} memset(dst1, 0, 0xc80); set_halfwordwise(dst2, val, 0x6400);
0x2C	MAGIC	YES	srcBufIdx = popSecond(); dstBufIdx = popThird(); switch (popFirst()) { 0, default: rotate 90 deg CW; 1: h-flip; 2: v-flip; 3: invert; }
0x2D	BUFCPY	YES	srcBufIdx = popFirst(); dstBufIdx = popSecond(); first copies one 0xc80 sized buffer of {flashBuffer 3, flashBuffer 4, flash buffer 5} to another by index, assuming src and dst indices are < 3, then copies one framebuffer sized buffer of {framebuffer, flashBuffer0, f;ashBuffer1, flashBuffer2} to another by index. index >= 3 means "flashBuffer3"
0x2E	DRAW_RAM_IMAGE	YES	similar to DRAW_OBJ_IMAGE, except image is taken from RAM buffer {fb,buf0, buf1, buf2} which is indexed by popFifth(); app is expected to craft a valid LargerImage* header there. After drawing onto the buffer, the 1bpp rectangle from buf 5 at (0, 0) sized (w, h) is copied to (dstCol, dstRow) in buf3, presumably this makes sense when buf5 is the dirty buffer used
0x2F	NOP	NO	-
0x30	RESET	NO	reset the console
0x31	SLEEP	NO	if (pop() == 1 || (pop == 0 && !DOWNCOUNTER)) sleep_no_wakeup(); this is the idle counter check (if param is 0) or a force power off call otherwise
0x32	RDTIME	YES	push the lower 16 bits of the 125Hz incrementing counter
0x33	RSTTIME	YES	clear the 125Hz incrementing counter
0x34	???	NO	nop on color, DROP_TOP on multimedia
0x35	???	NO
0x36	CLRMEM	NO	zero all memory (this will also erase up the stack, etc)
0x37	SELFTEST	NO	two values on stack are params, result is a word on stack. options include checksumming ROM, cart, RAM test, and a few other options
0x38	LSR8UXTB	YES	push ((pop() >> 8) & 0xff)
0x39	UXTB	YES	push(pop() & 0xff)
0x3A	RAND	YES	push(rand() % pop())
0x3B	SET_CLUT_37	YES	directly set CLUT entry #37. B = popFirst, G = popSecond, R = popThird();
0x3C	NATIVE_CALLOUT_28	YES	r0 = popFirst(), r6 = popSecond() jump to CODE_28 in thumb mode. If that code wants to return, it needs to "BX R11", works precisely the same on multimedia
0x3D	GET_BATT_ADC	YES	Average the 4 last battery samples from the ADC and push the result
0x3E	NOP	NO	-
0x3F	NOP	NO
0x40	DROP_TOP	NO	pop()
0x41	FLSH_PRG_RAW	YES	write bytes of flash with bank auto-select but no bank crossings numBytes = popFirst() * 2; bankNo = popSecond(); flashOfst = popThird(), sourceData = &MEM16[popFourth() * 2]
0x42	FLSH_READ_RAW	YES	read bytes of flash with bank auto-select but noo bank crossings into VM mem numBytes = popFirst() * 2; bankNo = popSecond(); flashOfst = popThird(), dstPtr = &MEM16[popFourth() * 2]
0x43	FLSH_ERZ_RAW	YES	erase sectors of flash with bank auto-select but no bank crossings numSec = popFirst(), firstSecIdx = popSecond()
0x44	FLSH_READ_RAWBUF	YES	read bytes of flash with bank auto-select but no bank crossings into buffer numBytes = popFirst() * 2; bankNo = popSecond(); flashOfst = popThird(); dst = known_buffers[popForth()];
0x45	FLSH_PRG_RAWBUF	YES	write bytes of flash with bank auto-select but no bank crossings numBytes = popFirst() * 2; bankNo = popSecond(); flashOfst = popThird(); src = known_buffers[popForth()]
0x46	BUFSEL	YES	pop a value, use it to select the current "BUFFER" to accessed by BUFWR and BUFRD. #0 is framebuffer, 0..7 are flash buffers. any larger value defaults to flash buffer 6
0x47	BUFWR	YES	CURBUF16[popFirst() * 2] = popSecond();
0x48	BUFRD	YES	push(CURBUF16[pop() * 2])
0x49	GETPAL	YES	current pallette in XRGB444 format is written to "flash buffer 7"
0x4A	SETPAL	YES	pop a value to define where to get the palette. bit 15 set in the value means get it from "flash buffer 7", bit 14 set means user built-in palette with the given index. else cart palette of the given index. index is lower 13 bits. palette index is used to find the proper object in the object table.
0x4B	NOP	YES	-
0x4C	FLSH_WR_A400	YES	flashBank = pop(), erase 0x1000 bytes and then write 0xc80 bytes from flash buffer 4 to flash offset 0xA400. each bank is 64K, idx is 1-based (param of 1 produces bank 0 signal to flash)
0x4D	FLSH_WR_B400	YES	flashBank = pop(), erase 0x400 bytes and then write 0x200 bytes from flash buffer 7 to flash offset 0xB400. each bank is 64K, idx is 1-based (param of 1 produces bank 0 signal to flash)
0x4E	FLSH_RD_A400	YES	flashBank = pop(), read 0xc80 bytes from flash offset 0xA400 into flash buffer 4. each bank is 64K, idx is 1-based (param of 1 produces bank 0 signal to flash)
0x4F	FLSH_RD_B400	YES	flashBank = pop(), read 0x200 bytes from flash offset 0xB400 into flash buffer 7.each bank is 64K, idx is 1-based (param of 1 produces bank 0 signal to flash)
0x50	???	NO	pop(); pop();
0x51	SETCONTRAST	YES	SetContrast(MAX(pop(),15); No effect on TFT screens
0x52	BUFCLR?	NO	clear a buffer by index in {flashBuffer 3, flashBuffer 4, flash buffer 5} BUT 0x6400 is cleared (which is much more than buffer size)
0x53	GWT_HW_REV	YES	push 0xa0 on pixter color, 0xb1 on pixter multimedia
0x54	WRDOWNCOUNT	YES	DOWNCOUNTER = lastLoadedValue_downcounter = pop() * 128
0x55	RDDOWNCOUNT	YES	push(DOWNCOUNTER);
0x56	MASKEDIMGADJ	YES	param = pop(), flash buffer 0 is src and dest, flash buffer 4 is mask (one bit per flash buffer 0 byte). bits that are set means corresponding byte is unaffected. also bytes 0x00 and 0xff are unaffected. all others getparam * 16 added to it. if result is >= maskedImageAdjustmentMAxClutVal, maskedImageAdjustmentMaxClutVal is subtracted. This is used to make a part of an image shimmer or fade in/out
0x57	SPRITECOPY	YES	spriteCopy(row = popFirst(), col = popSecond(), toScreen = popThird()) //copies a 25x15 sprite between screen and a 25x15 bytebuffer called SPRITEBUFFER
0x58	SETIMGADJCLUTMAX	YES	maskedImageAdjustmentMaxClutVal = pop()
0x59	NOP_OR_NOT	NO	nop on color, not nop on multimedia
0x5A
0x5B
0x5C
0x5D
0x5E
0x5F
0x60	AND	YES	push(popSecond() & popFirst())
0x61	ORR	YES	push(popSecond() | popFirst())
0x62	EOR	YES	push(popSecond() ^ popFirst())
0x63	UMOD	YES	push(popSecond() % popFirst())
0x64	ADD	YES	push(popSecond() + popFirst())
0x65	SUB	YES	push(popSecond() - popFirst())
0x66	MUL	YES	push(popSecond() * popFirst()) note: does not truncate to 16 bits
0x67	UDIV	YES	push(popSecond() / popFirst())
0x68	IS_EQ	YES	push(popSecond() == popFirst())
0x69	IS_NE	YES	push(popSecond() != popFirstv)
0x6A	IS_GT	YES	push(popSecond() > popFirst())
0x6B	IS_GE	YES	push(popSecond() >= popFirst())
0x6C	IS_LT	YES	push(popSecond() < popFirst())
0x6D	IS_LE	YES	push(popSecond() <= popFirst())
0x6E	LSL	YES	push((popSecond() << popFirst()) & 0xffff)
0x6F	LSR	YES	push((popSecond() >> popFirst()) & 0xffff)
0x70	NOT	YES	push(~pop())
0x71	NOT	YES	push(~pop())
0x72	ADD	YES	push(popSecond() + popFirst())
0x73	SUB	YES	push(popSecond() - popFirst())
0x74	NOP	NO	-
0x75
0x76
0x77
0x78	RET 0	YES	pop top 0/1/2/3 words from stack, grab return address from stack, grab halfword there to know how to decrement LOCAL_VARS ("CALL" instr details), increment it => vPC, re-push those 0/1/2/3 words -- they are the return value(s)
0x79	RET 1
0x7A	RET 2
0x7B	RET 3
0x7C	NOP	NO	-
0x7D	???	NO	pop()
0x7E	???	NO
0x7F	NATIVE_CALLOUT_2C	YES	r0 = halfword from instruction stream (this is a 2-halfword instr) jump to CODE_2C in thumb mode. If that code wants to return, it needs to "BX R11". On pixter multimedia, the callout to cart is only if the second word is >= 0x8d. Else an in-interp call is made (to emulate what known games did on color. Clearly the idea was to allocate "ioctl #s" to each thing done, thus comparison with 0x8d 0x00 - pen config. one param on stack - operation to do 0..2, one return val. operations: 0 - config for pen detect, return val dummy 1 - check for pen detect, return 1 if so, 0 else, if so, reconfig for no more pen detect irq - manual conversations 2- just config for manual conversions, disable pen detect waiting 0x01 - store_halfword_at_Exported_pointer. ((u16*)(EXPORTED_POINTERS[popThird()]))(popSecond()) = popFirst; //specific pointers differ on ROMS 0x02 - load_halfword_at_Exported_pointer push(((u16*)(EXPORTED_POINTERS[popSecond()]))(popFirst())) //should not be common. 0x03 - some display buffer work. firstBuf = {fb,buf0, buf1, buf2}[popFirst()]; pow = popSecond(); col = popThird(); secondBuf = {fb,buf0, buf1, buf2}[popFourth()]; op not well understood 0x04 - some screen effect (and, or, or xor, details to follow) 4 params, no returns 0x05 - partialBufferCopy. dstBuf = {buf0, buf1, buf2, buf7}[popFifth()]; srcBuf = {buf0, buf1, buf2, buf7}[popForth()]; memcpy(dstBuf + 2 * popThird(), srcBuf + 2 * popSecond(), 2 * popFirst();) 0x06 - i2c eeprom write byte. WRITE_EEPROM_BYTE(addr = popFirst, val = popSecond()); 0x07 - i2c eeprom read byte. push(READ_EEPROM_BYTE(pop())) 0x08 - VM restart. does not reboot whole console but restarts the VM by resetting vPC, LOCALS pointer, hardware stack, vStack, etc. To tell code that this happened, 0xAABB is stored to MEM16[0], 0x55AA is stored into MEM16[2]

Pixter Color Cart Header

Cart is seen in the address pace at 0x48000000. this is hardwired on Pixter Color, and while Pixter Multimedia has an MMU, for obvious reasons of backwards compatibility, the cart is also mapped there at the same address. What reasons? Many of the header fields are not offsets burt actual addresses, basd at ... 0x48000000. Only the values that are ever read at all are listed here.

type	ofst	use
u32	0x00	0xAA5566CC - magic
u16	0x04	0x0001 - must be nonzero, not used otherwise, likely format version
u32	0x08	points to a table of pointers to UI_LAYOUT, called UI_COLOR_LAYOUT_TAB
u32	0x0c	address of the constants table (Referred to here as CONSTANTS)
u32	0x10	address of where to start executing - initial vPC
u32	0x14	address of where a u16 is stored saying the number of halfwords of MEM to allocate for this cart
u32	0x18	address of the object table
u32	0x28	code pointer to THUMB code called via NATIVE_CALLOUT_28. referred to as CODE_28
u32	0x2C	code pointer to THUMB code called via NATIVE_CALLOUT_2C. referred to as CODE_2C

Pixter Multimedia Cart Header

Pixter Multimedia Cart header is seen in the 0th page of the 0th NAND block and is muhc simpler. The specified byte amount will be copied from cart start (incl this header) to the given RAM address. Then, with cp15, c1 set to 0x70, an ARM-mode jump will be made to 0x200 + copy destination. This header format is allowed not only on NAND carts but also on normal parallel flash carts.

type	ofst	use
u32	0x00	0xAA5567DC - magic
u32	0x08	copy destination address in RAM
u32	0x0c	copy length minus 4 (in bytes)

Pixter Color VM structures

Object Table

The object tabel lists all objects in the game. It is used as an index to find them. What are objects? Anything that is not code is an object, mostly. Examples are: images, color tables, sounds, etc. Objects themselves do not have a "type", they are each simply a bag of bytes with a start address. Nothing stops the same object from being a sound effect and a color table, if you are clever enough. They do not have a stored size either, like I said - only a start address. The start of the Object Table itself is stores in the cart header at offset 0x18. What is the format of the object table? First there is a word that has the absolute address of the second word. Yes, semi-self-referential. The second word is the number of objects in the table. Then come the pointers to objects. Object indices are one-based so the first pointer is for object number 1, not 0.

Color Tables

A color table is an object of size 514. The first two bytes are unused, after that, come precisely 256 16-bit color entries in XRGB444 format. That is all.

4-to-16 maps

For better storage efficiency, some bitmaps are stored in a 4-bits-per-pixel format, which limits them to 16 colors. But as the console always runs in 8 bits per pixel mode, how does one pick which 16 of those 256 colors to use? One solution might be to say that the first 16 are used, but this woufl be limiting, so instead there is a table tah maps each 4 bpp color to an 8-bit index into the proper full color table. The SET_GLOBAL_4_to_8_CLUT opcode can set which map top use by provinging the object index to the map. Object index 1 in every cart is NECESSARILY a 4-to-16 map, and it will be loaded at game start.

Audio Objects

Audio efects are stores in an ADPCM format, with a 48-byte header that is always entirely ignored. Pixter's ADPCM streams include inline signaling to signify stream end, and thus no length tracking is needed or provided

Font Objects

struct FontObj { u16 offsets[] //in halfwords, each //points to a CharImage struct CharImage { u8 width; u8 height; u8 data[]; } }

Font objects describe fonts that can be used to draw text. Each font is a collection of character images, each of which has a unique height and width. Pixels are stored at one byte per pixel, which might lead you to think that fonts can be color. This is false. The value of 0xFF means transparent and any other value means opaque, filled with the "text foreground color" (UI setting 3). Each font can draw up to 224 unique characters, the lowest supported code is 0x20. That is to say that if you attempt to draw a character with a lower code, it will be ignored. Else, 0x20 is subtracted and that resulting value is used as an index into the offsets table. The value there multiplied by two is added to the start of the font object to find a CharImage object which describes a character image. If a character width is odd, it is stored as if it was one pixel wider. That last column will not be drawn.

Larger Image

struct LargerImage { u16 w; u16 h; u8 flags; u8 objIdx4to8bppMap; u8 data[]; }

Why larger? Because there are smaller image formats in Pixter Classic, and this is what I named this while reverse engineering it and I decided to keep it. Deal with it! These images can be compressed, and they can have a transparent color. Curiously, uncompressed images cannot have transparency. The compression is RLE, with a few differences based on whether the image is stored with 4 or 8 bits per pixel. As previously mentioned, 4-bits-per-pixel images are expanded to the 8-bits-per-pixel palette using a 4-to-16 map object. There is a global setting for the default one, but each image can also specify its own. The flags field is split into some sub-fields. The bottom four bits describe the compression used. The top bit is the "isCompressed" flag. There are two compression types: one is represented by the type field value of 8, and the other is used in all other cases. Decompression algorithms for both are given below. As you can see, there is a field to set the 4-to-16 map object index, but you'll also note that it is only 8 bits in size, thus limiting the object index that can be represented. This leads most games to cluster their 4-to-16 map objects at the start of the object table since no other part of the VM limits object indices to 8 bits.

The drawing itself is affected by the "flags" setting passed to the DRAW_OBJ_IMAGE or the DRAW_RAM_IMAGE opcode. As they share the drawing core, those flags are explained here. the parsing of the flags field is ... curious and explained below. Whenever an image is drawn, a "dirty buffer" is also affected. This is another memory buffer where a bit is allocated per pixel. If a given image pixel is drawn, the dirty buffer's bit is also changed. Depending on the image mode it may be set or cleared. This later allows using the dirty buffer as a mask for other ops.

The image decompression code is also given below

0x00 - no transparency, use last-used 4-to-8-CLUT if needed, dirty buffer in CLEAR mode
0x01..0x7F - transparent color given by UI setting 2, use last-used 4-to-8-CLUT if needed, dirty buffer in CLEAR mode
0x80 - no transparency, use per-image 4-to-8 CLUT given in image header, dirty buffer in CLEAR mode
0x81, 0x83..0xFF - transparent color given by UI setting 2, use per-image 4-to-8 CLUT given in image header, dirty buffer in CLEAR mode
0x82 - transparent color given by ui_setting_2, use per-image 4-to-8 CLUT given in image header, dirty buffer in SET mode

Decompress8bpp: while (rleRepeatedValue = *src++, rleRepeatsLeft = *src++) { while (rleRepeatsLeft--) *dst++ = rleRepeatedValue; } Decompress4bpp: while (1) { rleRepeatedValue = *src / 16; rleRepeatsLeft = *src++ % 16; if (!rleRepeatsLeft) rleRepeatsLeft = *src++; if (!rleRepeatsLeft) break; while (rleRepeatsLeft--) *dst++ = 4BPP_to_8BPP_MAP[rleRepeatedValue]; }

Audio effects

Pixter color is capable of playing ADPCM sound effects in the background of the game at an 8KHz sampling rate using interrupts and a PWM unit for analog output. Quality is ... not great. sicne "ADPCM" means many things ot many people, the precise decoder used is presented here. One cool feature of the bitstream format used in Pixter is that "end of sound" marker is embedded in the data itself, thus requiring no tracking of data length by the playback code. The output of the ADPCM decoder is an unsigned 8-bit sample value. The input is a nibble from the input data stream. Since the incoming data is a stream of bytes, the nibble order is important. Pixter considers the higher nibble to be the earlier sample. The decoder has two bytes of state: predictor which is inited to 0x80 and stepSize which is inited to 0x00

const u8 adpcmTab1[] = { 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 13, 2, 3, 5, 8, 12, 17, 23, 30, 3, 6, 11, 18, 27, 38, 51, 66, 4, 9, 14, 24, 34, 44, 64, 84, 5, 11, 17, 29, 41, 53, 77, 101, 6, 13, 20, 34, 48, 62, 90, 118, 7, 15, 23, 39, 55, 71, 103, 125, }; const u8 adpcmTab2[] = { 0x00, 0x00, 0x00, 0x00, 0x00, 0x00, 0x08, 0x08, 0x00, 0x00, 0x08, 0x08, 0x08, 0x08, 0x10, 0x10, 0x08, 0x08, 0x10, 0x10, 0x10, 0x10, 0x18, 0x18, 0x10, 0x10, 0x10, 0x18, 0x18, 0x20, 0x20, 0x28, 0x18, 0x18, 0x18, 0x20, 0x20, 0x28, 0x28, 0x30, 0x20, 0x20, 0x28, 0x28, 0x28, 0x28, 0x30, 0x38, 0x28, 0x28, 0x30, 0x30, 0x30, 0x30, 0x38, 0x38, 0x30, 0x30, 0x38, 0x38, 0x38, 0x38, 0x38, 0x38 }; AdpcmGetNextSample(inNibbble): tmp0 = ((inNibbble >> 1) & 7) | stepSize; if (!tmp0 && (inNibbble & 1)) AUDIO IS OVER. STOP PLAYBACK stepSize = adpcmTab2[tmp0]; if (inNibbble & 1) predictor -= adpcmTab1[tmp0]; else predictor += adpcmTab1[tmp0]; return predictor ^ 0x7F;

Color UI Layout

This is the structure that is used by UI_PROCESS_TAP opcode. None of this is so specialized that is cannot be done by normal VM code, but the ROM provides this to simplify. You describe your UI shape, and it can tell you which button a given tap pressed. The description format is as follows: First a button is described using 4 8-bit values: width, height, x, y. This is button #1 (they are 1-indexed). If more buttons of the same size exist, for each next button, only x and y coordinates are listed. If more buttons exist, but they are of different size, the byte 0xFE is inserted, and then we begin again by describing button width and height, x and y. At the end of the list of all buttons, the byte 0xFF is inserted.

As the game may have multiple layouts, they are all stored in a table. I suspect this was a late addition to the VM design, since there is no reason at all why UI Layouts would not be in the object table, except they are not. They get their own table, which is referenced from the cart header at offset 0x08

UI Settings

In a number of places you'll have seen references to "UI Settings". This is basically just a set of 16-bit values that can be set via the SET_UI_SETTING opcode. Not all settings are fully decoded yet, but the ones I see used are.

0x00 - brush color for drawing
0x01 - ObjectID of a bitmap representing the brush shape
0x02 - 8-bit color index to treat as transparent when drawing 8bpp images
0x03 - 8-bit color index for the fore color of text drawn using PUTCHAR
0x07 - current audio volume, 0 = max, 4 = mute
0x08 - number of bits needed to represent MelodyID to the current Melody Chip

Appendix B - Pixter Classic VM

What follows is my documentation on the VM. This is accurate enough to produce an HLE and to understand/interpret/modify games. Here are some important notes. The VM in the 6502-based Pixter devices uses the host stack as the VM stack, so overflowing the host stack is doable. Be careful. When pushing multi-byte values onto the stack, here are the pseudo-ops I use:

pop2() = popFirst() * 256 + popSecond()
pop3() = popFirst() * 65536 + popSecond() * 256 + popThird();
push2(val) = push(val & 0xff); push(val >> 8);
push3(val) = push(val); push(val >> 8); push(val >> 16);

Some classic VM opcodes' behaviour differs between classic, plus, 2.0, and color/multi and that is OK as long as no games use it -- the ROM game can since the ROM game is developed together with that specific VM. Differences are noted in the table as best as I was able to ascertain them

Pixter Classic VM instructions

How to use the opcode table: match an instruction halfword with this table top to bottom till you find a match among the listed bit values. More specific decode options are higher up. This gives you instruction format. The scroll down to the docs for that instruction format to see what the instr is.

7	6	5	4	3	2	1	0	BITS/use
00	imm6	push(imm6)
0100	imm4	push(MEM8[imm4])
0101	imm4	MEM8[imm4] = pop()
1011	op	ALU
11	op
op	SPECIAL

ALU ops

Some instructions are more than one byte long. That will be explained in the description if so

op	name	notes
0xB0	MEMWR8	MEM8[popFirst()] = peek()
0xB1	NOT8	push(0xff &~ pop())
0xB2	MEMWR16	MEM16[popFirst()] = peek2()
0xB3	NOT16	push2(0xffff &~ pop2())
0xB4	MEMPREINCR8	push(0xff & ++MEM8[pop()])
0xB5	MEMPREDECR8	push(0xff & --MEM8[pop()])
0xB6	MEMPOSTINCR8	push(0xff & MEM8[pop()]++)
0xB7	MEMPOSTDECR8	push(0xff & MEM8[pop()]--)
0xB8	MEMPREINCR16	push2(0xffff & ++MEM16[pop()])
0xB9	MEMPREDECR16	push2(0xffff & --MEM16[pop()])
0xBA	MEMPOSTINCR16	push2(0xffff & MEM16[pop()]++)
0xBB	MEMPOSTDECR16	push2(0xffff & MEM16[pop()]--)
0xBC	ADD24	push3((popSecond3() + popFirst3()) & 0xffffff)
0xBD	SUB24	push3((popSecond3() - popFirst3()) & 0xffffff)
0xBE	MEMWR24	MEM24[popFirst()] = peek3()
0xBF	CODESTRCPY	strcpy(MEM8 + popFirst(), currentPC); currentPC += string_length_copied_incl_null
0xC0	AND8	push(popSecond() & popFirst())
0xC1	ORR8	push(popSecond() | popFirst())
0xC2	EOR8	push(popSecond() ^ popFirst())
0xC3	UMOD8	push((popSecond() % popFirst()) & 0xff)
0xC4	ADD8	push((popSecond() + popFirst()) & 0xff)
0xC5	SUB8	push((popSecond() - popFirst()) & 0xff)
0xC6	MUL8	push((popSecond() * popFirst()) & 0xff)
0xC7	UDIV8	push((popSecond() / popFirst()) & 0xff)
0xC8	IS_EQ8	push(popSecond() == popFirst() ? 0xFF : 0x00)
0xC9	IS_NE8	push(popSecond() != popFirst() ? 0xFF : 0x00)
0xCA	IS_GT8	push(popSecond() > popFirst() ? 0xFF : 0x00)
0xCB	IS_GE8	push(popSecond() >= popFirst() ? 0xFF : 0x00)
0xCC	IS_LT8	push(popSecond() < popFirst() ? 0xFF : 0x00)
0xCD	IS_LE8	push(popSecond() <= popFirst() ? 0xFF : 0x00)
0xCE	LSL8	push((popSecond() << popFirst()) & 0xff)
0xCF	LSR8	push((popSecond() >> popFirst()) & 0xff)
0xd0	AND16	push2(popSecond2() & popFirst2())
0xD1	ORR16	push2(popSecond2() | popFirst2())
0xD2	EOR16	push2(popSecond2() ^ popFirst2())
0xD3	UMOD16	push2((popSecond2() % popFirst2()) & 0xff)
0xD4	ADD16	push2((popSecond2() + popFirst2()) & 0xff)
0xD5	SUB16	push2((popSecond2() - popFirst2()) & 0xff)
0xD6	MUL16	push2((popSecond2() * popFirst2()) & 0xff)
0xD7	UDIV16	push2((popSecond2() / popFirst2()) & 0xff)
0xD8	IS_EQ16	push2(popSecond2() == popFirst2() ? 0xFF : 0x00)
0xD9	IS_NE16	push2(popSecond2() != popFirst2() ? 0xFF : 0x00)
0xDA	IS_GT16	push2(popSecond2() > popFirst2() ? 0xFF : 0x00)
0xDB	IS_GE16	push2(popSecond2() >= popFirst2() ? 0xFF : 0x00)
0xDC	IS_LT16	push2(popSecond2() < popFirst2() ? 0xFF : 0x00)
0xDD	IS_LE16	push2(popSecond2() <= popFirst2() ? 0xFF : 0x00)
0xDE	LSL16	push2((popSecond2() << popFirst()) & 0xff)
0xDF	LSR16	push2((popSecond2() >> popFirst()) & 0xff)
0xE0 0xXX	RD8_CONST	push(0xXX)
0xE1 0xXX 0xYY	RD16_CONST	push2(0xXX + 0xYY * 256);
0xE2 0xXX 0xYY 0xZZ	RD24_CONST	push3(0xXX + 0xYY * 256 + 0xZZ * 65536);
0xE3	MEMRD8	push(MEM8[pop()])
0xE4	MEMRD16	push2(MEM16[pop()])
0xE5	MEMRD24	push3(MEM24[pop()])
0xE6	ADDRGEN8x1	push((popFirst() + 1 * popSecond()) & 0xff)
0xE7	ADDRGEN8x2	push((popFirst() + 2 * popSecond()) & 0xff)
0xE8	ADDRGEN8x3	push((popFirst() + 3 * popSecond()) & 0xff)
0xE9	RDROM8	push(ROM8[pop3()]) //on classic, top 8 bits of the 24-bit addr become bank select, on color they are ignored and only current bank is used (code is always in bank 0)
0xEA	RDROM16	push2(ROM16[pop3()]) //on classic, top 8 bits of the 24-bit addr become bank select, on color they are ignored and only current bank is used (code is always in bank 0)
0xEB	RDROM24	push3(ROM24[pop3()]) //on classic, top 8 bits of the 24-bit addr become bank select, on color they are ignored and only current bank is used (code is always in bank 0)
0xEC	ADDRGEN24x1	push3(popFirst3() + 1 * popSecond())
0xED	ADDRGEN24x2	push3(popFirst3() + 2 * popSecond())
0xEE	ADDRGEN24x3	push3(popFirst3() + 3 * popSecond())
0xEF	WRROM8	ROM8[popFirst3()] = peekSecond(); //one write cycle, not actual (complex) flash write, but could be used to flip pages in theory, on classic, top 8 bits of the 24-bit addr become bank select, on color they are ignored and only current bank is used
0xF0 0xYYYY	BRA	vPC = 0xYYYY
0xF1 0xYYYY	BNEZ	if (pop() != 0) { vPC = 0xYYYY }
0xF2 0xYYYY	BEQZ	if (pop() == 0) { vPC = 0xYYYY }
0xF3 0xXX 0xYYYY	SWITCHJUMP	if (peek() == 0xXX) { pop() } else { vPC = 0xYYYY} //used for implementing if-then-else for switch()
0xF4 0xXX 0xYYYY	CALL	after reading whole instr, push PC *UNDER* 0xXX stack vals, then jump to 0xYYYY
0xF5 0xXX	RETURN	pop XX values from stack, pop return addr, re-push the values. XX can be 0..3, other values are treated as 3
0xF6	U8_to_16	push2(pop())
0xF7	U8_to_24	push3(pop())
0xF8	U16_to_8	push(pop2())
0xF9	U16_to_24	push3(pop2())
0xFA	U24_to_8	push(pop3())
0xFB	U24_to_16	push2(pop3())
0xFC	NOP
0xFD	DROP24	pop3();
0xFE	DROP16	pop2();
0xFF	DROP8	pop();

SPECIAL ops

The remainder of the decode space is made up of special operations, each with its own purpose and meaning. They are detailed here, with notes about differences in behaviour on different platforms. You'll note that sometimes Pixter Color/Pixter Multimedia are mentioned. As they have a VM for compatibility with classic carts via the adapter, their implementations are also instructive. The "op" listed is literally the byte value of the instruction. When a description says "same as 0x.." that does not simply mean that the operation is the same, that means that the same exact code runs (same jump targets), this means that this is not accidentally similar code but purposefully same handler implying same purpose. You'll also note that some opcodes have different stack effects between different Pixter variants. These opcodes thus by definition cannot be used in any published games. They can be used in the ROM game itself though. Sometimes multiple opcodes map to the same code. This is reflected in the table by merging rows.

op	name	used	notes
0x60	???	NO	executes as NOP on 2.0 and color, executes same as 0x61 on classic
0x61	IDLE_CHECK	YES	If device auto-off downcounter (180 sec) has expired, put the device into as low a power mode as possible. This is not wake-able. This is for the case where the kid forgot to turn the devce off
0x62	???	NO	clears the entire MEMORY(190 bytes) on classic and 2.0, executes as NOP on color
0x63	SELFTEST	NO	Performs some memory checksumming on classic and 2.0, with popFirst() deteriming the range out of a set. Results are written to three memory locations: MEM8[popSecond()], MEM8[popThird()] and MME8[popFourth()]. Color, instead, simply pops two values off the stack and does nothing more. This disparity in stack usage makes this opcode incompatible between classic/2.0 and color, leading me to believe that it was never used in shipping games. Lack of usefullness of it redoubles this belief
0x64	SET_DOWNCOUNT	YES	idx = popFirst(); if (idx >= 1 && idx <= 5) DOWNCOUNTERS[idx] = popSecond() * (idx == 5 ? 1 : 8);
0x65	GET_DOWNCOUNT	YES	idx = popFirst(); if (idx >= 1 && idx <= 5) push (DOWNCOUNTERS[idx]) else push(0)
0x66	RAND8	YES	push(rand() % pop())
0x67	RAND16	YES	push2(rand() % pop2())
0x68	GET_IDLE_TIMER_LEFT	YES	MEM8[pop()] = time till devices considers itself idle in units of 10 second (at power-on this is 18, and decrements every 10 sec)
0x69	???	NO	on classic, it returns DOWNCOUNTERS[0] ? 8 - clz8(DOWNCOUNTERS[0]) : 0, on 2.0 it executes same as 0x6A, on color is executes as NOP
0x6A	GET_PIX	YES	row = popSecond(); col = popThird(); properBuffer = BufferByIndex(popFirst()); if bit at row, col in given buffer is set, push 0xff, else push 0x00
0x6B	SET_PIX	YES	row = popThird(); col = popForth(); properBuffer = BufferByIndex(popSecond()); if popFirst() is nonzero, set given bit in buffer, else clear it
0x6C	???	NO	acts as NOP in classic, same as 0x6D in 2.0 and color
0x6D	DRAW_BUF_0	YES	copies BUF0 to FB
0x6E	???	NO	acts as NOP in classic, same as 0x6F in 2.0 and color
0x6F	COPY_SCREEN	YES	if (pop()) { copy FB => BUF0 } else { copy BUF0 => FB }
0x70	???	NO	classic: same as 0x77, 2.0: a single pop(), color: same as 0x77
0x71	???	NO	classic: same as 0x77, 2.0: five pop() operations, color: same as 0x77
0x72	???	NO	classic: same as 0x77, 2.0: as NOP, color: same as 0x77
0x73	???	NO	classic: same as 0x77, 2.0: a single pop(), color: same as 0x77
0x74	???	NO	classic: same as 0x77, 2.0: a single push(garbage), color: same as 0x77
0x75	???	NO	classic: same as 0x77, 2.0: two pop() operations, color: same as 0x77
0x76	???	NO	classic: same as 0x77, 2.0: two pop() operations, color: same as 0x77
0x77	???	NO	classic and 2.0: push(isCalibReqButtonPressedAfterDebouncing() ? 0xFF : 0x00); color: MEM8[pop()] = 0. different stack effects make it unlikely that this is used
0x78	TOUCH_CALIBRATE	YES	color and 2.0: enter touch calibration UI and force user to calibrate screen. 2.0 : NOP, plus erases calibration data and sets up the default values
0x79
0x7A	FREQ_COUNT	NO	classic will calculate "Fosc / 6000". This takes up to a second and an annoying and loud 500Hz beep will be created in the speaker during this operation. Due to the above, it is unlikely to ever be used. However, if used, result is in permile, termed X, is then stored as follows: MEM8[popFirst()] = X / 100; MEM8[popSecond()] = X % 100. As Classic Fosc is 6MHz, the nominal answer is 1000, stored as {10, 0} 2.0 will do basically the same, except it uses Fosc/ 5480, which given its Fosc of 5.48MHz should also produce a nominal 1000 result. Color executes this as simply two pop() operations. So stack-wise it is equivalent and is safe to call, but no reply is provided
0x7B	RAW_I2C_RD	NO	classic and 2.0 will do a raw i2c access, presumably this is designed for accessing the internal eeprom since nothing else is on that bus and it is not externally exposed: 8bitWriteAddr = popSecond() registerIDx = popFirst() MEM8[popThird()] = i2cReadOneByte(8bitWriteAddr, registerIDx) Usefullness is dubious since while there are indeed unused bytes in the EEPROM, how would games arbitrate whose data it is and what is to be done with it? Color executes same as 0x80
0x7C	???	NO	classic: NOP, 2.0: pop(), color: same as 0x80
0x7D
0x7E
0x7F
0x80	COPY_BUF	YES	classic: NOP, 2.0 and color copy 0x320 bytes from BufferByIndexExpanded(popFirst()) to BufferByIndexExpanded(popSecond()). This is used as one of the ways to access the extra RAM that classic lacks. Some games do this after detecting a post-classic device as all the rest have more RAM
0x81	CLEAR_BUF	YES	set 0x320 bytes to zereo in BufferByIndex(popFirst())
0x82	TINYDELAY	YES	pop(), then execute a few NOPs. Delay is insubstantial compared to VM's logic
0x83	SET_VOLUME	YES	sets sound volume to pop(). 0 is max volume, 3 is min audible volume, 4 is full mute. When on full mute, melodies will not play at all, appearing to end imediately. ADPCM sound effects will decode and take as much time and CPU cycles as if they were playing, but will produce no audio. Setting is saved in EEPROM as well and survives reboots
0x84	GET_VOLUME	YES	MEM8[pop()] = current volume
0x85	GET_NAME	NO	classic has complex logic here storing many bytes to many places that mostly seem to go unread ever again. Color executes as NOP. 2.0 uses this to get SELF_NAME from a few places to VM_MEM. ops are: dst = &MEM8[popSecond()]; switch(popFirst()) { case 0: src = eeprom; case 1: src = RXED_IR_PACKET; case 2: src = BUF1 + 3 } dst[0] = src[0]; memcpy(dst + 1, src + 1, dst[0]); this can get the user name from IR packet or eeprom or BUF1
0x86	???	NO	classic: same as 0x85. Color and 2.0: NOP
0x87	IR_RELATED	NO	classic: same as 0x8C, color: NOP, 2.0 executes some IR-related code
0x88	GET_KNOWN_GAME_ID	NO	classic: same as 0x8C, color: NOP, 2.0: pushes known game id to stack
0x89	IR_POLL	NO	classic: same as 0x8C, color: NOP, 2.0 executes IR poll (to check for arriving data). param of 0 means reset machinery, param of 1 means do poll. return value is 0xff if an image was RXed and 0x00 else. if it was, it will be in BUF1
0x8A	FLOOD_FILL	YES	classic: same as 0x8C, 2.0 and color: flood fill at (popSecond(), popFirst()). To make up for it being slow on 2.0, a jingle is played. Color does not play sound BUF0 is used as temp storage for this and is clobbered
0x8B	BUF1_INDIRECT	YES	classic:same as 0x8C, color: NOP, 2.0 does: if (popFirst()) BUF1[peekThird()] = popSecond(); else{ popSecond(); push(BUF1[popThird()]); }
0x8C	DRAW_CIRCLE	YES	point_on_circle = (popSecond(), popFirst()) center_of_circle = (popFourth(), popThird()) // the thickness is always 1 despite ROM drawing code supporting more thicknesses
0x8D	DRAW_OVAL	YES	bottom_lef_of_bounding_box = (popSecond(), popFirst()) center_of_oval = (popFourth(), popThird()) // the thickness is always 1 despite ROM drawing code supporting more thicknesses color: NOP so likely it was never used. no game seems to use it, despite a full impl of this complex-to-draw-thing in the ROMs
0x8E	DRAW_RECT_FRAME	YES	corner1 = (popSecond(), popFirst()) corner2 = (popFourth(), popThird()) //thickness is always 1 despite ROM drawing code supporting more thicknesses
0x8F	???	NO	classic and color: NOP, 2.0: pop three values from stack
0x90	WRITE_SELF_NAME	NO	classic and color: NOP, 2.0: writes self name from BUF1 to EERPOM. format in buf1 is: u8 len, u8 chars[] in pixter charcodes
0x91	???	YES	two values are popped from stack. classic writes them to locations never read, 2.0 and color simply ignore them
0x92	INK_W_SOUND	YES	track pen and draw black pixels on framebuffer, while playing the canned "click" sound every so often. This is the main doodling primitive. startY = popFirst(), startX = popSecond()
0x93	???	NO	classic and color: same as 0x94, 2.0: pop 3 values and do nothing with them
0x94	DRAW_BUF_0_INV	YES	pop4(); copy BUF0 => FB, inverting each pixel
0x95	GET_PEN	YES	gPenUiLayoutID = popFirst(); //zero if none MEM8[popSecond()] = pen status; 0 = pen up, 1 = ??, 2 = in ui-defined button, 3 = in under-screen soft button, 4 = just onscreen MEM8[popThird()] = Y; MEM8[popFourth()] = X; MEM8[popFifth()] = soft button id (1-based), 0 if not in buttons) MEM8[popSixth()] = buttonID (if a ui layout given, else 1 for onscreen but not in soft button area, 0 for not onscreen). when a button press is reported, the button index reported is 1 + CHUNK_FIRST_INDEX + chunk->numCols * row + col, where CHUNK_FIRST_INDEX is sum of numRow * numCol of all previous chunks. see "Pixter Classic UI Layout"
0x96	NATIVECALLOUT	YES	push(CALL_NATIVE_FUNC_BF0C(pop2())) since architecture changes exist between revisions, 2.0 and color emulate what earlier games MEANT to do by matching them via the "KNOWN GAME ID" mechanism which is explained elsehwere in this document. With proper magic values in proper places, however, it is possible to get native 6502 code execution here on classic, plus, 2.0, and even ARM code on the color/multimedia!
0x97	PLAY_JINGLE	YES	play a pre-canned jingle from pixter's ROM. Will wait for current ADPCM sound to finish, then plays the requested jingle, then waits for that to finish before returning. 20 jingles are in the color ROM
0x98	PLAY_ADPCM_EXTENDED	NO	{soundAddr, soundPage} = FindADPCM(popFirst()); sampleRate = {8K, 7.5K, 7K, 6.5K, 6K, 8.5K, 9K}[popSecond()] PlaySoundInBackground(soundAddr, soundPage, sampleRate)
0x99	???	NO	2.0 does alot of weird things here that often lead the console to self-reset, classic executes this same as 0x9A, color - same as 0x9C leading me to think that maybe nobody ever used this
0x9A	SAVE_IMG_TO_EEPROM	YES	partially stores BUF0 to eeprom. Partially to allow UI to show progress. popFirst() is byte offset into the current chip, popSecond() is chip index 0..3, color executes this same as 0x9C leading me to think that maybe nobody ever used this directly
0x9B	LOAD_IMG_FROM_EEPROM	YES	the opposite of 0x9A (load instead of store, same params). color executes this same as 0x9C leading me to think that maybe nobody ever used this directly
0x9C	PLAY_MELODY	YES	loopForever = popFirst(); melodyID = popSecond() & 0x3f; playMelodyChipMelody(loopForever, melodyID); //melody is NOT played if volume is set to mute. Melody does not end if looped. Melody 0x3F is reserved and required to not exist. Nonexistent melodies appear to not ever start. See IS_MELODY_PLAYING for how to determine melody end
0x9D	IS_MELODY_PLAYING	YES	push(isMelodyChipMelodyPlaying() ? NONZERO_VALUE : 0); //classic and 2.0 push 0x40, color uses 0xFF
0x9E	AUDIO_ORDERLY_END	YES	Wait for any ADPCM sounds to be finished, then turn off current Melody Chip melody (no waiting for it to end)
0x9F	MAGIC	YES	performs various magic on-screen effects common to all games, eg fancy erases, screen flips, etc. * wait for any ADPCM sounds to stop * if op is 4 or 5, stop Melody Chip music switch (pop()) * then (these are implemented in classic and later): 0 = erase by showing pre-canned star animation and music 0x39f 1 = erase using scattered dots "fade" (actually an image animation too but drawn using the "only draw white pixels" mode DrawMode = 0) and music 0x3a2 2 = erase using "galaxy" (pre canned animation) and music 0x3AE 3 = erase using "bug" - image is drawn animating moving across screen in four stripes, right, left, right left, each stripe is 20 px tall 4 = save current framebuffer to pixter eeprom with animation and music 5 = load framebuffer from pixter eeprom with animation and music 6 = invert screen then play sound 0x3AB (source for image data is buf0, dst is framebuyffer) 7 = 90 deg CW rotation then play sound 0x3AB (source for image data is buf0, dst is framebuyffer) 8 = vflip then play sound 0x3AB (source for image data is buf0, dst is framebuffer) 9 = hflip then play sound 0x3AB (source for image data is buf0, dst is framebuffer) * these are in plus/2.0 but not in color, leading me to think they were never used or might be IR-related and thus not called outside of 2.0 use cases: 10 = in 2.0 and plus: similar to 3 except only two stripes, top goes left, bottom goes right. 2.0 ROM shows a stick figure sweeping 11 = nop in 2.0, in plus: wind-god animation to erase screen 12 = nop in 2.0, in plus: dragon animation to erase screen 13 = nop in 2.0, in plus: bulldozer animation to erase screen (like 3 but bulldozer instead of bug) 14 = nop in 2.0, in plus: splatter animation to erase screen 15 = nop in 2.0 and in plus 16 = similar to 4 17 = similar to 5
0xA0	EXT_BUS_WR	NO	raw write to BEX bus. seemingly, no game uses it but a cute idea for expansion ability EXTCHIPID = popFirst() EXTXCHIPCONFIG = popSecond() EXTCHIP[popThird()] = popFourth() color executes as nop that eats the params from stack
0xA1	EXT_BUS_RD	NO	raw read from BEX bus. seemingly, no game uses it but a cute idea for expansion ability EXTCHIPID = popFirst() EXTXCHIPCONFIG = popSecond() push(EXTCHIP[popThird()]) popFourth(); //do nothing with it color executes as nop that eats the params from stack
0xA2	POKE	YES	HOST_CPU_ADDR_SPACE[popFirst2()] = popSecond(); color fakes with nop that affects stack same way
0xA3	CONTINUE_LINE	NO	Thickness given by last call to DRAW_LINE, line drawn from newly given coords to previous call's coords or DRAW_LINE's (x1,y1) is that was the previous line-drawing call. newY = popFirst(), newX = popSecond() color executes as NOP, so presumably this was never used by games
0xA4	PEEK	YES	tmp = HOST_CPU_ADDR_SPACE[popFirst2()]; popSecond(); push(tmp); color fakes with nop that affects stack same way
0xA5	DRAW_LINE	YES	Always to framebuffer. always in black. thickness = 1 + popFirst() /* 0..3 are valid on classic and 2.0, 0..1 on color */ y1 = popSecond(); x1 = popThird(); y2 = popFourth(); x2 = popFifth();
0xA6	SET_SCENE_IDX	YES	SCENE_INDEX = pop();
0xA7	ERASER	YES	track pen and draw white pixels or rects on framebuffer, while playing canned "click" sound every so often. startY = popFirst(), startX = popSecond(); useRects = popThird(); if lines are used, they are continuous, one pixel thick, if rects are used, they are sparse if pen is moved fast enough. rect size is always 3x3 centered on the pen (technically an image in ROM, but who cares?)
0xA8	DRAW_IMAGE	YES	DRAW_MODE = popFirst() buffer = BufferByIndexExpanded(popSecond()) row = popThird() col = popFourth() {imageAddr, imagePage} = FindImage(popFifth()) DrawImageToBuffer() DRAW_MODE = 0
0xA9	???	NO	classic and color: same as 0xAA, 2.0 does something weird
0xAA	SCROLL_W_BUF	YES	toRight = pop() == 1; scroll framebuffer by 4 pixels right or left, get data from BUF0 which is also scrolled the same direction (missing data not filled) This allows wider-than-screen images to be smoothly scrolled
0xAB	SCROLL_SIMPLE	YES	toRight() = pop() == 1; scroll framebuffer by 4 pixels right or left, nothing done with freed up space
0xAC	SCREEN_ROT	NO	classic, color: rotate screen by 90 * popFirst() degrees counterclockwise, 0 is invalid and will break things. next 4 params are offsets in MEM8 which are filled in with some values I am not sure of, I think they are always 80, 80, 0, 0, respectively to MEM8[popSecond()] to .. MEM8[popFifth()] color does NOT fill in any MEM8 locations, and ignores param always rotating by 90 degrees CW so I guess that is the only allowed option really 2.0: ??? not understood yet, likely not used due to classic/2.0 acting differently
0xAD	SCREEN_FLIP/IR_TX/???	NO	classic: flip screen. direction is based on popFirst(); H-flip is 0, V-FLIP is nonzero 2.0: SEND buffer over IR, self name is sent too. other side may accept or reject, we will not know. we do know if there was no other side. 0x00 is returned then on stack. if TX worked and we got an ACK, 0xFF is pushed instead color: same as 0xAE
0xAE	PLAY_ADPCM	YES	{soundAddr, soundPage} = FindADPCM(pop()); PlaySoundInBackground(soundAddr, soundPage, sampleRate = 8KHz);
0xAF	GET_ADPCM_STATUS	YES	if adpcm is still playing push nonzero (color uses 3, classic 0xff) else push 0

Pixter Classic Structures

Pixter Classic Cart Header

The cart header for pixter classic is seen at the given addresses when cart page 0 is selected

type	addr	use
u8[2]	0xbf00	0xAA, 0x55 - magic
ptr16	0xbf02	ptr to UI Layout list
ptr16	0xbf04	ptr to Scene list
ptr16	0xbf06	starting VM PC/td>
ptr16	0xbf08	sounds list
ptr16	0xbf0a	all objects list
jmp	0xbf0c	6502 jump instr for NATIVECALLOUT op
u8	0xbf0e	nonzero to run at 2x CPU speed, but see "Cpu Speed Bug"
u8	0xbf10	must contain: 0xff to make VM happy. Can also contain 0x25 to indicate that Melody Chip should be force-stopped before game starts. pixter 2.0-capable games have a 2 here
u8	0xbf11	can contain 0xAA, if so this is a game released after pixter color existed, called "modern game" (and may, but does not have to, use native ARM code using NATIVECALLOUT on it) also indicates that pixter 2.0 support may be present
jmp	0xbf12	6502 jump instr for some IR handling in 2.0-capable games, else 3x 0xff
jmp	0xbf15	6502 jump instr for some IR handling in 2.0-capable games, else 3x 0xff
ptr16	0xbf40	ARM code to copy start
u8	0xbf42	ARM code to copy page number
ptr16	0xbf43	ARM code to copy end

Classic UI Layout

u8 numChunks; Chunk { u8 numCols; u8 numRows; Column { u8 left, right } [numCols]; Row { u8 top, bottom; } [numRows] } [numChunks];

This is the structure that is used by GET_PEN opcode. None of this is so specialized that is cannot be done by normal VM code, but the ROM provides this to simplify. You describe your UI shape, and anytime you get pen status, the info of whether a button was tapped is also provided. Also provided is the info on whether any of the soft buttons under-screen were tapped. The layout is described by a structure shown here. This layout is optimized for grids of buttons and indeed all UIs are built around this primitive.

Classic Image and Sound lookup

This is how you find an image or a sound given its index and the current scene. An address is composed of a ROM page (0..31) and an address therein (0x4000..0xbfff).

//looks up an image by scene index and image index. SCENE_INDEX is set by opcode 0xA6. //If it is zero, built-into-ROM images are used //image indices are also not allowed to be 0. it DOES work but no game does it, instead at index [0] in each //sceneImgListPtr, the number of images contained in the scene is stored FindImage(imgIdx) { u16 sceneImgListPtr = ROM16[0xbf04] + SCENE_INDEX; u16 imgPtrPtrPtr = ROM16[sceneImgListPtr] + 2 * imgIdx; u16 imgPtrPtr = ROM16[imgPtrPtrPtr]; u16 imagePtr = ROM16[0xbf0a] + imgPtrPtr; u16 imageData = ROM16[imagePtr]; u8 imagePage = ROM8[imagePtr + 2]; if (imageData >= 0xc000) imageData -= 0x8000; imagePage--; } //looks up an ADPCM object by index FindADPCM(soundIdx) { u16 audioPtrPtr = ROM16[0xbf08] + 3 * (soundIdx - 1) u16 audioPtr = ROM16[0xbf0a] + audioPtrPtr; u16 audioData = ROM16[audioPtr]; u8 audioPage = ROM8[audioPtr + 2]; if (audioData >= 0xc000) audioData -= 0x8000; audioPage--; }

Classic Image Format and compression

This is the format of a Classic image and how to decompress it. Indeed it is unnecessarily complex. I do not know why.

CLASSIC_IMAGE { u8 widthAndCompressedFlag; u8 height; u8 data[stride * height]; //stride = (actualWidthidth + 7) &~ 7; } //actualWidthidth is (widthAndCompressedFlag & 0x7F) //isCompressed is (widthAndCompressedFlag & 0x80) //cart images can be compressed. images in pixter ROM itself seem to //never be (Decompression never considered for them) DRAW_MODE is: 0 = draw only 00-valued pixels 1 = draw only FF-valued pixels 4 = draw all pixels else = invert 00 valued pixels only DECOMRESSION: struct DecompressState { u8 decompressed[30]; u8 flags; //@0x1e u8 idx; //@0x1f //32 bytes in size to here const u8* src; u8 bitBuffer, bitMask; }; static u8 getBit(struct DecompressState *state) { if (!(state->bitMask >>= 1)) { state->bitBuffer = *state->src++; state->bitMask = 0x80; } return (state->bitBuffer & state->bitMask) ? 0x00 : 0xff; } //to be called once at image start void decompressInit(struct DecompressState *state, const u8* img) { state->src = img; state->bitMask = 1; state->flags = getBit(state) == 0xff ? 0 : 2; state->flags += getBit(state) == 0xff ? 0 : 1; } //to be called to decode the run length u8 classicImgCompressionGetRunLength(struct DecompressState *state, u8 curPolarity) { static const uint8_t decompressTab0[] = { 2, 3, 3, 3, 4, 4, 5, 5, 6, 6, 6, 7, 7, 7, 7, 7, 7, 8, 8, 8, 8, 8, 8, 8, 8, 8, 8, 8, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xB, 0xB, 0xB, 0xB, 0xB, 0xB, 0xB, 0xB, 0xB, 0xB, 0xB, 0xB, 0xB, 0xB, 0xB, 0xB, 0xB, 0xB, 0xB, 0xB, 0xB, 0xB, 0xB, 0xB, 0xB, 0xB, 0xB, 0xB, 1, 0, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 0xA, 0xB, 0xC, 0xD, 0xF, 0x36, 0x3E, 0xE, 0x10, 0x11, 0x12, 0x15, 0x16, 0x17, 0x1E, 0x22, 0x40, 0x4C, 0x13, 0x14, 0x18, 0x19, 0x1A, 0x1C, 0x1D, 0x20, 0x39, 0x3C, 0x3F, 0x44, 0x48, 0x4E, 0x1B, 0x1F, 0x21, 0x23, 0x2D, 0x2E, 0x30, 0x33, 0x34, 0x4B, 0x24, 0x25, 0x26, 0x27, 0x28, 0x29, 0x2A, 0x2B, 0x2C, 0x2F, 0x31, 0x32, 0x35, 0x37, 0x38, 0x3A, 0x3B, 0x3D, 0x41, 0x42, 0x43, 0x45, 0x46, 0x47, 0x49, 0x4A, 0x4D, 0x4F}; static const uint8_t decompressTab1[] = { 2, 2, 3, 4, 4, 5, 5, 6, 6, 6, 7, 7, 7, 7, 7, 8, 8, 8, 8, 8, 8, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 1, 2, 5, 0, 4, 3, 6, 7, 8, 9, 0xA, 0xB, 0xC, 0xD, 0xE, 0xF, 0x10, 0x11, 0x12, 0x14, 0x17, 0x13, 0x15, 0x16, 0x18, 0x19, 0x1A, 0x1B, 0x1C, 0x1D, 0x1E, 0x1F, 0x20, 0x21, 0x22, 0x23, 0x24, 0x25, 0x26, 0x40, 0x4C, 0x4E, 0x27, 0x28, 0x29, 0x2A, 0x2B, 0x2C, 0x2D, 0x2E, 0x2F, 0x30, 0x31, 0x32, 0x33, 0x34, 0x35, 0x36, 0x37, 0x38, 0x39, 0x3A, 0x3B, 0x3C, 0x3D, 0x3E, 0x3F, 0x41, 0x42, 0x43, 0x44, 0x45, 0x46, 0x47, 0x48, 0x49, 0x4A, 0x4B, 0x4D, 0x4F}; static const uint8_t decompressTab2[] = { 2, 4, 4, 4, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 6, 6, 6, 6, 6, 6, 6, 6, 6, 7, 7, 7, 7, 7, 7, 7, 7, 8, 8, 8, 8, 8, 8, 8, 8, 8, 8, 8, 8, 8, 8, 8, 8, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 0xA, 0xC, 0xB, 0xD, 0xE, 0xF, 0x10, 0x11, 0x12, 0x13, 0x16, 0x14, 0x15, 0x17, 0x18, 0x19, 0x1A, 0x1D, 0x2A, 0x1B, 0x1C, 0x1E, 0x1F, 0x20, 0x21, 0x22, 0x23, 0x24, 0x25, 0x26, 0x27, 0x29, 0x2D, 0x30, 0x36, 0x28, 0x2B, 0x2C, 0x2E, 0x2F, 0x31, 0x32, 0x33, 0x34, 0x35, 0x37, 0x39, 0x3E, 0x38, 0x3A, 0x3B, 0x3C, 0x3D, 0x3F, 0x40, 0x41, 0x42, 0x43, 0x44, 0x45, 0x46, 0x47, 0x48, 0x49, 0x4A, 0x4B, 0x4C, 0x4D, 0x4E, 0x4F}; static const uint8_t decompressTab3[] = { 1, 3, 3, 4, 5, 5, 6, 6, 7, 7, 8, 8, 8, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xB, 0xB, 0xB, 0xB, 0xB, 0xB, 0xB, 0xB, 0xB, 0xB, 0xB, 0xB, 0xB, 0xB, 0xB, 0xB, 0xB, 0xB, 0xB, 0xB, 0xB, 0xB, 0xB, 0xB, 1, 2, 3, 0, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 0xA, 0xB, 0xC, 0xD, 0xE, 0xF, 0x10, 0x11, 0x12, 0x13, 0x14, 0x15, 0x17, 0x19, 0x20, 0x22, 0x16, 0x18, 0x1A, 0x1B, 0x1C, 0x1D, 0x1E, 0x1F, 0x21, 0x23, 0x24, 0x25, 0x26, 0x27, 0x28, 0x29, 0x2A, 0x2B, 0x2C, 0x2E, 0x2F, 0x30, 0x33, 0x34, 0x36, 0x37, 0x43, 0x46, 0x4C, 0x4E, 0x2D, 0x31, 0x32, 0x35, 0x38, 0x39, 0x3A, 0x3B, 0x3C, 0x3D, 0x3E, 0x3F, 0x40, 0x41, 0x42, 0x44, 0x45, 0x47, 0x48, 0x49, 0x4A, 0x4B, 0x4D, 0x4F}; static const uint8_t decompressTab4[] = { 3, 3, 3, 4, 4, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 6, 6, 6, 6, 6, 6, 6, 7, 7, 7, 7, 7, 7, 7, 8, 8, 8, 8, 8, 8, 8, 8, 8, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0xA, 0, 1, 4, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 0xB, 0xC, 0xD, 0xA, 0xE, 0xF, 0x10, 0x11, 0x12, 0x13, 0x14, 0x15, 0x16, 0x17, 0x18, 0x19, 0x1E, 0x1A, 0x1B, 0x1C, 0x1D, 0x1F, 0x20, 0x21, 0x22, 0x4E, 0x23, 0x24, 0x25, 0x29, 0x2A, 0x2B, 0x2C, 0x2D, 0x26, 0x27, 0x28, 0x2E, 0x2F, 0x30, 0x31, 0x32, 0x33, 0x34, 0x35, 0x36, 0x37, 0x38, 0x39, 0x3A, 0x3B, 0x3C, 0x3D, 0x3E, 0x3F, 0x40, 0x41, 0x42, 0x43, 0x44, 0x45, 0x46, 0x47, 0x48, 0x49, 0x4A, 0x4B, 0x4C, 0x4D, 0x4F}; static const uint8_t decompressTab5[] = { 1, 3, 4, 4, 5, 5, 6, 6, 7, 7, 8, 8, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 0, 6, 8, 9, 0xA, 0xB, 0xC, 0xD, 0xE, 0xF, 0x10, 0x11, 0x12, 0x13, 0x14, 0x15, 0x16, 0x17, 0x18, 0x19, 0x1A, 0x1B, 0x1C, 0x1D, 0x1E, 0x1F, 0x20, 0x21, 0x22, 0x23, 0x24, 0x25, 0x26, 0x27, 0x28, 0x29, 0x2A, 0x2B, 0x2C, 0x2D, 0x2E, 0x2F, 0x30, 0x31, 0x32, 0x33, 0x34, 0x35, 0x36, 0x37, 0x38, 0x39, 0x3A, 0x3B, 0x3C, 0x3D, 0x3E, 0x3F, 0x40, 0x41, 0x42, 0x43, 0x44, 0x45, 0x46, 0x47, 0x48, 0x49, 0x4A, 0x4B, 0x4C, 0x4D, 0x4E, 0x4F}; static const uint8_t *decompressTabsA[4] = {decompressTab0, decompressTab1, decompressTab2, NULL}; static const uint8_t *decompressTabsB[4] = {decompressTab3, decompressTab4, decompressTab5, NULL}; u8 cmpVal = 0, tabPos = 0, readVal = 0, matchVal = 0; const u8 **tabs = curPolarity ? decompressTabsA : decompressTabsB while(1) { while (tabs[state->flags][tabPos] != cmpVal) { cmpVal++; matchVal *= 2; readVal = readVal * 2 + (getBit(state) != 0xff ? 1 : 0); } if (readVal == matchVal) return tabs[state->flags][tabPos + 80]; matchVal++; tabPos++; } } //to be called to decompress each next row produces the ROW in state->decompressed void decompressNextRow(struct DecompressState *state) u8 curPolarity; state->idx = 0; memset(state->decompressed, 0, sizeof(state->decompressed)); curPolarity = getBit(state); do { u8 runLength = classicImgCompressionGetRunLength(state, curPolarity); if (!runLength) //0 means till end of line runLength = state->idx - CUR_IMAGE_WIDTH; if (curPolarity) { //set bits do { state->decompressed[state->idx / 8] |= 0x80 >> (state->idx % 8); state->idx++; } while (--runLength); } else { //clear bits (no work needed since we pre-zeroed the buffer) state->idx += runLength; } curPolarity ^= 0xff; //polarity changes } while (state->idx < CUR_IMAGE_WIDTH); }

EEPROM use in Pixter Classic/2.0

ADDR	USE
0x000..0x31f	Saved 80x80x1bpp image
0x321..0x322	Calibration valid marker - 0xAA 0x55
0x323..0x326	Calibration slope and intercept for X and Y
0x327	Sound volume
0x328	Self Name length, 16 max (2.0 only)
0x329..0x338	Self name. ASCII minus 0x20 each char (2.0 only)

Appendix C - connections and pinouts

For all cart pinouts, the pin numbering works as follows. Imagine the cart lying on the table, front (colorful label) on top, connector facing you as you look into the connector. The top side of the connector is numbered from your left to your right in odd numbers: 1, 3, 5, and so on till 59. The bottom side is numbered also from your left to right, in evens: 2, 4, 6, and so on till 60. For Pixter Classic connector, the rules are the same, except that the numbering only goes to 20. Why this order? Some carts are actually labeled and this is the numbering they all use. To avoid confusion, we adopt it too.

Pixter Classic cart

Most carts have the pins listed here together shorted in the cart. Inside Pixter, they are not shorted, but one is n/c.

1	3	5	7	9	11	13	15	17	19
GND	AUDIO	MC0	MC1	nWP	AUDIO
ACTIVE	BEX
nRST	cart
detect
-
VCC	DQ0	DQ1	DQ2	DQ3	DQ4	DQ5	DQ6	DQ7	n/c
2	4	6	8	10	12	14	16	18	20

Pixter Classic to Color adapter

Refer to the above section for signal names. Here they are mapped to the Color Cart slot.

1	3	5	7	9	11	13	15	17	19	21	23	25	27	29	31	33	35	37	39	41	43	45	47	49	51	53	55	57	59
DQ5	DQ6	DQ7	DQ0	DQ2	DQ1	DQ3	DQ4	VSS
-
MC1	MC0	cart
detect	nWP	AUDIO
ACTIVE	BEX
nRST	AUDIO	VCC
2	4	6	8	10	12	14	16	18	20	22	24	26	28	30	32	34	36	38	40	42	44	46	48	50	52	54	56	58	60

Pixter Multimedia NAND cart

1	3	5	7	9	11	13	15	17	19	21	23	25	27	29	31	33	35	37	39	41	43	45	47	49	51	53	55	57	59
CLE	ALE	R/nB	VSS
-
DQ0	DQ1	DQ2	DQ3	DQ4	DQ5	DQ6	DQ7	nCS	nOE	nWE	VCC
2	4	6	8	10	12	14	16	18	20	22	24	26	28	30	32	34	36	38	40	42	44	46	48	50	52	54	56	58	60

Pixter Color cart

1	3	5	7	9	11	13	15	17	19	21	23	25	27	29	31	33	35	37	39	41	43	45	47	49	51	53	55	57	59
A0	A1	A2	A3	A4	A5	A6	A7	A8	A9	A10	A11	A12	A13	A14	A15	A16	A17	A18	A19	A20	A21	A22	A23	i2c SDA	VSS
-
DQ0	DQ1	DQ2	DQ3	DQ4	DQ5	DQ6	DQ7	DQ8	DQ9	DQ10	DQ11	DQ12	DQ13	DQ14	DQ15	nCS2
(ROM)	nCS3
(extra)	nOE	nWE	cart
detect	Melody CLK	i2c SCL
Melody DAT	AUDIO
ACTIVE	AUDIO	VCC
2	4	6	8	10	12	14	16	18	20	22	24	26	28	30	32	34	36	38	40	42	44	46	48	50	52	54	56	58	60

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

24. The Age of the Amplifier

Source: https://www.construction-physics.com/p/the-age-of-the-amplifier
Site: Construction Physics
Author: Brian Potter
Published: 2026-03-27
HN activity: 11 points · 2 comments
Length: 5.9K words (~26 min read)
Language: en

William Shockley, John Bardeen, and Walter Brattain, winners of the 1956 Nobel Prize for their work on the “transistor effect.” Via Wikipedia.

As we’ve noted more than a few times before, for most of the 20th century AT&T’s Bell Labs was the premier industrial research lab in the US. As part of its ongoing efforts to provide universal telephone service, Bell Labs generated numerous world-changing inventions, and accumulated more Nobel Prizes than any other industrial research lab.1 But the most important of its technical contributions proved to be useful far beyond the confines of the Bell System. Statistical process control, for instance, was invented by AT&T engineer Walter Shewhart to improve the manufacturing of AT&T’s electrical equipment at supplier company Western Electric. Since then, the methods have been successfully applied to all manner of manufacturing, from jet engines to semiconductors to container ships.

Interestingly, some of AT&T’s most important technological contributions — namely, the vacuum tube, the negative feedback amplifier, the transistor, and the laser — were (in whole or in part) the product of efforts to make new, better amplifiers for boosting electromagnetic signals. Amplifiers played a crucial role in the Bell System, making it possible to (among other things) connect telephones over long distances, but the value of these four amplifiers extended far beyond telephony. The vacuum tube became a crucial building block for electronics in the first half of the 20th century, used in everything from radio to television to the earliest computers. The negative feedback amplifier helped spawn the discipline of control theory, which is used today in the design of virtually every automated machine. The transistor is the foundation of modern digital computing and everything built on top of it. And the laser is used in everything from fiber-optic communications to industrial cutting machines to barcode scanners to printers.

It’s worth looking at why AT&T was so motivated to build better and better amplifiers, and why those efforts produced so many transformative inventions.

In 1876 Alexander Graham Bell placed the world’s first telephone call, summoning his assistant Thomas Watson from another room. By 1881, Bell’s company, the Bell Telephone Company (it wouldn’t become American Telephone and Telegraph, or AT&T, until 1899) had 100,000 customers. By the turn of the century AT&T was operating 1,300 telephone exchanges in the US, connecting over 800,000 customers with 2 million miles of wire.

The goal of the Bell System was “universal service” – to connect every telephone user with every other telephone user in the system. But by the early 20th century this quest was bumping up against technological limitations.

Telephones converted the sound of someone speaking to electrical signals, which were transmitted along wires until reaching a telephone on the other end, where they were converted back into sound. More specifically, in early telephones the sound from someone speaking would compress and decompress a chamber full of carbon granules, which would alter their electrical resistance, changing how much current flowed through them. At the other end, the electrical current would flow through an electromagnet, which pulled on a thin iron diaphragm; fluctuations in the electrical current would change the motion of the diaphragm, reproducing the speech.

But the farther electrical signals travelled, the more they would be attenuated. Resistance from the wire carrying them would convert some of the electrical energy into heat, and electrical current could “leak” between adjacent telephone wires. As the electrical signals got weaker and weaker, the sound would be less and less intelligible when reproduced, until it couldn’t be heard at all. If AT&T wanted to provide universal service, it would need a way to maintain the strength of the electrical signal as it traveled over long distances.

AT&T was able to partly resolve this problem using the loading coil, an invention of electrical engineer Michael Pupin. (Lines which had loading coils added to them were sometimes described as being “Pupinized.”) The loading coil added inductance (a tendency to resist changes in current) to telephone lines, which reduced signal attenuation. As a result, the loading coil roughly doubled the effective distance limit of telephone calls, from around 1000-1200 miles to closer to 2000 miles. But the loading coil merely reduced signal attenuation; the signal was still decaying as it traveled along the lines, just more slowly. Without some way of actually amplifying the telephone signals, the maximum distance for a telephone line was enough to connect New York to Denver, but not enough to reach the West Coast from New York and connect the entire country.

AT&T experimented with various mechanical amplifiers, which converted the electrical signals into mechanical movements and then back to electrical signals, but these were found to greatly distort the signal, and were not widely used. What was needed was an electronic amplifier, which could amplify the electrical signals directly, without the lossy and distorting effects of mechanical translation. In 1911, AT&T formed a special research branch to tackle the problem of long-distance transmission, and hired the young physicist Harold Arnold (who would later become the first director of research at Bell Labs) to research possible amplifiers based on the “new physics” of electrons.
Electronic amplification: the blue is the voltage of the input signal, which varies over time. The red is the amplified voltage of the output signal. The gain of this amplifier is three: output voltage is 3x input voltage. Similar amplification can be done for electrical current. Via Wikipedia.

At first, Arnold had little success. He looked at a variety of possible amplifying technologies, and experimented extensively with mercury discharge tubes (which initially seemed promising), but nothing appeared to fit AT&T’s requirements. But in 1912, Arnold learned of a new, promising amplifier known as the audion, which had been brought to AT&T by American inventor Lee de Forest. De Forest’s audion was, in turn, based on an invention of the British physicist Ambrose Fleming, known as the “Fleming valve.” Fleming was inspired by extensive experimentation with what was known as the “Edison Effect:” the observation that in an incandescent bulb, electric current would flow from the heated filament to a nearby metal plate. Fleming used this effect to create a diode, a device which lets electric current flow in one direction but not another. De Forest modified Fleming’s valve by adding a third element, a metallic grid, between the filament and the plate. By varying the voltage at the metallic grid, De Forest eventually discovered he could control the flow of electrical current from the filament to the plate. This allowed the device to act as an amplifier: a small change in the voltage could create a much larger change in the current flowing from the filament to the plate.
A radio receiver built with audions, via Wikipedia.

De Forest’s audion had uneven performance — notably, it couldn’t handle the level of energy needed for a telephone line. Moreover, it was clear that De Forest did not quite understand how the device worked. But Arnold, well-versed in the physics of electrons, recognized its potential, and realized that, with modifications, its various limitations could be overcome. Via “The Continuous Wave,” a history of early radio:

Arnold knew exactly what to do about the audion’s limitations. “I suggested that we make the thing larger, increase the size of the plate with the corresponding increases in the size of the grid but particularly at that time I suggested that we were not getting enough electrons from the filament.” What he wanted to do, in fact, was convert the de Forest audion into a different kind of device. He wanted a much higher vacuum in the tube, with residual gas eliminated to the greatest possible extent; and he knew the newly invented Gaede molecular vacuum pump made that possible. He wanted more electron emission from the filament without an increase in filament voltage; and he knew Wehnelt’s new oxide-coated filaments would do that.

After paying $50,000 (roughly $1.6 million in 2026 dollars) for the rights to the audion, Arnold and others at AT&T spent the next year turning it into a practical electronic amplifier: the triode vacuum tube. By June 1914, vacuum tube amplifiers were being installed on a transcontinental telephone line connecting New York and San Francisco, and in January of 1915 the transcontinental line was inaugurated at the Panama-Pacific International Exposition with a call between Alexander Graham Bell in New York and Thomas Watson in San Francisco. By the late 1920s, AT&T was using over 100,000 vacuum tubes in its telephone system, and triodes and their descendents (four-element tetrodes, five-element pentodes) would go on to be used in all manner of electronic devices, from radios to TVs to the first digital computers.
Via Hong 2001.

The vacuum tube, with its ability to amplify electronic signals, represented a sea change in how AT&T engineers thought about telephone service. Prior to the electronic amplifier, a telephone call was essentially a single diminishing stream of electromagnetic energy. The range of that energy could be extended farther and farther from the speaker at the steep cost of its fidelity. The amplifier made it possible to consider a telephone call as a stream of information, as a signal that was distinct from the medium that carried it. It could be ably renewed, translated, modified in new and exciting ways. As historian David Mindell notes:

…a working amplifier could renew the signal at any point, and hence maintain it through complicated manipulations, making possible long strings of filters, modulators, and transmission lines. Electricity in the wires became merely a carrier of messages, not a source of power, and hence opened the door to new ways of thinking about communications…The message was no longer the medium, now it was a signal that could be understood and manipulated on its own terms, independent of its physical embodiment.

Thanks to vacuum tube amplifiers, AT&T could finally fulfill its dream of universal telephone service, connecting telephones to each other anywhere in the continental US. But vacuum tubes were far from perfect amplifiers. The ideal amplifier has a linear relationship between the input and the output, effectively multiplying the input current or voltage by some value. If this relationship is non-linear, some inputs will be multiplied more than others, and the signal will become distorted. This distortion can garble speech, and — on a wire carrying multiple telephone calls — can create cross-talk, with speech from one telephone call being heard on another.

The vacuum tube was a superior amplifier to anything that preceded it, but it wasn’t a perfectly linear amplifier; its amplification curve formed more of an S-shape, under-amplifying low values and over-amplifying high ones. For a line carrying a single telephone call, the resulting distortion could be mitigated by restricting inputs to the linear portion of the curve, but as AT&T adopted carrier modulation — carrying multiple calls at different frequencies on a single line — distortion became more of a problem.

In 1921, Harold Black, a 23 year old electrical engineer, joined AT&T. He soon produced a report analyzing the future potential of a transcontinental telephone line carrying thousands of carrier-modulated conversations. At the time, carrier modulation was being used to carry at most three calls on a single line. Black’s analysis showed that such a line would require an amplifier with far less distortion than existing vacuum tubes,and Black began to work on developing an improved amplifier as a side project.

At first, Black simply tried to create vacuum tubes with less distortion, a project that many others at AT&T were also working on. The efforts of Black and others produced higher-quality vacuum tubes, but nothing Black tried reduced the distortion to the degree he was aiming for.

After two years of failure, Black decided to pivot; rather than trying again and again to build a perfectly linear amplifier, he would accept that any amplifier he made might be imperfect, and instead find a way to remove the distortion that it introduced.

Black first tried to do this by subtracting the input signal from the amplifier’s output, leaving behind just the distortion, and then amplifying that distortion and subtracting that from the output signal. This method — the “feedforward amplifier” — worked, but not well. It required having two amplifiers (one for the original signal, and one for the distortion) that needed to have very precisely matched amplification characteristics, and maintaining that alignment over a wide range of frequencies and for a long period of time proved difficult. As Black noted later:

For example, every hour on the hour —24 hours a day —somebody had to adjust the filament current to its correct value. In doing this, they were permitting plus or minus 1/2-to-l dB variation in amplifier gain, whereas, for my purpose, the gain had to be absolutely perfect. In addition, every six hours it became necessary to adjust the B battery voltage, because the amplifier gain would be out of hand. There were other complications too, but these were enough! Nothing came of my efforts, however, because every circuit I devised turned out to be far too complex to be practical.

Black grappled with the problem over the next several years, until suddenly realizing the solution while taking the ferry to work one morning in 1927. An electromagnetic signal consisted of a wave, alternating back and forth between positive and negative voltage. If you took a fraction of the output from an amplifier, and subtracted that from the input signal before it got amplified — by modifying the input with negative feedback — you would cancel out the distortion. Because this would reduce the strength of the input signal, this would have the downside of greatly reducing the how much the signal would be amplified (known as the gain), but that was ok; the distortion would be reduced so much that you could get as much gain as you needed by stringing several such amplifiers together. And unlike Black’s feedforward amplifier, this negative feedback amplifier would be self-correcting: any unexpected change to the gain in the amplifier would become a change in the feedback signal, compensating for the change.
Black’s first publication of the negative feedback amplifier, via Archive.org.

By the end of the year, Black had built a negative feedback amplifier that reduced distortion by a factor of 100,000. But Black had a difficult time convincing others of the merits of his invention. At the time feedback was largely considered undesirable by electrical engineers. Feedback could cause an amplifier to “sing” and start generating its own output, known as self-oscillation, overwhelming the input signal. (Think of the high-pitched sound that you get when placing a microphone next to a speaker.) Engineers went to significant efforts to prevent feedback-related problems.

At the time it was also believed that an amplifier with high levels of feedback would be fundamentally unstable. Opposition to Black’s amplifier was so severe that securing a US patent required “long drawn-out arguments with the patent office,” and the British patent office treated the invention the way they treated perpetual motion machines, demanding a working model. Harold Arnold, who had since become director of research at Bell Labs, “refused to accept a negative feedback amplifier, and directed Black to design conventional amplifiers instead.”

In practice, keeping the amplifier stable (avoiding self-oscillation) while also stringing together amplifiers in sequence proved to be a complex problem. These issues were resolved in part thanks to the help of two other Bell Labs researchers, Harry Nyquist and Henrik Bode. Nyquist and Bode studied the behavior of the negative feedback amplifier, and created mathematical tools for analyzing it and determining the conditions under which it would be stable.

Taken together, these efforts turned Black’s invention into a mainstay of electronics. Within 25 years, thanks to the work of Black, Nyquist, Bode, and others, the principle of negative feedback was “applied almost universally to amplifiers used for any purpose,” and it continues to be used in the design of modern amplifiers.

The effects of the Bell Labs work on negative feedback resonated far beyond amplification. A parallel tradition of feedback-based devices existed in mechanical engineering, in the design of things like governors and servomechanisms. During WWII, these two traditions began to merge into the modern discipline of control theory, which studies how to control a dynamic system using feedback. Feedback loops designed using control theory methods are the foundation of virtually every sort of automated system: aircraft autopilots, robotic arms, chemical plants, and the entire electrical grid all use feedback-based control loops, and the tools that Black, Nyquist, Bode, and others created to analyze the negative feedback amplifier are still used by control engineers around the world today.

Even with negative feedback reducing their distortion, vacuum tubes were still far from ideal amplifiers. A vacuum tube is essentially a highly modified lightbulb, and has similar drawbacks as early lightbulbs: heating the filaments consumed a lot of power, and over time the tubes would burn out and need to be replaced. Mervin Kelly, a Bell Labs physicist who was promoted to director of research in 1936, wanted to replace the vacuum tube amplifiers and mechanical relays in the Bell System with solid-state devices, devices whose switching or amplification was done by way of electrons moving through a solid chunk of matter. Shortly after his promotion, Kelly began to hire physicists who were familiar with the then-novel physics of quantum mechanics, and could help better understand the behavior of solid matter. In 1938 Kelly created a group specifically devoted to solid-state research, and the team began working on building a solid-state amplifier using semiconductors: materials such as silicon, germanium, and copper oxide whose conductivity could be greatly varied. The group made progress — most notably, in 1939 Russell Ohl discovered that small amounts of impurities in silicon could drastically affect silicon’s conductivity when he accidentally created a photovoltaic cell in a silicon rod — but the work was soon disrupted by wartime priorities.

As the war progressed, Kelly recognized that wartime scientific and technological advances had the potential to upend the communications industry, and that if AT&T wanted to stay on top it needed to master the relevant sciences. He conceived of a new, major research program into solid-state physics that would be led by William Shockley, a physicist Bell Labs had hired in 1936 and who since 1938 had been researching solid-state devices.

During the war Shockley had worked on a variety of problems unrelated to semiconductors, including designing tactics for submarine warfare and training B-29 crews to use radar bombsights. But he also found time to work on a solid-state amplifier. In April of 1945, a few months before the end of the war, Shockley began to sketch out a device made from doped silicon (silicon with small amounts of impurities). Shockley hoped to use external electric fields to modify the conductivity of the silicon, amplifying the current flowing through it. His initial experiments, however, were met with failure.

A few months later, Kelly reorganized the research program at Bell Labs, creating a new, larger group wholly devoted to solid-state physics and led by Shockley. Among those who joined the new group were Walter Brattain, a physicist who had joined Bell Labs in 1929 and had previously studied copper oxide semiconductors, and John Bardeen, a new researcher from the Naval Ordnance Laboratory. Both were part of a subteam of the new solid-state physics group devoted specifically to the study of semiconductors.

Shortly after Bardeen joined, Shockley asked him to check Shockley’s calculations for the silicon amplifier in the hopes of learning why it hadn’t worked. Bardeen studied Shockley’s work, and eventually theorized that electrons might be getting “trapped” on the surface of the material, preventing the electric field from penetrating it and thus altering its conductivity. The semiconductor group began studying these “surface states,” and after nearly two years of experiments a breakthrough occurred.

Brattain had been studying surface states in silicon and germanium by shining light on the materials; if surface states existed, the light would knock away some electrons via the photovoltaic effect, “ripping holes in the semiconductor fabric.” Brattain discovered that not only was this electron disruption taking place, but that by varying the charge in an electrode above the surface of a piece of silicon, the strength of the photovoltaic effect could be varied significantly. The surface states themselves could be manipulated.

On November 21st, 1947 — a few days after Brattain’s discovery — Bardeen suggested using this ability to manipulate surface states to build an amplifier. They placed a sharp metal point onto the surface of a piece of doped silicon, and surrounded it with an electrolyte. By placing a small wire into the electrolyte and varying its voltage, they believed they could alter the conductivity of the silicon, and thus how much current flowed through it from the metal point.

The experiment worked: applying a voltage to the electrolyte boosted the current flowing through the metal point by about 10%. When Brattain rode home that night, he told the other members of his carpool that he’d “taken part in the most important experiment that I’d ever do in my life.”

Over the next several weeks, Bardeen and Brattain iterated on their new silicon amplifier. Initially its performance was poor, amplifying current only marginally, not amplifying voltage at all, and only functioning at very low electrical frequencies. But they eventually found that replacing the silicon with germanium allowed the device to amplify both current and voltage, and removing the electrolyte allowed it to amplify voltage over a wide range of frequencies.

By the middle of December, Bardeen and Brattain were ready to apply what they had learned. They fashioned a new device consisting of two thin pieces of gold foil attached to the surface of a piece of doped germanium, separated by only a 500th of an inch. They connected one wire to each of the pieces of gold foil, and a third to the piece of germanium. They reasoned that varying the current in one of the gold foil wires should amplify the current flowing through the other gold wire.

It worked: both current and voltage could be amplified across a wide range of frequencies using the device. Bardeen and Brattain had fashioned a solid-state amplifier.
Point contact transistor, via Wikipedia.

By early 1948, Bell Labs had fabricated nearly a hundred copies of Bardeen and Brattain’s amplifier (which would soon be named the transistor), and was testing how it could be used in various electronic devices. By the end of May, Bell Labs engineers had built a transistor-based telephone repeater. At a June 30th press conference, Bell Labs announced the transistor to the world:

We have called it the Transistor, T-R-A-N-S-I-S-T-O-R, because it is a resistor or semiconductor device which can amplify electrical signals as they are transferred through it from input to output terminals. It is, if you will, the electrical equivalent of a vacuum tube amplifier. But there the similarity ceases. It has no vacuum, no filament, no glass tube. It is composed entirely of cold, solid substances.

The rest, of course, is history.

Bell Labs worked out how to make the transistor more reliable, and by 1949 was manufacturing them by the thousands. William Shockley, irritated at not having taken part in Bardeen and Brattain’s discovery, worked to design an alternative semiconductor amplifier, the junction transistor. Shockley’s junction transistor, first successfully fabricated by Bell Labs physicists Gordon Teal and Morgan Sparks in 1950, was far more reliable than the point-contact transistor, and it would go on to be the most widely-used transistor until the MOSFET appeared in the 1960s. In 1956 Shockley, Bardeen, and Brattain would share the Nobel Prize in physics for the discovery of the “transistor effect,” by which time Shockley had left Bell Labs to found his own semiconductor company, Shockley Semiconductor Lab. In 1957, eight disgruntled employees would leave Shockley’s company to found Fairchild Semiconductor. Departing Fairchild employees in turn went on to found their own semiconductor companies, and the so-called “Fairchildren” (which include Intel and AMD) became the foundation of Silicon Valley. The world would never be the same.

As Shockley, Bardeen and Brattain were experimenting with semiconductors in the 1940s, another Bell Labs physicist, Charles Townes, was studying microwaves. Since the invention of radio in the late 19th century, the technology had progressed by steadily marching up the electromagnetic spectrum, finding ways to use shorter and shorter wavelengths. There were a variety of reasons for this: shorter wavelengths carried more information, there were limits to how many users could occupy a particular part of the electromagnetic spectrum, antennas for shorter wavelengths could be smaller, and radars with shorter wavelengths could resolve more detail. The shortest wavelengths in use in the 1920s were tens of meters in length, but by WWII this had fallen to centimeters in length; these were known as microwaves. During the war, at the behest of the military, Townes designed microwave radars of increasingly short wavelengths. When Townes designed a radar with a 10 centimeter wavelength, he was then asked to build a 3 centimeter one; when he built that, he was asked for a 1.25 centimeter wavelength.

But the pressure to achieve smaller and smaller wavelengths was bumping up against technological limitations. Generating and amplifying smaller and smaller wavelengths required smaller and smaller components; by the time wavelengths reached the millimeter range, the components to generate the signals became so small that manufacturing them, and putting enough power through them, became impractical. What was needed was a new way to generate and amplify radio signals that didn’t require fabricating microscopic components.

In 1948 Townes left Bell Labs for Columbia University, where he pursued research related to microwave spectroscopy. Townes hoped to use microwaves of increasingly small wavelengths, on the order of millimeters, to study the molecules and atomic nuclei. Because of his interest and expertise, and because shorter-wavelength radiation might prove valuable for radars or other military uses, Townes was asked by the Navy in 1950 to form an advisory group on millimeter wave radiation, so the Navy could keep abreast of any promising developments in the field. As there was not yet any good method of generating millimeter waves, most of the group’s efforts were focused on thinking of ways to generate them.

In April of 1951, on the morning of a day-long meeting of the committee, Townes awoke early and sat on a bench in a nearby park, and began to consider ways to generate millimeter wave radiation. Certain molecules, Townes knew, radiated energy at microwave wavelengths: perhaps instead of small electronic components, he could use molecules to generate the short millimeter waves he and everyone else were looking for?

The idea was not initially very promising. Molecules would certainly radiate after absorbing energy, but they would necessarily emit less energy than they absorbed — you couldn’t simply shine a light or send a signal through a collection of molecules, and get a stronger signal back. Heated molecules would radiate energy, but to generate microwaves they would need to be so hot that they would break apart into individual atoms.

Townes did know of one way to get a molecule to boost an electromagnetic signal: stimulated emission. Normally, when an atom or molecule is struck by a photon, its energy level will be raised. Later, when it falls back to its normal state, it will emit a photon. However, if it’s struck by a photon while it’s already in an elevated energy state, it will emit a second photon of the exact same frequency: one photon becomes two.
Stimulated emission.

Most molecules are usually in low-energy states, not high energy states, which means that any amplification would quickly peter out as excess photons were absorbed. But Townes realized that if a collection of molecules could be coaxed so that most of them were in high energy states — known as a “population inversion” — a cascade of stimulated emission could take place. One photon striking a high energy molecule would become two; each of those could strike another high energy molecule, becoming four, then becoming eight, then becoming 16. A small amount of electromagnetic radiation could be amplified enormously. With enough molecules in an elevated state, Townes realized that in principle there would be “no limit to the amount of energy obtainable.”

Sitting in the park, Townes took an envelope from his pocket, and worked through how such a device might work. By feeding a stream of appropriately stimulated molecules into a resonator (a cavity that would reflect electromagnetic radiation of the appropriate wavelength), any electromagnetic radiation generated within the resonator would bounce back and forth, gaining energy each time it passed through the molecules as more and more photons were generated. The device would amplify any incoming signal as an electromagnetic wave passed through the population inversion molecules. And because the resonator would reflect the wave back and forth through the molecules (a form of feedback), it could also act as an oscillator — a generator of electromagnetic signals. Power would only be limited by how quickly molecules carried energy into the resonator.

A few months later Townes assigned Jim Gordon, one of his graduate students, the task of building the device, assisted by another graduate student, Herb Zeiger. Over the next several years Gordon worked diligently to realize the ambitious concept. Many physicists considered the idea unpromising: at one point, several years into the project, the current and former heads of Townes’s department, Isidor Rabi and Polykarp Kusch, exasperatedly stated to Townes that “you should stop the work you are doing. It isn’t going to work. You know it’s not going to work. We know it’s not going to work. You’re wasting money. Just stop!” But finally in 1954, a few months after Kusch insisted the device wouldn’t work, Gordon succeeded, demonstrating both amplification and oscillation in a collection of stimulated ammonia molecules. They called their device the maser, an acronym describing the device’s Microwave Amplification by Stimulated Emission of Radiation.

The maser, once developed, eventually proved to be “the world’s most sensitive radio amplifier,” an order of magnitude more sensitive than existing microwave amplifiers. Bell Labs, which hired Gordon in 1955, used masers to amplify the signals from its Echo and Telstar satellites launched in the early 1960s. The maser also found use in radio telescopes for astronomy. But the maser had drawbacks — most notably, it had to be cooled to a few degrees above absolute zero — and it was gradually relegated to increasingly niche uses as other low-noise amplifiers were developed.

The biggest impact of the maser was likely the invention that it inspired. In 1957, Charles Townes, still attuned to the problem of generating shorter and shorter electromagnetic waves, began considering how the maser might be adapted to such a task. Historically, radio had advanced into shorter wavelengths gradually, one step at a time. But Townes realized that with the maser it might be as easy, or perhaps even easier, to skip from microwave wavelengths (roughly 1 meter to 1 millimeter) all the way down to infrared or even optical wavelengths (roughly 0.000000380 to 0.000000750 meters). By this time, Townes had re-joined Bell Labs as a part-time consultant, and Townes and another Bell Labs physicist, Art Schawlow, worked through the physics of what they referred to as an “optical maser.” In 1958, they published a paper outlining the idea.
Townes and Schawlow’s paper on optical masers, via American Physical Society.

After Townes and Schawlow’s paper was published, the race was on to build the optical maser, which soon began to be referred to as a laser, for Light Amplification by Stimulated Emission of Radiation). The first successful laser was built by Theodore Maiman at Hughes Aircraft in 1960 using a ruby crystal, but other successes quickly followed. It was soon discovered that a wide variety of materials could be made to “lase,” and before long there were lasers made from gasses, dye, glass, semiconductors, and more. In 1964, Townes would receive the Nobel Prize in physics for his work on the “maser-laser principle.”

While the laser could amplify signals that were passed into it, it proved much more useful as an oscillator, a generator of original signals. In 1959 Art Schawlow, believing that the laser would be more useful as an oscillator than an amplifier, jokingly suggested that it be renamed the LOSER. Unlike the maser, which was limited to niche uses, the laser proved to be useful for a wide variety of tasks. Within just two years of Maiman’s demonstration, a laser was used for eye surgery. By 1968, the US Air Force was dropping laser-guided bombs in combat. By 1971, Xerox PARC researchers built the first laser printer, and in 1974 the first laser-based barcode scanners were being installed. In 1980, the first commercial fiber optics lines using semiconductor lasers were made available. It’s the lasers ability to generate coherent light — light all of the same frequency, and in the same phase — that made it possible to continue to advance up the electromagnetic spectrum, and use optical wavelength electromagnetic radiation for communication.

Why did these various amplifiers, so many of them deriving from work at Bell Labs, end up being so valuable?

Partly it’s because an electronic amplifier is a very useful information processing device. An amplifier can amplify an electromagnetic signal, but it can also act as an electronic switch. And if the output of an amplifier is fed back into its input, an amplifier can also act as an oscillator: a generator of electromagnetic signals. Those are all useful information processing tasks, and each time a new, better amplifier was created, it extended the kinds of information processing that could be done. So these amplifiers were valuable because electronic information processing is valuable, and these amplifiers all greatly expanded the scope of information processing.

But a broader, somewhat more abstract reason is that many important technologies often act as amplifiers in one way or another. One of the most important inventions in biology, for instance, is the polymerase chain reaction, or PCR. PCR is essentially a DNA amplifier: it makes millions of copies of DNA sequences, making it far easier to study them and enabling things like the dramatic reduction in the price of genetic sequencing. The inventor of PCR, Kary Mullis, shared the 1993 Nobel Prize in Chemistry for his invention.

Examples of important amplifiers abound, because amplifiers themselves help produce abundance. Chemical catalysts, which can be thought of as amplifiers of chemical reactions, are used in everything from catalytic converters in cars to petroleum manufacturing. Simple machines like the lever or pulley amplify force, microscopes and telescopes amplify visual details. Industrial fermentation, nuclear reactors, the printing press, the Xerox machine, fractional reserve banking — all can be thought of as a type of amplifier.

So these four amplifiers were important in part because amplifiers in general are important. Amplifiers take something useful — an electromagnetic signal, a segment of DNA, a copy of a book — and make it possible to get a lot more of it, and technologies that do that are often particularly useful themselves.

1

For simplicity’s sake, I’m considering research done at AT&T before Bell Labs was formally incorporated as being done by Bell Labs.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

25. Leaving GitHub for Forgejo

Source: https://jorijn.com/en/blog/leaving-github-for-forgejo/
Site: jorijn.com
Author: Jorijn Schrijvershof
Published: 2026-05-08
HN activity: 543 points · 285 comments
Length: 3.5K words (~16 min read)
Language: en-US

I moved my code from GitHub to a self-hosted Forgejo. Not because of the outages, but because of who owns what runs on top of them. The Dutch government just made the same call.

On April 27, 2026 the Dutch Ministry of the Interior soft-launched code.overheid.nl, a self-hosted Forgejo instance for Dutch government source code. Project manager Boris Van Hoytema said the platform "was born from the requirement that the ministry has to legally publish [its] source code on a place that [it] owns," and that Forgejo was picked over GitLab because it is fully open source and offers all the freedoms needed for digital autonomy.

The week before, I quietly moved my own code in the same direction. My canonical Git host is now code.jorijn.com, running Forgejo v15 LTS on a single NUC in a hardened setup. Some of my repositories already live there; the rest are queued. The longer-term plan is to archive my public GitHub repositories once the migration is complete and point each archive at the new home.

Most pieces about leaving GitHub lead with the outages. Outages are real. They are not why I'm leaving. The outages, the AI-by-default opt-in, and the fact that GitHub no longer has its own CEO are all symptoms of one underlying fact: I do not own this. The Dutch government just published the same conclusion. So this is the long version of that thinking, and what the move actually looks like once you decide to make it.

TL;DR

GitHub logged 257 incidents in May 2025 to April 2026, 48 of them major. The CTO publicly apologised and said capacity needs to scale 30x to keep up with AI-driven load.
In August 2025 GitHub stopped having its own CEO. It is now a unit of Microsoft's CoreAI division, the same group building Copilot and the broader AI stack.
On April 24, 2026 GitHub flipped Copilot Free, Pro, and Pro+ user-interaction data to opt-in for AI training by default. There is no repository-level opt-out.
US-jurisdictional risk under FISA Section 702 and the CLOUD Act is unresolved. Microsoft's own attorney told the French Senate under oath he could not guarantee EU data was safe from silent US government access.
The Dutch government picked Forgejo for code.overheid.nl in April 2026 for the same set of reasons. I'm doing the same for my work.
code.jorijn.com runs Forgejo v15 LTS on a single NUC with a KVM-isolated, weekly-rebuilt Actions runner. Public GitHub repositories will be archived and pointed at the new home as the migration completes.

Why outages aren't actually the reason

The April 2026 outages were the kind that makes engineers angry. On April 23 the merge queue's squash-merge code path silently reverted previously merged commits across 658 repositories and 2,092 pull requests after a feature flag was rolled out incompletely. Companies including Modal and Zipline did manual data recovery. Four days later, an overloaded Elasticsearch cluster took Pull Requests, Issues, and Packages offline for over six hours.

But pick any month and the picture is the same kind of bad. February 2026 alone logged 37 incidents, including a 3-hour 40-minute outage that took Actions, the Copilot Coding Agent, Code Review, CodeQL, Dependabot, and Pages down at once. October 1, 2025 was a ten-hour macOS-runner outage. The IncidentHub aggregation puts the May 2025 to April 2026 total at 257 incidents and 48 major outages, with roughly 112 hours of total downtime.

The right way to read this list is not "GitHub is unreliable." Big systems break. The right way to read it is the framing GitHub itself put on it. CTO Vlad Fedorov apologised on April 28 and said capacity has to grow 30x to keep up with the load. He attributed that load directly to "agentic AI workflow growth" since December 2025. The reliability story is downstream of the AI story. GitHub is not slowing down on AI features. It is doubling down on them. The outages are what doubling-down looks like in production.

The Pragmatic Engineer pointed out that GitLab, Bitbucket, Vercel, Linear, and Sentry didn't have the same year. They serve developers under the same overall demand pressure. Whatever GitHub is wrestling with is specific to GitHub.

GitHub no longer has its own CEO

The bigger fact is older than the apology and got a lot less press. On August 11, 2025 Thomas Dohmke stepped down as GitHub's CEO. Microsoft did not replace him. Instead, GitHub was absorbed into Microsoft's CoreAI division, a group Satya Nadella introduced in January 2025 with the stated mission to build the end-to-end Copilot and AI stack for both first-party and third-party customers.

GitHub's revenue, engineering, and support now report into Microsoft's developer division under Julia Liuson. GitHub's CPO reports to Microsoft's AI platform VP. The brand still exists. The independent leadership does not.

This matters because the older argument for staying on GitHub was that Microsoft kept it at arm's length. From 2018 through 2024 that was substantively true. Dohmke had a real seat. Product decisions were visibly GitHub's, not Microsoft's. After August 2025 that argument no longer holds. When you push code to github.com today, you are pushing it to a unit of Microsoft's AI organization. Whether that bothers you depends on how much you trust Microsoft's AI organization to make the same decisions about your repository that the older GitHub would have made. I no longer do, and the reason for that distrust shows up in the next section.

The training-data default flipped

On March 25, 2026 GitHub announced a privacy-statement change effective April 24. From that date, interaction data, specifically inputs, outputs, code snippets, and associated context, from Copilot Free, Pro, and Pro+ users will be used to train and improve our AI models unless they opt out.

Three things about that statement matter, in order.

First: opt-out, not opt-in. The default flipped. Anyone using Copilot for free, on Pro, or on Pro+ is now contributing to model training unless they go to the Copilot settings page and turn it off.

Second: there is no repository-level switch. As a maintainer, I cannot tell GitHub don't train on interactions inside my repository. The opt-out is per user account, so each contributor has to make their own choice. In effect, my codebase becomes training material whenever anyone using Copilot Free/Pro/Pro+ touches it, no matter how I license it.

Third: the carve-out for private repositories is narrower than it sounds. GitHub says it does not use private-repo content "at rest" for training, but it does collect "code snippets and interaction context" generated while Copilot is being used inside a private repo. The line between the code at rest and the snippets generated while editing it is, charitably, blurry.

Copilot Business and Copilot Enterprise customers are exempt because they are governed by separate Data Protection Agreements. The split is clean: pay enough and your interactions are not training data. Otherwise they are.

I wrote about agentic GitHub Actions a few weeks ago, and at the time the security model was the headline. The training-data flip is the second half of the same story: GitHub's strategic interest in your interaction data is structural now, not optional. I am not interested in arguing about the merits of that strategy on someone else's platform. I would rather not be on the platform.

Then there's the jurisdiction

Underneath all of this is a layer that doesn't shift when the privacy statement does. GitHub Inc. and Microsoft Corp. are US companies. Anything they hold sits in scope of US law, including FISA Section 702 and the CLOUD Act of 2018. Both apply regardless of where data physically sits.

Section 702 was reauthorised in April 2024 for two years and is currently running on a 45-day extension signed at the end of April 2026 while Congress argues over a longer renewal. It authorises US intelligence collection against non-US persons through electronic communications service providers domiciled in the US. The CLOUD Act lets US law enforcement compel a US-headquartered company to produce data stored anywhere in the world.

GitHub announced EU data residency for Enterprise Cloud in October 2024. That solves data location. It does not solve jurisdiction. CLOUD Act exposure follows corporate control, not geography.

The most honest articulation of this came not from a regulator but from Microsoft's own attorney, who told a French Senate hearing in June 2025, under oath, that he could not guarantee French data stored in European Microsoft datacentres was safe from silent US government access.

I covered the broader legal picture in my earlier piece on why "hosted in Frankfurt" doesn't mean GDPR-compliant, and the operational implications for hosting providers in my piece on NIS2, so I'll keep the detail there. The point that matters here is narrow. As long as your code lives at github.com, your code lives in US legal territory. EU data residency is a comfort, not a fix.

The Dutch government's call: code.overheid.nl

This is where the Dutch government's choice deserves more attention than it got. The legal driver is the Netherlands' "Open, tenzij" policy, in force since 2020: software developed with public funds is open source by default unless security or confidentiality requires otherwise. To comply, the ministry needed somewhere to publish code that it actually controlled. Code.overheid.nl is the answer.

The piece worth pausing on is which forge they chose. The European Commission runs code.europa.eu on self-hosted GitLab, live since September 2022. Germany's openCode is also GitLab. France's code.gouv.fr is an aggregator that indexes repos hosted elsewhere, not a forge in itself.

The Dutch government's choice of Forgejo, not GitLab, was deliberate. As the OSOR article put it, the rationale was that Forgejo is fully open source, with no open-core split, and offers all the freedoms needed for digital autonomy. Van Hoytema added that Forgejo's roadmap was "way more aligned" with theirs than the alternatives. The government did not just want a sovereign forge. They wanted a sovereign forge that wasn't gated behind a commercial vendor's premium tier.

So the institutional pattern matters: a national government with serious lawyers and a long memory looked at the same picture I was looking at, made the same decision, and shipped it the week before I did. That isn't proof that the decision is right. It is, at minimum, proof that the decision is no longer fringe.

Why Forgejo, and not GitLab

I weighed GitLab seriously. Self-hosted GitLab CE is a known quantity, with a much larger commercial ecosystem and, frankly, a more polished UI. Two things tipped the choice.

First: licensing. GitLab is open core. The Community Edition is MIT-licensed, but many of the features I'd actually want in production live in the Enterprise tiers under a non-free license. Forgejo went the other way. As of v9.0 in August 2024 the project relicensed from MIT to GPLv3+, with the explicit goal of staying copyleft and resisting future commercial capture of the codebase. The fork from Gitea in December 2022 happened precisely because Gitea Ltd took control of the trademarks and domains in a way the community had not consented to. The lesson learned shows up in the license.

Second: governance. Forgejo lives under Codeberg e.V., a non-profit registered in Berlin since September 2018, with a member-elected board, public budgets, and 300,000+ repositories on its hosted instance. Members vote on the budget annually; the 2025 plan was accepted with 88 in favour, zero against, one abstention. That is not a marketing claim about community governance. That is a German Verein doing what Vereine do.

Forgejo v15.0 LTS shipped on April 16, 2026. It is the project's 100th release. Long-term support runs through July 15, 2027. Forgejo Actions reached the maturity I needed (ephemeral runners, OpenID Connect, reusable workflow expansion) in v15. Releases since the fork have been steady, with active monthly reports.

The honest caveat: the commercial Forgejo ecosystem is real but thin. The cleanest commercial offering today is Codey by VSHN, a Swiss-hosted managed Forgejo from 19 CHF per month, launched on Servala in March 2025. There is no Red-Hat-style enterprise support subscription. If you need 24/7 phone support and a vendor to point at, you will need to build that yourself, or wait. I am willing to wait, because I would rather own the platform.

What I built, and why it looks the way it does

Code.jorijn.com runs on a single Intel NUC with 64 GB of RAM in my home office. Forgejo v15 LTS, Postgres 17, and Traefik live inside Docker. An Incus-managed KVM virtual machine sits beside them and runs my Forgejo Actions runner. That is the whole platform.

The interesting decision is not in the Forgejo deployment. Forgejo plus Postgres plus a reverse proxy is not interesting. The decision that took the most thought is the runner.

Where the danger actually is

If you self-host a forge, the forge itself is the easy part. The hard part is whatever runs the CI jobs. My runner has to execute npm install, composer install, and pip install on a daily Renovate schedule, against lockfiles generated by my own repositories. That means it executes lifecycle scripts. It means every job potentially runs untrusted code, of the same general shape that recent npm-worm and axios supply-chain attacks used to ride dependency bots that auto-merged within an hour.

The runner's job, in other words, is not to run code. The runner's job is to contain the code while it runs. Everything in the runner architecture exists for that reason. The same logic I described in my piece on unmaintained dependencies applies here: assume any single layer can fail, and design so the next one absorbs the failure.

The defenses, weakest to strongest

The runner uses five layers, in order from softest to hardest.

A persistent KVM virtual machine. The runner lives in its own VM, not in a container on the host. The host's kernel is not shared with the job environment. A Linux kernel CVE inside the runner has to break the KVM boundary before it can touch the NUC.
gVisor as the default Docker runtime inside that VM. Job containers run under runsc, which intercepts system calls in user space rather than passing them to the host kernel. A container escape has to break gVisor and the surrounding KVM.
A weekly destructive rebuild. Every Monday at 02:00 UTC the entire VM is destroyed and recreated from a freshly baked Ubuntu base image, with new persistent runner registrations minted against Forgejo. The base image itself rebuilds on Sundays, so the new VM consumes that week's apt and kernel patches. Persistent state cannot live longer than seven days.
An nftables egress filter on the runner's bridge. The runner can reach :443, :80, :22, and :53 to public destinations (npm, pypi, ghcr, my own Forgejo via the public hostname through the router's hairpin NAT). It cannot reach 192.168.0.0/16, 10.0.0.0/8, or 172.16.0.0/12. A compromised job cannot scan my LAN, cannot reach the router admin interface, and cannot reach the host's other services.
Scope-bound runner tokens, never admin-scoped. The two persistent runner registrations are tied to a single user scope and a single org scope respectively, with write:user,write:organization PAT scopes for management. A leaked token cannot register runners outside its scope, and definitely cannot do anything admin-scoped.

The combination is deliberately overlapping. Each layer is a fence. Together they are a perimeter with depth. None of this is novel, in the sense that all the primitives are upstream and well-documented. What is new is wiring them together for a single-user homelab where the entire platform fits on one NUC and reverts cleanly when something goes wrong.

The underlying primitives, KVM isolation, gVisor, weekly rebuilds, and scope-bound runner registrations, are all things Forgejo and Incus support natively. I just had to combine them.

What I gave up

This is the section I have to write because every "both sides" article I respect has one. So: what does moving to Forgejo cost me, honestly?

Discovery and the social graph. GitHub is where my contributors find me. When someone pushes a small fix to a public repository, they expect to do it on github.com, not on a domain they have never heard of. The plan I'm working towards is to archive each public GitHub repository once the move is done and point its README at code.jorijn.com. The discovery path stays intact: people still find me via GitHub, see the archive notice, and follow the link to the canonical home. I'm not there yet — a few repositories already live on code.jorijn.com, the rest are queued. Until then, the gap is real, and I accept it.

GitHub Actions ecosystem fragility. Forgejo Actions deliberately aims for familiarity, not compatibility. Most things work. Some don't. permissions: blocks at the workflow level are silently ignored. actions/checkout@v6 broke authenticated checkout on non-GitHub runners in early 2026, so I pinned everything to v5. actions/upload-artifact@v4 requires the Forgejo-hosted fork. OIDC works but uses a different workflow key (enable-openid-connect: true) than GitHub's permissions: id-token: write. None of these are blockers. They are all friction. If your workflows lean heavily on GitHub-specific features, the migration is a project, not an evening.

Dependabot. Forgejo doesn't have it. I run Renovate on the same self-hosted runner, on a 3-hour schedule. It does the same job. It has more configuration. The setup took me a day.

24/7 vendor support. GitHub Enterprise gives you a phone number and an SLA. Forgejo gives you an issue tracker and a chat room. For a one-person operation that is fine. For a 200-engineer organisation it might not be, and that is a real reason to wait.

When this isn't worth it

I would not move to self-hosted Forgejo if any of the following are true.

The team has zero appetite or capacity for running infrastructure. A managed Forgejo (Codey, or Codeberg for FOSS) closes most of that gap, but you still own the migration cost.
You are heavily invested in GitHub-specific features: GitHub Apps marketplace, Codespaces, Copilot Workspace, Advanced Security. Forgejo is a forge, not a developer-platform-as-a-service.
Your contributor base is the GitHub social graph. If discoverability matters more than ownership, stay where the contributors are. Or accept the friction, archive your public repositories with a pointer to your new home once the move is finished, and revisit the decision later.
You don't have a credible operational answer for the runner. The runner is the part where this gets serious. If you are not prepared to think about KVM isolation, gVisor, nftables, and weekly rebuilds, run your CI jobs on a managed runner host, or stay on GitHub.

The Dutch government's pattern is the right model here too. They did not migrate everything in one step. Code.overheid.nl is a soft-launch platform for ministries to share open-source code, not a wholesale replacement for everything else they use. My setup has the same shape: Forgejo is canonical for my work, GitHub is a mirror, and I am willing to revisit the mirror later.

Key takeaways

GitHub is no longer an independent company with its own CEO. Since August 2025 it is a unit of Microsoft's CoreAI division.
The April 2026 outages and the Copilot training-data default flip are downstream of the same shift. Both are predictable from the structure.
US-jurisdictional risk under FISA 702 and the CLOUD Act is real and unresolvable from the customer side. EU data residency is a comfort, not a fix.
The Dutch government picked Forgejo for code.overheid.nl in April 2026 for the same set of reasons. The institutional pattern is forming.
A defensible self-hosted Forgejo deployment is achievable on a single NUC, but the runner is the part that requires real care: KVM isolation, gVisor, weekly rebuilds, scope-bound tokens, and an egress filter that says no to your LAN.
Migration friction is real. Archiving your public GitHub repositories with a pointer to the new home keeps the discovery path intact while you complete the move.

Recurring server or deployment issues?

I help teams make production reliable with CI/CD, Kubernetes, and cloud—so fixes stick and deploys stop being stressful.

Explore DevOps consultancy

Related articles

30 Apr 2026

copy.fail (CVE-2026-31431): a small Linux kernel bug with an unusually big blast radius

copy.fail is a Linux kernel local privilege escalation disclosed on 29 April 2026. It works on nearly every modern distribution, leaves no on-disk trace, and slips past Kubernetes' default seccomp. Why it matters and what to do. 1631 words
29 Apr 2026

HashiCorp Vault vs OpenBao: a thorough comparison for platform teams

Two secrets managers, one shared codebase, two very different licenses. A deep, practical comparison of HashiCorp Vault and OpenBao for platform engineers picking between them. 4605 words
19 Apr 2026

OpenTofu vs Terraform in 2026: the fork finally diverged

Three years after the fork, OpenTofu and Terraform have diverged in licensing, governance, and technical features. For EU teams evaluating infrastructure-as-code strategy, the choice is no longer theoretical. 1950 words

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

26. I moved my digital stack to Europe

Source: https://monokai.com/articles/how-i-moved-my-digital-stack-to-europe/
Site: monokai.com
Author: Monokai
Submitted: 2026-05-13 11:42 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 896 points · 542 comments
Length: 1.9K words (~9 min read)
Language: en

On digital sovereignty, and why European cloud is better than you think

April 29, 2026 10 min. Digital SovereigntyDigital InfrastructureDigital AutonomyEuropean CloudEurope

100% accurate European digital infrastructure, AI generated

There’s a version of this post that starts with a spreadsheet and ends with a quiet sense of satisfaction. That’s mostly how it went. But underneath the practical exercise of swapping one SaaS tool for another was something that felt more urgent, a growing discomfort with how much of my digital infrastructure sat on servers I didn’t control, in a jurisdiction increasingly prone to unpredictability, operated by companies whose incentives don’t always align with mine.

Digital sovereignty sounds like a buzzword until you think carefully about what it means. It means knowing where your data lives. It means not being one policy change, one acquisition, or one executive’s bad mood away from losing access to tools your business depends on. It means choosing infrastructure based on values, not just convenience.

So I started migrating.

Analytics

Google Analytics was the obvious first target. It’s the canonical example of a service that’s free because you are the product, your visitors’ behavior funneled back into Google’s advertising machinery.

Self-hosting Matomo solved this cleanly. The data stays on my own server, and I’m fully GDPR-compliant without the cookie consent theater that Google Analytics typically requires. The reporting is comprehensive, the interface is familiar enough, and I own everything.

The main downside is maintenance overhead. You’re now responsible for updates, backups, and keeping the server healthy. For most setups this is low-friction, but it’s not zero friction.

Email

Proton Mail is based in Switzerland, not EU territory, but Swiss privacy law is closely aligned with GDPR and arguably stronger in some respects. Proton builds its business model around privacy rather than advertising, and end-to-end encryption is baked in at the protocol level rather than bolted on. The email client is solid, the calendar works well, and for anyone moving away from US-based services, it sits comfortably in the same spirit as the rest of this stack.

One adjustment is getting used to Proton’s filter system, which is a bit more limited than Gmail’s. Gmail lets you write filters against virtually anything, including the full body of the message. Proton doesn’t support filtering on email content at all. So if you’ve built a workflow around catching specific phrases or keywords in message bodies, you’ll have to rethink it. For most people this won’t be a dealbreaker, but it’s worth knowing before you migrate.

There’s also a practical limitation worth flagging: Proton caps custom domains at three, even on the Duo plan. If you run several domains, like separate addresses for different projects or businesses, you’ll hit that ceiling quickly and need to rethink how you route and send mail. I ended up consolidating, which was probably overdue anyway, but it wasn’t a choice I made entirely freely.

Proton isn’t free and charges a substantial fee compared to other options. You’ll get access to a whole suite of Proton apps though.

Password Management

Once I was in the Proton ecosystem, moving password management there as well made sense. Proton Pass is end-to-end encrypted, open source, and benefits from the same Swiss jurisdiction as the rest of Proton’s stack.

1Password is a genuinely great product and this was a lateral move more than an upgrade. The interface is simple, the browser extension works reliably, and having passwords, email, and calendar under one encrypted roof has a certain satisfying coherence to it.

Compute

DigitalOcean has earned its reputation by doing one thing exceptionally well: getting out of your way. The UI is clean, the mental model is simple, and spinning up infrastructure never feels like a chore. It’s the platform that proved developer experience could be a competitive moat.

Scaleway was a pleasant surprise. I expected a capable-but-rough European alternative, but what I found was a platform that’s genuinely well thought out. Servers spun up quickly inside a private network of my own configuration, the control panel is clean, and the options available matched everything I actually needed. Scaleway displays projected CO₂ emissions alongside server location choices, a nice touch.

Object Storage

Scaleway’s object storage is S3-compatible, which makes migration mechanical rather than painful, update your endpoint and credentials and existing code works unchanged.

I used a tool called rclone to sync my old AWS S3 storage buckets to the new Scaleway S3 buckets. This took a little more than a week of constant syncing, as these buckets were quite large.

Offsite Backups

OVH is the largest European cloud provider and brings the reliability and pricing you’d expect at that scale. Their object storage works well as a backup destination and ends up cheaper than Backblaze B2 once you configure lifecycle rules to move older backups to the cold storage class.

Getting there, however, requires some patience. The OVHcloud control panel is a labyrinth: the lifecycle rule configuration is buried somewhere in the documentation, and it involves some work in the terminal. Once it’s set up, it works reliably and the cost difference is meaningful.

Transactional Emails

Lettermint is a European transactional email service that does the job without the bloat. Deliverability is solid, the API is clean, and it has straightforward pricing.

Compared to SendGrid, the analytics are leaner and the ecosystem integrations are fewer. SendGrid has years of tooling, documentation, and community answers behind it. Lettermint is newer and smaller. For most transactional sending use cases (password resets, notifications, receipts) that doesn’t matter much. But if you’re doing complex multi-stream email infrastructure, you’ll want to audit the feature set carefully first.

Error Tracking

Bugsink is a self-hosted error tracking tool that accepts Sentry’s SDK, which means the migration path is almost frictionless, change one line of configuration and you’re done.

To be honest: Bugsink is bare-bones. There’s no performance monitoring, no session replays, no advanced alerting. It’s not a Sentry replacement for teams that use Sentry properly. For me, it’s a simple remote error log, when something breaks in production I get a stack trace and that’s enough. Sentry’s cloud product is genuinely excellent if you need the full feature set, and for larger engineering teams the breadth almost certainly justifies the cost. But if your use case is “tell me when something broke and show me the stack trace”, self-hosted Bugsink does exactly that with no data leaving your infrastructure.

AI API integration

For my AI API integrations, I switched from OpenAI to Mistral. It worked out perfectly as I was mostly using simpler models anyway.

Mistral is headquartered in Paris and has published compelling open-weight models alongside its API offering. The API is clean, the models are fast and capable, and there’s something coherent about a European AI provider that leans into openness rather than away from it. For my inference workloads, the switch was lateral in quality and meaningfully better in terms of where the money goes.

CDN

Exception № 1

Not everything moved. Cloudflare is a US company, I still use it, and I’m at peace with that.

Here’s the reasoning: Cloudflare sits in front of my public-facing websites. Its job is to cache, protect against DDoS attacks, and make content load fast for visitors around the world. The data flowing through it is already public by definition. I’m not routing private communications or sensitive application data through Cloudflare; I’m using it to serve pages that anyone on the internet can read. The sovereignty calculus is different when the thing you’re protecting is already public.

I did try Bunny CDN, which is European-based and has a great reputation. For straightforward CDN use it’s excellent. But Cloudflare’s feature set (security rules, Workers platform, breadth of configuration options) wasn’t matched closely enough to justify the switch for my specific needs. Sometimes the pragmatic answer wins.

Payments

Exception № 2

Stripe is one of the few services I haven’t moved yet, even though payment infrastructure is exactly the kind of thing I care about having in a jurisdiction I trust. Mollie is a Dutch payment processor with full EU incorporation, strong GDPR compliance by design, and a product that has matured considerably in recent years. The API has converged toward parity for most common payment flows, and for a European business the regional payment method coverage (iDEAL, Bancontact, SEPA) is arguably better.

The migration is on the list. It’s just not a trivial one. Payment integrations touch billing logic, webhooks, tax invoicing and customer-facing flows in ways that require careful testing and a good moment to cut over. It’s also more expensive than Stripe for my usecase.

AI Code assistance

Exception № 3

This one felt overdue. OpenAI works fine, but the company’s trajectory doesn’t align with my own views anymore. After a period of deliberate drift, I felt the need to switch. Ideally I wanted to use Mistral Vibe here, but it just didn’t make the cut as it couldn’t compete with Claude.

Claude Code is now my day-to-day AI assistant for coding. The reasoning quality is strong, the context handling is genuinely impressive, and Anthropic’s approach to safety and transparency feels more structurally grounded.

Anthropic is a US company, so this doesn’t satisfy the jurisdictional criterion I applied elsewhere. But it satisfies something else, the sense that the organization building the thing has given serious thought to what it’s building and why.

It’s also worth noting that local models are becoming increasingly viable. Qwen, Alibaba’s open-weight model family, is a strong example: capable enough for many real workloads, running entirely on your own hardware, with no data leaving your machine. The gap between frontier API models and what you can run locally is narrowing faster than most people realize.

Not everything is ideal. Most data centers still sit outside Europe, and “open” means different things to different organizations. But the direction is right. A world where capable AI runs on your own hardware, with published weights and transparent training, is a much better world for digital autonomy than one where all inference routes through a handful of closed API providers. We’re not there yet, but the trajectory is encouraging.

Git Version Control

Exception № 4

GitLab also remains for now. GitLab is headquartered in the US but offers self-hosted options, and the company has long had a strong commitment to transparency and open source. A self-hosted instance is on the roadmap, but moving source control is a more significant undertaking than most of these migrations.

GitHub stays in the picture for one specific purpose: public-facing NPM packages and issue tracking for open source software. When you publish a package or maintain public tooling, GitHub is where developers expect to find it. The network effects are real, it’s where the forks, stars, and issue reports come from. For the public-facing surface of open source work, there’s no meaningful sovereignty concern and a lot of practical upside.

Was it worth it?

The practical friction was real but manageable. Most migrations were an afternoon of work: update a credential here, point a DNS record there, export and import some data. A few took longer. None were catastrophic. All in all it took longer than expected, but most time was spent in researching and planning when to do what. Two months in, everything is running without incident. No fires, no regrets.

Digital sovereignty isn’t about paranoia. It’s about being conscious about your infrastructure, where you decide who holds your data, who can reach it, and what happens when politics shift. The tools are there. The ecosystem is mostly mature. The only thing that was stopping me was inertia. It’s entirely possible to run a reliable, capable, professional digital stack mostly from European infrastructure. This migration was proof of that.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

27. After 3 decades of splendid scientific communication, this one's for you, Ned

Source: https://www.adn.com/alaska-news/science/2026/05/08/after-3-decades-of-splendid-scientific-communication-this-ones-for-you-ned/
Site: Anchorage Daily News
Author: Becky Lindsey, Alaska Science Forum
Published: 2026-05-09
HN activity: 15 points · 0 comments
Length: 664 words (~3 min read)

Ned Rozell in Eagle, Alaska, in June 1993, one year before he was hired by the Geophysical Institute to write for the Alaska Science Forum. (Photo courtesy of Mariko Shirazi)

It’s been a big spring for now-former Alaska Science Forum author Ned Rozell.

While biking 515 miles from his home in Fairbanks to Unalakleet on the Western Alaska coast, he received three significant recognitions: the University of Alaska Foundation’s Edith Bullock Prize, the University of Alaska Fairbanks Geophysical Institute’s Roger Smith Lifetime Achievement Award and emeritus status from UAF.

On May 1, he also retired from the Geophysical Institute after writing the weekly Alaska Science Forum column for 31 years, a labor of love that produced more than 1,500 science stories.

During recent farewell celebrations, Ned jokingly admitted that he was relieved to be out on the trail while admirers near and far heaped congratulations, well-wishes and words of appreciation on him.

Although few, if any, would describe Ned Rozell as an extrovert, his writing over the past three decades has broadcast Alaska- and Arctic-based science through the oldest and most effective human means of communication — a good story.

UAF researchers and scientists across the state trusted Ned to tell their stories accurately and in a way that engaged and inspired non-scientific communities.

GI glaciologist and friend Martin Truffer shared that “the reason Ned is so successful in his writing is that he has a style that is relatable to a very broad audience. What I find admirable is that he can accomplish this without compromising scientific accuracy.”

Fairbanksan Mike Powers wrote, “for 31 years, your column (and books!) have deepened our understanding of the incredible Alaskan world around us ... and have helped remind many of us what makes Alaska such a great place to live. Such a legacy!”

Prior to Ned’s tenure, a handful of other writers contributed to the column, including the late geophysicist and Geophysical Institute Deputy Director Neil Davis, who started the column in 1976.

Ned writes in his forthcoming book, “Lights on the Hill: A History of the Geophysical Institute,” that Davis brainstormed the inception of the now 50-year-old column with University of Alaska history professor Claus-M. Naske over cups of coffee in the Elvey Building.

They envisioned that Davis and other GI scientists would write short, non-technical science stories to be sent to newspapers and improve communication between scientists and the public to grow awareness and appreciation of how the environment affects life in Alaska.

In a recent letter to the editor, David Stanley wrote, “Neil Davis was a close family friend, and I read his superb version of the column for years. But, for the last couple of decades, I’ve been reading Ned’s version and have found it every bit as delightful and entertaining as Neil’s. Science communication has never been more important to all of us, and Ned delivered a great product that could appeal to everyone in his own conversational style.”

Carla Helfferich was writing for the column when Ned was hired in 1994. She reflected, “I was a little worried about the transition to the next writer. Ned Rozell? Who’s that?... Very soon, I learned that no worry had been necessary. Like me, Ned is good at jostling the elbows of the researchers and asking ‘Whatcha doing?’ But bless him, he did it better, out there in the field, not just in the labs, libraries and halls. And he brought it home with a priceless clarity.”

Thank you, Ned, for bringing us along on your adventures, entertaining curious readers and strengthening connections to science through the GI’s Alaska Science Forum.

As you start your next chapter with no weekly deadlines, it will be our turn to ask you — “Whatcha doing?”

We are eager to engage readers as we think about the next phase of the Alaska Science Forum. What are you curious about? What would you like to see in the column over the next 25 years? Email us at uaf-gi-public-info@alaska.edu.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

28. Medicare's new payment model is built for AI. Most of the tech world has no idea

Source: https://techcrunch.com/2026/05/12/medicares-new-payment-model-is-built-for-ai-and-most-of-the-tech-world-has-no-idea/
Site: TechCrunch
Author: Connie Loizos
Published: 2026-05-13
HN activity: 65 points · 42 comments
Length: 1.0K words (~5 min read)
Language: en-US

Neil Batlivala has spent seven years building a healthcare company that most of the tech industry has never heard of and that serves a patient population most of Silicon Valley ignores. But last month, that work put him at the center of something much bigger.

His company, Pair Team, announced on April 30 it had been accepted into ACCESS — a Medicare program — as one of 150 participants chosen by the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services to test what AI-driven medical care could look like at federal scale. The program goes live July 5.

“The government is creating swim lanes for AI innovation in traditionally regulated industries,” he told me over a Zoom call a few days later. “The best solution wins, which, in regulated industries like healthcare — that’s not been the case.”

ACCESS — Advancing Chronic Care with Effective, Scalable Solutions — is a 10-year CMS program testing a payment model that rewards health outcomes rather than required activities (like a certain number of check-ins). Participating organizations like Pair Team receive predictable payments for managing qualifying conditions and earn the full amount only when patients meet measurable health goals, like lower blood pressure or reduced pain. It covers diabetes, hypertension, chronic kidney disease, obesity, depression, and anxiety.

That payment structure is the real news.

Traditional Medicare reimburses based on time spent with a clinician. There’s no mechanism to pay for an AI agent that monitors a patient between visits, calls to check in, coordinates a housing referral, or makes sure someone picks up their medication. ACCESS creates that mechanism for the first time.

“It’s a payment model transformation,” Batlivala said. “You just couldn’t do this before.”

The first cohort spans a wide range of participants — AI doctor startups, virtual nutrition therapy providers, connected device companies, and wearable makers like Whoop. Batlivala is skeptical of some of them.

"I'm a big fan of wearables, but for a senior who's struggling with food insecurity, I don't know how much Whoop is going to be able to do," he said, adding of his own company, "We've been building toward this for five-plus years now."

Pair Team launched in 2019 with a specific kind of patient in mind: people managing chronic conditions who were also dealing with unstable housing, too little food, or lack of transportation. About a third of Americans fall somewhere in that category.

The company's premise was that you can't improve health outcomes without addressing the full context of someone's life. It now employs roughly 850 clinical professionals, runs what it describes as the largest community health workforce in California, and, per Batlivala, generates revenue above nine figures. It has raised about $30 million along the way, including from Kleiner Perkins, Kraft Ventures, and Next Ventures.

The model has peer-reviewed evidence behind it. A study, co-authored by Pair Team researchers and peer-reviewed by the Journal of General Internal Medicine, evaluated Pair Team's community-integrated model, which blends medical, behavioral, and social care for Medicaid members with high rates of homelessness, serious mental illness, and chronic disease, and it showed strong patient engagement and significant reductions in avoidable emergency and inpatient utilization. Batlivala says one in four hospital visits and one in two ER visits don't happen when a patient is in his company's care.

But for years, delivering that level of care required human teams, which limited how fast and cheaply it could scale. Then, about nine months ago, Pair Team deployed a voice AI agent called Flora as its primary patient-facing interface. Flora is available 24 hours a day, handles intake, coordinates referrals, and does the check-ins that keep patients engaged between clinical visits.

The first call that shifted his thinking was with a 67-year-old woman living out of her car, managing PTSD and congestive heart failure. She spoke with Flora for over an hour. "It was both incredible and depressing," Batlivala told me. "Flora was probably the only 'person' she'd talked to in weeks about her situation." Now, hourlong conversations with Flora are routine. "That's the companionship piece," he said. "And it turns out that is truly an intervention."

The architects of ACCESS are themselves former startup operators. The program was designed by Abe Sutton, director of the CMS Innovation Center, and Jacob Shiff, chief AI and technology officer of the CMS Innovation Center. Sutton was previously a venture capitalist at a healthcare fund called Rubicon Founders. Shiff is a former healthcare founder. Both joined CMS under the Trump administration, and their startup backgrounds are reflected in the program's design: outcome-based payments, direct-to-consumer enrollment, and a deliberate push for competition.

There are real risks. Participants are feeding extraordinarily sensitive patient data — intimate conversations about housing and diseases and mental illness — into a federal infrastructure with a documented history of breaches, including exposed Social Security numbers. For the vulnerable populations ACCESS is designed to serve, that's not an impractical concern.

There are financial risks, too. The track record of CMS innovation programs is mixed. A 2023 Congressional Budget Office analysis found that the CMS Innovation Center increased federal spending by $5.4 billion during its first decade rather than producing the projected savings. CMS is also paying less per patient per month than many participants anticipated, which means the math only works for organizations that have fully automated most of their patient interactions.

Batlivala's answer to the reimbursement concern is that it's a feature, not a bug. "If you want to build a model that truly incentivizes the use of AI, the reimbursement rates have to be low," he told me. "The economics only work if you're running a lean, AI-first operation."

Pair Team says it right now has partnerships in place that give it access to roughly 500,000 potential patients and that it wants to reach a million within three years.

Healthcare investors have been watching all of this closely. Digital health funding hit its highest Q1 total since the pandemic this year, with AI companies capturing the bulk of it. ACCESS, meanwhile, has barely registered outside health tech trade press.

When you purchase through links in our articles, we may earn a small commission. This doesn’t affect our editorial independence.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

29. An idiot's guide to lead optimisation for proteins

Source: https://magnusross.github.io/posts/protein-lead-optimisation-1/
Site: magnusross.github.io
Submitter: magni121 (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-05-11 11:21 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 145 points · 16 comments
Length: 3.9K words (~17 min read)
Language: en-us

Or, understanding the Cradle-1 pipeline.

Lead optimisation is the step in drug design where you take a molecule that sort of works and try to make it actually work, and it’s arguably the step where most real-world design campaigns succeed or die. Due to the influence of a couple of my pals, I have recently become interested in using machine learning to do lead optimisation for proteins. Said pals have been kind enough to indulge my extremely beginner level questioning over the few weeks. I’m going to use this post to share what they have taught me, in the hope it might in turn help you understand a bit more about this fascinating area. Like any field, there are some established principles that are never spelled out explicitly in the literature, which can make it confusing for newcomers. We’re going to try to understand how we could actually build a real system for lead optimisation but studying one that has been shown to work well in real life.

Firstly, before we get into it, what actually is a protein? I think to answer this in full we would need multiple textbooks/degrees. Since basically all of my knowledge of biology comes from one read through of Philip Ball’s How Life Works I am convinced the answer to any question about biology is arbitrarily arcane and complex, so for now it will suffice to say that proteins are a class of molecule which are an integral part of basically all the processes that sustain life. Proteins are chains of smaller molecules called amino acids of which there are 20 different types.1 As such we can represent a protein as a string of characters, with a character standing for a different amino acid, using all the letters of the alphabet apart from BJOUXZ.2 For example, we can write myoglobin, a protein responsible for shuttling oxygen around our cells, as:

MGLSDGEWQLVLNVWGKVEADIPGHGQEVLIRLFKGHPETLEKFDKFKHLKSEDEMKASEDLKKHGATVLTALGGILKKKGHHEAEIKPLAQSHATKHKIPVKYLEFISECIIQVLQSKHPGDFGADAQGAMNKALELFRKDMASNYKELGFQG


For certain combinations of amino acids, this chain folds up into a fixed shape, which allows that protein to perform a function. Predicting the shape of the fold from its sequence is, to put it mildly, highly non-trivial, and is the problem the AlphaFold-2 model “solved” to some extent to win the Nobel Prize in Chemistry. It is important to understand that there are many possible combinations of amino acids, and most of them will not fold into a regular, predictable shape, and do not do anything useful.3 The folded myoglobin looks something like this:

Typically proteins consist of about 300 amino acids, but the largest, which is comically named PKZILLA, contains upwards of 40,000, and they can be as small as 20. There are estimated to be between 80,000 and 400,000 different proteins that perform functions in human cells. Note that when the amino acids are bonded to form the protein each one is known as a residue. The proteins that exist in nature are the result of evolution. Because of this we can group proteins into families which have some similarity to each other; within these families a large proportion of the sequence representing each protein will be the same. So now we very roughly know what a protein is, what is protein design?

The ultimate goal of protein design4 is to generate new molecules that perform a certain function. This function can range from catalysing a specific chemical reaction to binding to a disease causing molecule. Lead optimisation is one of the most important steps in the design process. We assume that we have an existing template molecule that is functional to some extent, but is not sufficient for our ultimate goal. This molecule might have been the result of a previous failed design campaign, generated de novo (i.e. from scratch) by some other model, or chosen from nature. The process of lead optimisation involves proposing changes to this initial molecule with the ultimate goal of improving its properties for the task at hand. In practice, the function of the protein for this task can rarely be summarised by a single number and we usually care about several properties at once and these can trade off against each other. For simplicity, we’ll mostly talk as if we’re optimising a single property in this post, but keep in mind that the real picture is multi-objective.

The process of lead optimisation proceeds by proposing a set of candidate changes, testing them in the lab, and then proposing more changes after integrating the results of the lab tests. The way this traditionally worked was by using directed evolution, which essentially involves introducing random mutations, testing them and keeping the ones that improve function and mutating them further in a loop until we get to sufficient performance. Given that we have massive databases of proteins, and the awesome power of deep learning, these days we can probably do better.5 And indeed some people have!

Cradle is a bio-tech startup that sells a system for ML-based protein lead optimisation. They’re somewhat unusual for a bio-ML company in operating their own wet lab, which they claim gives them a unique ability to keep the loop between model suggestions and experimental feedback tight. Their system seems to be a market leader, and they are working with a number of the world’s largest pharmaceutical companies (e.g. Novo Nordisk, Bayer, J&J). They have demonstrated impressive results across a number of different contexts. Cradle recently published a white-paper, describing how their system works at a high level. Here it is: Confused? I was too! But don't worry, by the end of this post mini-series we'll have a good understanding of what's going on here, and why each of these colourful boxes is necessary. In this part we will cover the structure of the base model, the process of pushing it towards making more useful suggestions using fine-tuning, and how we can use it to estimate the properties of a given protein. In the next edition, we'll cover how we can actually use this model to generate proteins for further testing.

The base model

There are a lot of models shown on the big diagram, a somewhat scary number, but actually most of them are tweaked versions of the same fundamental backbone: a transformer-based protein language model. If we can understand that we can go a long way to understanding the pipeline. The standard language modelling paradigm (that powers Claude, ChatGPT etc) is fundamentally based on next-token prediction; a token is a word, or part of a word, and we task models to predict the next word given proceeding context. Typically there are 10,000s of possible tokens corresponding to the large number of words in our vocabulary. We can apply this paradigm directly to modelling proteins by substituting our large vocabulary of words for our 20 different types of amino acids, since proteins are just sequences of these. To train our model, we take a dataset of protein sequences, and cover up some of the residues, and get the model to predict which amino acid was in that position based on the others around it. We can do this either by covering up the end of the sequence in the same way we would do in a standard language model, which is known as next-token prediction, or by covering up a residue in the middle of the sequence which is known as masked language modelling. The base model in the Cradle pipeline takes the latter approach, so we will focus on that. The problem essentially looks something like this:

 M K T A [?] G L S E R ...
          |
    L  ██████ 0.42
    V  ███    0.28
    I  █      0.15
    ...


The base model produces a distribution of probabilities over amino acids likely to fill the missing position. The first step of the Cradle pipeline is to take this model structure, and train it on a dataset of tens of millions of natural proteins. This is what is happening at the top of the diagram in the section labelled pre-training. The idea here is to produce a model that has learned something about the features of natural proteins. Such a model is actually useful in its own right because it gives us a way of understanding if certain edits to a protein are likely to ruin it, that is to say to cause it to become disordered or not expressed or whatever. The model gives us suggestions for residues we could place at a specific position to make a natural protein. Say we mask a G in a known protein and the model predicts that that position was 0.001% likely to be a W but 40% likely to be a V, we can conclude that the protein with the W is unlikely to be functional. The model is saying that it has never seen a protein that looks like that in nature, and we believe that since many millions of years of evolution has produced the set of proteins that exist, those that don’t are unlikely to be useful. We should note that this is not something we know for sure to be true. It is possible that there may be proteins that are functional that are very different from natural ones; these are going to be very difficult to model with machine learning because, by definition, we have very little data about them.

Now we have an understanding of what the base model does (it predicts how “natural” specific edits to individual amino acids are) we have covered the top three boxes. We can now move on to the next section, which has a lot more going on.

Evotuning

The space of natural proteins is very large and diverse. The process of lead optimisation is about improving the function of a protein for a specific use case. When using a model trained on the space of all proteins, the model is unaware of the specifics of the function we are trying to optimise for; it is too general. It is possible for the base model to make suggestions that are natural, but would be totally unhelpful for our use case. How can we push the model to make more relevant suggestions? The answer is to use fine-tuning.

Fine-tuning is the process of adapting a more general model to perform well on a more specific task by training it on a representative set of data from that task. In lead optimisation, we start with a single template protein which already functions to some extent, and we want to improve this function further. We want to form a fine-tuning task to push the model to suggest proteins that are likely to be functional. We can do this by finding all the natural proteins that are likely to be evolutionarily related to the template, and training the model on them. The idea is that if they are evolutionarily related, they likely share some function. We want the model to “focus” on this area of the full protein space.

We form the set of evolutionarily related proteins by using something called a Multiple Sequence Alignment (MSA). Understanding MSAs fully would be its own whole thing, but the rough idea has two parts: first, we search a huge database of protein sequences for ones that are statistically likely to share a common ancestor with our template (these are called homologs). Then we align them, i.e. line them up residue by residue so that positions playing the same structural or functional role sit on top of each other. This is complex because not all of the homologs will necessarily be the same length, so we need to account for insertions and deletions. Once we do this we can glean some extra information about the sequence. I’ve tried to illustrate this with some more ASCII below.

Query    : M K T A Y G L S E R N

Hit 1    : M K S A Y G L T E R N    (91% similar)
Hit 2    : L K T A Y G L S D R N    (81% similar)
Hit 3    : M R T A Y G I S E K N    (73% similar)
           ─────────────────────
Conserv. : x x x ✔ ✔ ✔ x x x x ✔


In this example, the database returns 3 similar sequences, but in reality it would be thousands. We can see that there are a number of positions (4, 5, 6 and 11) where all the proteins share the same amino acid, i.e. they are conserved. We can be fairly sure, then, that in any protein we suggest for further testing, these positions should also be the same. In real proteins, it isn’t just particular positions that are conserved but motifs: sequences of amino acids like AYG in this example.

Once we have our MSA for the template, we take our pre-trained model and train it further on those sequences. This pushes the model to make suggestions that are consistent with the evolutionary context of the protein in question, which we hope will mean the model’s suggestions are more likely to be functional. This process is called evolutionary fine-tuning, or evotuning. So we now have an idea of what’s going on in the top row of the fine-tuning section. We should note here that there is another arrow from the MSA box, to “Potts-like”. We’ll get to this in the next post, but the MSA information is also useful for generation because it tells us something about which positions are likely to be important to the structure of the protein.

What about the lab?

When I introduced the lead optimisation problem, one of the key steps was testing the function of the proteins in the lab. The ultimate goal of the whole process is to optimise these measurements, so how do we incorporate this information into the process? In this section we’ll discuss how we can use the sequence-measurement pairs to push our model to suggest proteins that are likely to score better, and how we can adapt the model to actually predict the likely score of future candidates for testing.

First we need to get at least a surface level understanding of what these measurements actually look like. In biology, lab tests like this, where we are measuring some aspect of the function of some substance (in this case, a protein) are called assays. What these assays measure is very dependent on what function we are optimising for and, as mentioned earlier, a single assay run often returns several measurements at once, since we typically care about multiple properties simultaneously. It’s important to realise that the measurement values are pretty much always an imperfect proxy for the true function we are interested in. For instance, we might measure how a protein performs against a single purified target in a test tube, when what we really care about is how it behaves in the messy environment of a living cell. The data we get out typically looks something like this:

Sequence                          Activity   Stability
─────────────────────────────────────────────────────
M K T A Y G L S E R N ...          0.82       54.1
M K T A Y G L T E R N ...          0.79       53.8
M K S A Y G L S E R N ...          0.91       52.4
M R T A Y G L S E R N ...          0.44       55.0
M K T A Y G I S E R N ...          0.88       51.9
M K T A Y G L S D R N ...          0.71       53.2


There are many different kinds of assay. Often assays are performed in batches, where there is a plate with multiple wells laid out in a grid and a different protein is tested in each well. This means that at each round of testing we obtain a set of new data points. In the Cradle setup this seems to be 96 most of the time. Typically in machine learning we assume that points in our dataset are statistically independent from one another. This assumption can be violated in the context of batched assay measurements because there are quirks of the measurement process that affect all the measurements in the grid simultaneously. Additionally, weird stuff can happen at the edges of the grid which make those measurements less reliable. Any model we create needs to be robust to these batch effects; we won’t discuss them further here but it’s important to consider when building a system like this.

Pushing preferences

Now we know roughly what the “sequence-function” box corresponds to, we can see that this leads to two downstream models. Let’s tackle the more arcane “g-DPO” first. About a year ago in my office DPO seemed to be basically the only thing anyone was talking about. These days things have cooled off a bit and it’s been cemented as one of the key methodologies powering LLM post-training (the bit where we turn the LLM from fancy autocorrect to all-powerful agent). DPO stands for direct preference optimisation; there are about a million blog posts explaining it way better than I could (here is a mathsy one and a less mathsy one), so I’ll spare you. The basic idea in the LLM context is that we have some preference data consisting of prompts (e.g. “Is B a standard amino acid?”) and a pair of possible responses, one good (e.g. “No”) and one bad (e.g. “Yes, and you’re a loser”). We want to try to push the model to give us more good responses and fewer bad ones. DPO gives us an efficient way to do this without having to introduce extra scoring models and other fancy reinforcement learning things, which was the way this was done before.

In our context we want to push the model to generate more proteins that have higher function values, as measured by the assay, and fewer ones with lower values. The format of the assay data doesn’t really match up with the pair of completions in the original DPO setup. One way we can massage it a bit to get these pairs is by setting a threshold for the assay measurements: if the measurement is above the threshold it’s “good”, and if not, it’s “bad”. How we actually pair sequences up is much less clear than in the language case however, and it all gets a bit messy. All in all trying to directly apply DPO here is a bit square peg round hole, so the Cradle people introduced a variant called grouped DPO (“g-DPO”). In g-DPO we group proteins into clusters with similar sequences, and then we form pairs from within the group. The idea is that if we compare sequences that only differ by a few positions (as they do within the group) the model learns how subtle changes affect the protein function; when comparing very different sequences the model learns more obvious differences.

We take our sequence-function data and apply the g-DPO method to further train the evotuned model from the previous step. At this stage, we ideally have a model that is really good at suggesting changes to our template sequence that will result in a more functional protein. This model is called the “logiter”6 on the diagram. Now onto the next box!

Forecasting function

We have one more model to tackle before we can run generation: the “predictor”. The point of the predictor is pretty much what it says on the tin: we want to predict the assay value(s) (the function) from the sequence. We’ll get into the details next time, but we can use this predictor to filter the suggestions of our logiter and prioritise what to send for testing.

A good model for protein sequences should be able to capitalise on meaningful features of the sequence and use them to make predictions. We (hopefully) already have a good model for protein sequences: the evotuned model. This is not a model for predicting function, but instead for predicting the sequence itself. In order to be good at that however, the model must learn useful representations of the sequences. Inside the transformer, each position in the sequence is associated with a vector of numbers that gets progressively refined as it passes through the layers, ending up as a sort of summary of what that residue is doing in the context of the whole protein. These vectors are what we mean by representations, and the final amino acid prediction is just a simple operation applied on top of them.

The structure of this model allows us to access the representations it has learned, and use them for other purposes. This is the approach we take to build the predictor. We feed the learned representations from the evotuned model into a simple model that uses them to predict the assay values. We call this simple model a regression head because we attach it to the top of our model. The intuition is that if we can predict the residue at different positions in the sequence (as we do with the evotuned model) accurately, then we must have learned some useful information about the sequence. This information will also be useful for predicting whether the sequence is functional. The beauty is that most of the work has already been done; we just need to adapt this information a bit for our new purpose.

Wrapping up (for now)

OK, so after all that, what are we left with? We now have two key models that will allow us to stride forth and generate some proteins: the logiter and the predictor. In generation, we’ll use the former to make suggestions, and the latter to rate them. There is one quite important thing we’ve skirted around up to now. The logiter gives us a prediction for which amino acid is likely to work well at a given position, but it assumes that we already know which position we are interested in modifying. Determining which positions to modify is by no means trivial, and is the responsibility of the “Masking model”, which we’ll get to next time.

Thanks for bearing with me, and I look forward to seeing you in part 2 for more protein fun!

And thanks very much to David Miller for reviewing this post and highlighting a number of oversights.

There are actually more, but the other ones are too rare to bother caring about very much. ↩︎

Which sounds kind of like a French word, or a club they’d go to on Geordie Shore ↩︎

This is a massive simplification and is not really true. Proteins that don’t fold into a regular shape are called intrinsically disordered and they actually can do important things, but this is a very active area of research. People are also trying to use ML to design these things, but this is a bit of a different problem and so we won’t discuss it further here. ↩︎

I think technically lead optimisation, where we are modifying an existing protein to improve its function rather than creating something new, is known more as protein engineering in the field. ↩︎

It should be noted that although it sounds simple, getting directed evolution to work well for real problems was a huge achievement and resulted in half a Nobel Prize for Frances Arnold. ↩︎

It’s called this because it outputs logits which are the raw numerical scores a neural network spits out for each option (in our case, each amino acid) before they’re normalised into probabilities that sum to 1. ↩︎

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

30. Comparing a 1980s memory map to the Raspi Pico

Source: https://medium.com/@noborutakahashi/a-40-year-old-memory-map-comparable-to-todays-raspberry-pi-pico-932c4309260d
Site: Medium
Author: Noboru Takahashi
Published: 2026-04-30
HN activity: 23 points · 0 comments
Length: 864 words (~4 min read)
Language: en

4 min read

Apr 30, 2026

--

Press enter or click to view image in full size

In the first article, I wrote about analyzing a 40-year-old RTOS I had built using AI.
This time, as a continuation, I look at the memory map notes from that time to understand the design approach.

Reference:
A 40-Year-Old System Analyzed with AI: It Turned Out to Have a Modern Architecture

(Japanese version)

1989 Memory Map

There is a memo from 1989, when I developed the communication system for my second company.
The hardware was not custom-made; it was built by combining general-purpose Motorola VME bus boards.

Press enter or click to view image in full size

Memory map of the second system(It was in Japanese)

Local RAM (192KB)

Local RAM appears to be the memory on the 68000 CPU board.
It ranges from 000000 to 02FFFF, totaling 192KB.
There is a debug monitor called VMEBUG, on top of which the OS (CHARM-II) is implemented.
The application is also placed in this area.
This is the core execution area.

Global RAM (512KB)

Global RAM ranges from 080000 to 0FFFFF, totaling 512KB.
It is likely implemented as a separate RAM board.
The last line in the memo shows 0FFFF, which is probably missing one “F”.

Rewriting this area as a diagram makes its characteristics clearer.

Press enter or click to view image in full size

Global RAM — reorganized memory map (red areas are discarded)

Round-number Allocation and Unused Space

Normally, memory is packed as tightly as possible to avoid waste.
Allocations are adjusted in units of a few kilobytes to eliminate gaps.

However, in this map:

- Memory is divided in 64KB units
- Remainders are left as-is
- Unused regions clearly exist

The design prioritizes clarity and simplicity over memory efficiency.

This was likely made possible by the addition of 512KB of RAM.

Message Area (320KB)

A large portion of Global RAM is allocated as the Message Area, occupying 320KB.

At the time, this was a very large allocation.

50 bps Communication

Most overseas communication for this system used TELEX (50 bps).

A simple calculation shows that filling 320KB would take about 20 hours.
In practice, data would almost never accumulate to that extent.

As a result, this area was effectively impossible to fully utilize.

At this point, 512KB of RAM felt more than sufficient.
This made it possible to adopt a “luxurious” memory map, using round-number allocation and leaving unused areas without concern.

Comparison with Raspberry Pi Pico

The current Raspberry Pi Pico has about 260KB of RAM.
The Pico 2 has about 520KB.

Compared to this, the Local RAM (192KB) of the 68000 system is quite similar in scale.

The access methods are also different.
At the time, RAM was accessed via the VME bus, with an effective bandwidth of a few MB/s.
In contrast, the Pico executes code while reading from external flash via QSPI.

Although the architectures differ, they can still be compared at a similar scale.

Feasibility on a Pico-based System

The second system was built using general-purpose boards, resulting in a large enclosure — about the size of a full-tower PC — and sturdy enough for an adult to sit on.

The 68000 at the time operated at around 8 MHz, whereas the Pico’s RP2040 runs at up to 133 MHz.
In terms of clock speed alone, there is more than a tenfold difference.

Additionally, while the 68000 has 32-bit registers, its bus is 16-bit.
In contrast, the Pico is fully 32-bit in both registers and bus.

Considering these factors, the communication system from that time could likely be implemented today using a Pico.

An Era Where 1MB Was Enough

Given the constraint of 50 bps communication,
even 1MB of memory would rarely be fully utilized.

In this era, communication speed — not memory — was the primary bottleneck.

A Few Years Later: Considering 48MB

Looking at notes from the early 1990s, the situation changes significantly.

Press enter or click to view image in full size

Memo considering whether to expand Mac memory (The original was in Japanese)

At that point, 16MB was not enough, and expansion up to 48MB was being considered.

By then, the system was handling image processing and print-related data on a Mac.

Changing Memory Demands

As the focus shifted from text-based communication to image and bitmap processing,
memory requirements increased by orders of magnitude.

Within just a few years, the required capacity changed drastically.

Summary

Revisiting the memory map from 40 years ago reveals the design approach through its round-number allocation and intentionally unused spaces.

With the addition of 512KB of RAM, it became possible to prioritize simplicity over memory efficiency.

However, only a few years later, even 48MB was being considered insufficient.

Memory capacity continues to grow, but so do the demands placed on it.
As a result, the sense of “not enough” never really disappears.

(Japanese version)

Series: Revisiting a 40-Year-Old System

When I analyzed a 40-year-old system with AI, it looked just like modern architecture
This article: A memory map from 40 years ago revealed an unexpectedly “luxurious” design
An Era When Almost Everything Was My Code — CHARM-II and Bare-Metal Systems

