Hacker News Top 30 — 2026-08-08

Generated on 2026-08-08 03:10 UTC

1. The Nixpkgs core team has disbanded

Source: https://discourse.nixos.org/t/the-nixpkgs-core-team-has-disbanded/79413
Site: NixOS Discourse
Submitter: Meleagris (Hacker News)
Published: 2026-08-07
HN activity: 128 points · 55 comments
Language: en

No extractable content.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

2. NASA to keep its 48-year-old Voyager 2 probe running for yet another year

Source: https://www.space.com/space-exploration/voyager/nasa-figured-out-how-to-keep-its-48-year-old-voyager-2-probe-running-for-yet-another-year
Site: Space
Author: Elizabeth Howell
Published: 2026-08-07
HN activity: 48 points · 5 comments
Length: 611 words (~3 min read)
Language: en

An artist's depiction of NASA's Voyager 2 probe. (Image credit: NASA/JPL-Caltech)

NASA just made an interstellar tweak to the Voyager 2 spacecraft, known as the "Big Bang", to keep its remaining 50-year-old science instruments running a little longer.

Voyager 2 and its twin launched in 1977, called Voyager 1, rely on a form of nuclear battery known as a radioisotope thermoelectric generator that uses the heat produced by the decay of plutonium. But the supply of plutonium on each probe drops at about four watts a year on each spacecraft.

To keep the probe running on this dwindling power supply, engineers recently reduced Voyager 2's power requirements by turning off a few non-science devices and using "lower-power alternatives" that are still effective enough to keep the spacecraft warm while it's so far from the sun, NASA officials said in a statement. "The spacecraft power margins have grown razor thin, requiring the team to conserve energy by shutting off non-essential devices and systems," NASA officials wrote of the mission, which is managed by the agency's Jet Propulsion Laboratory.

The drop in power is having a measurable science impact on both spacecraft — each has turned off two of their science instruments since 2024 alone. While some of these instruments were shut off after the spacecraft finished their historic planetary flybys decades ago, others were turned off due to power requirements.

Each spacecraft initially launched with 10 instruments, and Voyager 2 is now down to only three instruments. At first it looked as though Voyager 2 would have to shut down another of these instruments later this year, but luckily, the new power shifts will allow all three to operate "for at least another year," NASA said.

Voyager 1 will be tasked to do the same "Big Bang" power change "in the coming months." A signal to each spacecraft takes nearly 24 hours (or one light-day) to make a one-way journey, and officials noted Voyager 1 is further from Earth than its twin. (Voyager 2 is at about 142 astronomical units or sun-Earth distances, while Voyager 1 is nearing 171 AU.)

The two spacecraft initially launched to take advantage of a rare alignment between the outer solar system gas giant planets, which in order of distance from the sun are Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus and Neptune. Each Voyager spacecraft first flew past Jupiter and Saturn, taking unprecedented imagery of the planets and their moons.

NASA's Voyager 2 probe captured this image of Europa, the smallest of Jupiter's four Galilean moons, on July 9, 1979. (Image credit: NASA/JPL)

Next, Voyager 1 was directed to fly above the plane of the solar system (also known as the ecliptic) while Voyager 2 continued flying past Uranus and Neptune, becoming the first spacecraft to see these worlds and their moons. Voyager 2's last planetary flyby was in 1989.

The two spacecraft continue to send scientific data from interstellar space; Voyager 1 passed into that region in 2012, while Voyager 2 did so in 2018. Voyager 1 is Earth's most distant spacecraft, currently around 15.9 billion miles (25.5 billion kilometers) away from us, according to NASA.

Elizabeth Howell (she/her), Ph.D., was a staff writer in the spaceflight channel between 2022 and 2024 specializing in Canadian space news. She was contributing writer for Space.com for 10 years from 2012 to 2024. Elizabeth's reporting includes multiple exclusives with the White House, leading world coverage about a lost-and-found space tomato on the International Space Station, witnessing five human spaceflight launches on two continents, flying parabolic, working inside a spacesuit, and participating in a simulated Mars mission. Her latest book, "Why Am I Taller?" (ECW Press, 2022) is co-written with astronaut Dave Williams.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

3. DeepSeek V4 Flash 0731

Source: https://arcprize.org/results/deepseek-v4-flash-0731
Site: ARC Prize
Submitter: tosh (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-08-07 17:56 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 491 points · 301 comments
Length: 20 words (~1 min read)
Language: en

ARC Prize 2026

Get started and receive official contest updates and news.

No spam. You can unsubscribe at any time.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

4. U.S. Department of Energy Launches the Genesis Open Models Initiative

Source: https://genesisopenmodels.anl.gov/
Site: genesisopenmodels.anl.gov
Submitter: moelf (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-08-07 22:24 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 121 points · 46 comments
Length: 938 words (~5 min read)
Language: en-US

U.S. Department of Energy Launches the Genesis Open Models Initiative and, with Arcee, Unveils Genesis-Science-1 — Its First Open-Weight Model for Scientific Research

Arcee Al is the first industry partner supporting the new Genesis Mission open-weights program. A DOE-hosted contribution portal opens today, with first-round applications due August 14, 2026.

Apply Now!

Our Partners

Overview

The U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), in collaboration with industry partners, has announced a new class of open-weight foundation models designed specifically to accelerate scientific discovery as part of DOE’s broader Genesis Mission initiative. These Genesis models aim to provide researchers, national laboratories, industry partners, and the broader open science community with powerful, transparent, and extensible AI models that can be adapted to a wide range of scientific domains and use cases. The first model in this class will be Genesis-Science-1, developed in partnership with Arcee.

By releasing models with open-weights, DOE seeks to galvanize the scientific and AI communities around shared infrastructure for science: enabling new workflows in materials discovery, energy systems, earth systems modeling, fusion, biology, high-energy physics, and beyond. This effort is grounded in the principles of open science, reproducibility, and responsible AI, with the goal of lowering barriers to advanced AI capabilities for the public good.

As part of this initiative, we are collecting information from interested participants who would like to contribute to and benefit from this new ecosystem:

Open weight models: Organizations to provide open-weight models, both as base models to support downstream fine-tuning and for immediate deployment. Models should have transparent provenance.
Pretraining contributions: Organizations and researchers with access to high-quality, domain-specific scientific data who are interested in contributing to future pretraining cycles (e.g., curated datasets, benchmarks, or specialized corpora).
Fine-tuning efforts: Teams interested in shaping downstream, domain-adapted versions of Genesis-Science-1 (and future models) for particular scientific fields, applications, or mission needs (e.g., lab assistants, simulation surrogates, scientific copilots).

DOE opened the Genesis open-weight models contribution portal today, hosted by the Genesis Mission US Open Models Initiative at https://genesisopenmodels.anl.gov/. If you or your organization are interested in participating, either by contributing models and data, co-developing evaluations and benchmarks, or collaborating on fine-tuning and application deployments, please share your information through our interest form below. Your engagement will help shape the capabilities, governance, and impact of Genesis-Science-1 and other Genesis open models as a shared public asset for scientific innovation. The portal invites universities, national laboratories, companies, scientific nonprofits, and research organizations to contribute data, research environments, evaluations, and technical expertise. Applications for the first contribution window close August 14, 2026.

Contributing to Genesis Open Models

The program is seeking scientific and technical materials for several stages of model development.

Foundation-stage contributions may include scientific text, code, documentation, and structured technical collections suitable for pretraining, midtraining, or context extension.

Post-training contributions may include expert demonstrations, annotated task examples, research software, datasets, complete workflow environments, reinforcement-learning tasks, held-out evaluations, scoring rubrics, tests, and verifiers.

The program also needs scientists and engineers who can review tasks, model behavior, and completed artifacts. Infrastructure providers may submit rolling inquiries about additional training or evaluation capacity.

The 2026 program has two scheduled contribution tracks. Organizations may apply to both when the proposed contributions are distinct.

Contribution track Appropriate contributions Apply by Delivery deadline if selected
Foundation-stage data Scientific text, code, documentation, and structured collections for pretraining, midtraining, and context extension August 14, 2026
Additional deadlines expected every 3 months August 28, 2026
Post-training data and environments Supervised fine-tuning examples, workflow environments, reinforcement-learning tasks, held-out evaluations, rubrics, tests, and verifiers August 25, 2026
Additional deadlines expected every 3 months September 14, 2026

Applicants will identify the relevant track, describe the scientific work and its importance, explain what material is ready, name the experts available to support it, and state the proposed terms of use.

The public application form collects descriptions and metadata only. No scientific material is transferred during the application process, and each contributor specifies how its material may be handled.

Applications will be reviewed, with a DOE governed process with input from academic, national laboratory and industry partners, through five gates: scientific fit, rights and handling, expert and evaluation readiness, technical integration, and final program selection.

Selected contributors will work with the researchers building and evaluating Genesis Open Models. They will receive early evaluation access as the system develops and will be credited in the technical report and release materials.

The program is particularly interested in workflows that are poorly represented by standard Al evaluations and require direct collaboration with the researchers who perform the work.

Parties interested in contributing open weight models may directly email [email protected].

About the Genesis Mission

Launched by executive order in November 2025, the Genesis Mission is a Department of Energy-led national initiative to accelerate scientific discovery through artificial intelligence. Its stated goal is to double the productivity and impact of American science and engineering within a decade.

The mission connects DOE’s 17 national laboratories, leadership-class computing facilities, scientific data resources, and partners across industry and academia. DOE Under Secretary for Science Darío Gil directs the Genesis Mission. More information is available at energy.gov/genesis-mission.

About Genesis Open Model Partners

Genesis mission is accepting new partners for the open models effort.

Existing Partners:

Arcee Al is a U.S. open-model lab that develops open-weight foundation models end to end, including data preparation, architecture, pretraining, post-training, evaluation, and deployment. More information about Arcee’s Genesis-Science-1 is here. Its Trinity family ranges from compact models designed for local use to Trinity Large, a 400-billion-parameter sparse mixture-of-experts model. Arcee builds models that developers, enterprises, and public institutions can run and adapt on infrastructure they control. More information is available at arcee.ai.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

5. Assembly Hall of Shame

Source: https://github.com/xoreaxeaxeax/asm-hall-of-shame
Site: GitHub
Submitter: piotrgrabowski (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-08-07 18:01 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 271 points · 65 comments
Length: 1.7K words (~8 min read)
Language: en

Assembly Hall of Shame

Overview

Instruction latency analysis usually focuses on performance optimization—making code run as fast as possible. The Assembly Hall of Shame takes the opposite approach: searching for the absolute floor of single-instruction performance.

🏆 Current Champions 🏆

x86: fxrstor64

Strategy: Use fxrstor64 to load 512-byte FPU/MMX/XMM state from a high-latency MMIO region in the PCIe fabric, then starve the fabric while the load is in flight — a fleet of hammer cores pounds a different high-latency MMIO register with tight 4-byte reads, saturating the PCIe root complex and endpoint with non-posted transactions, so CPU 0's 512-byte fxrstor64 must queue behind all that contending traffic.

Contender: AMD Ryzen 7 5800H

; CPU 0 — timed instruction
movl $0xfcc68830, %rsi
fxrstor64 %rsi

; CPUs 1..N — hammer loop against a different high-latency location
movl 0xfcc68858, %eax

🏆 Score: 198,002,498,236 cycles

🏆 Time: 62 seconds

Honorable Mentions

A spec-violating unaligned ymm0 load that forced non-posted dword transactions from stalled GPU registers was used to break the fundamental design of System Management Mode in smiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii.

vmovdqu 0xfcc003b1, %ymm0

Rules

Instructions may use whatever setup is necessary, but only a single instruction is eligible to be scored.
Trapped/emulated/virtualized instructions may only time the trap, not the handler.
Instructions must not be interruptible. rep movs, pause, etc. are disqualified.
Times are normalized based on the CPU base clock frequency.
All platforms must be in their factory stock configurations - no hardware modifications.

x86 Leaderboard

27. nop

Strategy: nop does nothing. It opens the leaderboard accordingly.

Contender: Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-8559U CPU @ 2.70GHz

nop


Score: 1 cycles

Time: 0 nanoseconds

26. nop16

Strategy: Regular nop was too short, but how do we make nothing take longer? Try a lonnnnnng nop.

Contender: Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-8559U CPU @ 2.70GHz

data16 data16 data16 data16 data16 data16 data16 nopl 0x00000000(%%eax,%%eax,1)


Score: 20 cycles

Time: 7 nanoseconds

25. rdtsc

Strategy: Just a reference instruction to get our bearings.

Contender: Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-8559U CPU @ 2.70GHz

rdtsc

Score: 49 cycles

Time: 18 nanoseconds

24. idiv

Strategy: Use 128-bit dividend (rdx:rax=2:0) with small divisor to push the quotient above the ceiling imposed by sign-extension, driving the longest path through the divider microcode.

Contender: Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-8559U CPU @ 2.70GHz

xorq %rax, %rax   ; rax = 0  (low 64 bits of dividend)
movq $2, %rdx     ; rdx = 2  (high 64 bits: full dividend = 2^65)
movq $5, %rbx     ; divisor → quotient = 2^65/5 ≈ 7.4×10^18
idivq %rbx

Score: 77 cycles

Time: 28 nanoseconds

23. enter

Strategy: Use maximum nesting depth (31) to force 30 display-pointer loads and pushes through the microcode display-walk path.

Contender: Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-8559U CPU @ 2.70GHz

enter $0, $31       ; 0 bytes allocated, nesting depth 31 (maximum)

Score: 112 cycles

Time: 41 nanoseconds

22. fldl

Strategy: Try a small denormal to trigger an FP microcode assist.

Contender: Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-8559U CPU @ 2.70GHz

    movabsq $0x0000000000000001, %rax
    movq    %rax, -8(%rsp)
    fldl    -8(%rsp)

Score: 133 cycles

Time: 49 nanoseconds

21. clflush

Strategy: Just ensure the cache line is dirty.

Contender: Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-8559U CPU @ 2.70GHz

clflush (%rax)          ; rax -> dirty cache line resident in L3

Score: 165 cycles

Time: 60 nanoseconds

20. fsin

Strategy: Use exponent 0x7ff to reach 'special value' processing in microcode; positive/negative, NaN/inf doesn't seem to make a difference, go with QNaN.

Contender: Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-8559U CPU @ 2.70GHz

    movabsq $0x7fffffffffffffff, %rax
    movq    %rax, -8(%rsp)
    fldl    -8(%rsp)
    fsin

Score: 257 cycles

Time: 94 nanoseconds

19. mfence

Strategy: Saturate all write-combining line-fill buffers with movnti stores to distinct cache lines, forcing mfence to drain the full LFB write path to the uncore before retiring.

Contender: Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-8559U CPU @ 2.70GHz

movnti %r9,  0*64(%rdi)   ; ×16 distinct cache lines — saturate the write-combining LFBs
; …
movnti %r9, 15*64(%rdi)
mfence                     ; must drain all pending LFB writes before retiring

Score: 326 cycles

Time: 120 nanoseconds

18. mov cr3

Strategy: Nothing for now, just check how long it takes to invalidate the TLB.

Contender: AMD Ryzen 7 5800H with Radeon Graphics (Trigkey S5)

mov %rax, %cr3

Score: 352 cycles

Time: 110 nanoseconds

17. fadd

Strategy: Hit x87 FP microcode assist path by using denormal source operand.

Contender: Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-8559U CPU @ 2.70GHz

fldl   subnorm    ; 1e-310: value < DBL_MIN, biased exponent = 0
faddl  subnorm    ; source is subnormal → FP microcode assist

Score: 677 cycles

Time: 249 nanoseconds

16. split lock

Strategy: Align lock-prefixed operand to straddle cache-line boundary, forcing CPU to assert the external bus lock rather than using the fast MESI cache-coherence path.

Contender: Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-8559U CPU @ 2.70GHz

; split_ptr % 64 == 63 — dword spans bytes 63 (line N) and 64–66 (line N+1)
lock xaddl %r9d, (%rdi)

Score: 865 cycles

Time: 319 nanoseconds

15. fdiv -

Strategy: Use subnormal divisor, hardware hands control to microcode assist, assist normalizes operand, performs the division, then restores architectural state.

Contender: Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-8559U CPU @ 2.70GHz

    movabsq $0x3ff0000000000000, %rax   ; 1.0 (normal dividend)
    movq    %rax, -8(%rsp)
    fldl    -8(%rsp)                     ; ST(0) = 1.0

    movabsq $0x0000002000000000, %rax   ; 6.79e-313 (subnormal divisor)
    movq    %rax, -8(%rsp)
    fdivl   -8(%rsp)                     ; ST(0) = 1.0 / subnormal → FP assist

Score: 883 cycles

Time: 325 nanoseconds

14. cpuid

Strategy: Use rakefield to find the highest latency CPUID leaves.

Contender: Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-8559U CPU @ 2.70GHz

movl $6, %eax
cpuid


Score: 1248 cycles

Time: 460 nanoseconds

13. rdrand

Strategy: Execute in a tight loop to deplete the hardware entropy pool faster than it can be refilled, forcing subsequent calls to stall while the entropy source recovers.

Contender: Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-8559U CPU @ 2.70GHz

rdrand %rax

Score: 5,579 cycles

Time: 2.057 microseconds

12. wrmsr

Strategy: Use project:nightshyft to identify high latency MSRs. MCG_CTL on Zen look like a winner: may be a microcode quiesce and synchronize on MCA error banks across hardware units, some potentially off-die, requiring fabric-level communication rather than a simple local register write.

Contender: AMD Ryzen 7 5800H with Radeon Graphics (Trigkey S5)

movl $0x17b, %ecx       ; MCG_CTL
wrmsr

Score: 34,304 cycles

Time: 10.742 microseconds

11. out

Strategy: Target an I/O port that straddles a NIC device register boundary, triggering the device to quiesce its TX DMA engine on each write.

Contender: AMD Ryzen 7 5800H with Radeon Graphics (Trigkey S5)

mov $0xf019, %dx
outl %eax, %dx

Score: 49,857 cycles

Time: 15.580 microseconds

10. rdmsr

Strategy: Use project:nightshyft to identify high latency model-specific-registers: VIA uses an undocumented register at 0x133 that gives wildly high response time. No idea what it does.

Contender: VIA Eden Processor 800MHz

movl $0x133, %ecx ; undocumented MSR
rdmsr

Score: 161,602 cycles

Time: 202.004 microseconds

9. wbinvd

Strategy: Fully load L1/L2/L3 caches with dirty lines to force DRAM writeback of entire hierarchy.

Contender: AMD Ryzen 7 5800H with Radeon Graphics (Trigkey S5)

wbinvd

Score: 1,616,480 cycles

Time: 506.165 microseconds

8. in

Strategy: Target I/O port mapped to an ACPI PM block where an unaligned 4-byte read decodes into multiple non-posted loads from wherever this port goes.

Contender: AMD Ryzen 7 5800H with Radeon Graphics (Trigkey S5)

mov $0x0413, %dx
inl %dx, %eax

Score: 12,524,415 cycles

Time: 3.921769 milliseconds

7. mov

Strategy: Use mmiotic to identify high-latency deadspace in PCIe fabric, hit unkown GPU register.

Contender: AMD Ryzen 7 5800H with Radeon Graphics (Trigkey S5)

movl 0xfcc003b0, %esi

Score: 443,937,696 cycles

Time: 139.010268 milliseconds

6. mov rax -

Strategy: Search MMIO space for slowest registers in PCIe fabric, hit unknown GPU register, use 8-byte MMIO read to get two dword register accesses, which isn't technically allowed but works anyway.

Contender: AMD Ryzen 7 5800H with Radeon Graphics (Trigkey S5)

movq 0xfcc003b0, %rax

Score: 887,716,864 cycles

Time: 277.971228 milliseconds

5. vmovdqu xmm -

Strategy: Search MMIO space for slowest registers in PCIe fabric, hit unknown GPU register, use 16-byte MMIO read to get four dword register accesses, which isn't technically allowed but works anyway.

Contender: AMD Ryzen 7 5800H with Radeon Graphics (Trigkey S5)

vmovdqu 0xfcc003b0, %xmm0

Score: 1,774,555,776 cycles

Time: 555.664133 milliseconds

4. vmovdqu ymm -

Strategy: Search MMIO space for slowest registers in PCIe fabric, hit unknown GPU register, use 32-byte MMIO read to get eight dword register accesses, which still isn't technically allowed but works anyway.

Contender: AMD Ryzen 7 5800H with Radeon Graphics (Trigkey S5)

vmovdqu 0xfcc003b0, %ymm0

Score: 3,549,079,296 cycles

Time: 1.111345034 s

3. vmovdqu ymm (unaligned) -

Strategy: Search MMIO space for slowest registers in PCIe fabric, hit unknown GPU register, use 32-byte unaligned MMIO read to get nine dword register accesses, which is even less allowed than the aligned version, but works anyway.

Contender: AMD Ryzen 7 5800H with Radeon Graphics (Trigkey S5)

vmovdqu 0xfcc003b1, %ymm0

Score: 4,453,212,256 cycles

Time: 1.394428818 seconds

2. fxrstor64 (baseline) -

Strategy: Use mmiotic to identify high-latency deadspace in PCIe fabric, isolate region near 0's and offset state to avoid MXCSR corruption (possibly VGA buffer?), use fxrstor64 to load 512-byte FPU/MMX/XMM state from MMIO, forcing CPU to process 512 bytes of I/O transactions through slowest available memory aperture.

Contender: AMD Ryzen 7 5800H

movl $0xfcc68830, %rsi
fxrstor64 %rsi

Score: 74,584,168,512 cycles

Time: 23.354502677 seconds

1. 🏆 fxrstor64 🏆

Strategy: Extend fxrstor64 (baseline) by starving the fabric while the load is in flight — a fleet of hammer cores pounds a different high-latency MMIO register with tight 4-byte reads, saturating the PCIe root complex and endpoint with non-posted transactions, so CPU 0's 512-byte fxrstor64 must queue behind all that contending traffic.

Contender: AMD Ryzen 7 5800H with Radeon Graphics (Trigkey S5)

; CPU 0 — timed instruction
movl $0xfcc68830, %rsi
fxrstor64 %rsi

; CPUs 1..N — hammer loop against a different high-latency location
movl 0xfcc68858, %eax

🏆 Score: 198,002,498,236 cycles

🏆 Time: 62 seconds

??. xrstor64 (AMX, MMIO)

Strategy: Leverage extended AVX state in Sapphire Rapids with MMIO approach from fxrstor64: xsave state area is 8KB vs 512 bytes, 16x size -> 1,000,000,000,000 cycles

Contender: TODO

; XCR0 must enable AMX components (bits 17-18); state area ~8KB
xrstor64 (%rsi)         ; rsi -> MMIO region, same technique as fxrstor64

ARM Leaderboard

T.B.D.

RISC-V Leaderboard

T.B.D.

Author

The assembly hall-of-shame is a research effort from Christopher Domas (@xoreaxeaxeax).

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

6. Ancient Library – 1,060 Greek/Latin texts, click any word to parse it

Source: https://ancientlibrary.net/
Site: Ancient Library
Submitter: aagha (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-08-07 18:51 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 162 points · 54 comments
Length: 224 words (~1 min read)
Language: en-US

A complete parsing reader for the classical canon. Click any word in any text for its lemma, morphology, and full dictionary entry — Lewis & Short for Latin, Liddell-Scott-Jones for Greek.

1060 works · 293 Latin · 767 Greek · 140 authors · browse the full A–Z index

Latin

EpicThe great narrative poems of Rome.23 worksLyric & ElegyCatullus, Horace, and the Roman elegists.42 worksTragedySeneca’s tragedies.10 worksComedyPlautus and Terence.26 worksHistoryCaesar, Livy, Sallust, Tacitus.16 worksBiographyLives of the Caesars and famous men.68 worksOratory & RhetoricCicero and the art of Roman speech.48 worksPhilosophyCicero, Seneca, Lucretius.22 worksLettersCicero, Pliny, Seneca.8 worksDidactic & TechnicalTeaching in verse and prose.5 worksMyth, Hymn & ReligionOvid’s calendar and mythological verse.12 worksSatire & FableHorace, Juvenal, Persius, Phaedrus.6 worksProse FictionThe Roman novel.4 worksScience & MedicinePliny’s encyclopedia and Roman science.2 worksGrammar & ReferenceGellius’ learned miscellany.1 work

Greek

EpicHomer, Hesiod, and their heirs.45 worksLyric & ElegyPindar, Sappho’s heirs, and the Anthology.26 worksTragedyAeschylus, Sophocles, Euripides.34 worksComedyAristophanes and Menander.11 worksHistoryHerodotus, Thucydides, and their successors.47 worksGeography & TravelStrabo and Pausanias.2 worksBiographyPlutarch’s Lives and more.146 worksOratory & RhetoricThe Attic orators and the Second Sophistic.247 worksPhilosophyPlato, Aristotle, and the Stoics.53 worksDidactic & TechnicalManuals and treatises.12 worksMyth, Hymn & ReligionApollodorus’ library of myth.2 worksSatire & FableLucian of Samosata.71 worksProse FictionThe Greek novel.7 worksScience & MedicineHippocrates, Galen, Euclid, Ptolemy.26 worksGrammar & ReferenceAncient lexica.2 worksBiblical TextsThe Greek New Testament.27 worksEarly Christian WritingsThe Fathers of the Church.9 works

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

7. What happens if an entire class of workers loses faith in their careers

Source: https://www.noemamag.com/why-is-everyone-in-tech-so-sad/
Site: NOEMA
Author: Aaron Horwath
Published: 2026-08-06
HN activity: 462 points · 564 comments
Length: 3.8K words (~17 min read)
Language: en-US

Credits

Aaron Horwath is the director of AI operations at a creative technology company where he is focused on implementing AI in a way that supports both humans and business.

On a recent morning commute, I sat on a train in one of those awkward four-person configurations with a shared table. Across from me sat a typical commuter: early 30s, slacks, dress shirt, dirty white sneakers, hair a little disheveled, AirPods in, basking in the glow of an open MacBook.

For over half an hour, I listened to this young man as he was on a call explaining, in painfully monotone detail, EBITDAs, margin expansion opportunities, cost structures, ARR, etc. On and on he went until the screeching of the train’s brakes signaled our arrival at the final station. But as everyone else around us began shuffling to disembark, I watched the man begin digging frantically through a leather bag at his side. Intriguing! I wondered what he’d pull out. A copy of “Atomic Habits”? A framed portrait of Gary V? A Mac mini running OpenClaw?

None of the above. Instead, he took out two long knitting needles. Between them dangled a mound of pink yarn. He explained to me that he was making a winter hat for a niece. And for the first time that morning, I noticed a glint of pride and excitement in his eyes.

The hat was a project born from a desire, as he put it, to do something.

Among my Knowledge Worker peers, I am hearing this more and more often: people who want to pick up pottery, painting, crochet or other old-timey analog hobbies. In coffee shops and in the low-lit corners of bars, professionals are sharing dreams of “disappearing” or “living on a farm somewhere” or “going off the grid.” These aren’t fantastical daydreams; they are visions of escape shared in a tone that betrays an underlying existential angst, a fundamental doubt about work and careerism inspired by a seemingly increasingly common experience: waking up one morning at an existential precipice, struck with a sudden sense that knowledge work is, and perhaps always has been, pointless. Perhaps you too have felt such a feeling, a rising tide of overwhelming, indescribable melancholy, slowly threatening to envelop you in your Ikea office chair.

“Among my Knowledge Worker peers, I am hearing this more and more often: people who want to pick up pottery, painting, crochet or other old-timey analog hobbies.”

This disillusionment is infectious. One person speaks of it and others begin nodding: They too have felt it, the drop in motivation, the sense of being distant from their work, the lack of sleep, the concerns about the future. These conversations inevitably turn to fundamental questions about careers: What the fuck are we actually doing? What the fuck is the point of all of this?

We are, it’s true, living through a time of disruption. But what seems to differentiate this period from those of the past is the nature of the angst itself. Yes, AI is threatening jobs and disrupting industries. But Knowledge Workers have faced recessions, outsourcing, new technology and automations of many kinds before. Recent graduates always worry about breaking into the job market. Millennial professionals have navigated economic uncertainty their entire careers. What’s different about this moment is that the questions are not just economic but existential, the kind of questions that cause high-earning technical professionals to contemplate throwing it all away to start a goat farm in Washington or become a surf instructor in Costa Rica.

It strikes me as significant that the people who are usually the most insulated from economic upheaval, and seem to be well-positioned to ride out AI’s near-term impacts — highly paid executives and senior professionals with decades of institutional knowledge — are also uncertain about the future of their careers amid the rapid change nearly every industry is undergoing.

Some will say: good, fuck ‘em. In the 2010s, Knowledge Workers told everyone to learn to code while they sipped kombucha and played Xbox in beanbag chairs. Then, Knowledge Workers sat inside during the pandemic while frontline workers risked their health to make Amazon and Uber Eats deliveries. Now, those same Knowledge Workers are building AI that threatens to eliminate work for humans across industries and make a very few people wealthy beyond imagination. And these same assholes want pity now?

To that I say: fair enough. But this sweeping disenchantment begs a fascinating (or terrifying or sad) set of questions: What is this angst plaguing Knowledge Workers? And what happens to a society and its industries if an entire class of workers loses faith in their careers overnight?

Workism: Praise Thee

In 2019, Derek Thompson wrote in The Atlantic about “American Workism” where he described a trend among Knowledge Workers, particularly in the U.S., of increasingly seeking fulfillment, community and a sense of meaning from work that previous generations had garnered from religion. As Thompson wrote, Workism is “emotional — even spiritual. The best-educated and highest-earning Americans, who can have whatever they want, have chosen the office for the same reason that devout Christians attend church on Sundays: It’s where they feel most themselves.”

People have long held careers from which they’ve derived a deep sense of meaning. Traditionally, we’ve referred to those careers as vocations: a calling, a way of life. More than a job: a purpose.

A vocation emphasizes skills, values and the desire to contribute something beneficial. Vocations have traditionally referred to careers that are challenging, socially impactful, often rewarding in ways other than financial. These are your teachers, nurses, firefighters, social workers, paramedics or even service providers with direct connections to the communities and customers they serve, like mechanics, plumbers or electricians. Even on bad days, deep down, most of these folks find their work rewarding in important and intangible ways.

But those aren’t the careers young people have dedicated their lives to. Instead, graduates are overwhelmingly taking jobs in finance, consulting or technology. There’s no doubt that getting these jobs is competitive, and that they are demanding, complex and require navigating layers of politics and bureaucracy, a ton of ass-kissing, long work hours, heavy cognitive workloads, advanced skillsets and the emotional burden of a near-constant threat of layoffs. But so much of the work lacks any altruistic upside.

“Perhaps you too have felt such a feeling, a rising tide of overwhelming, indescribable melancholy, slowly threatening to envelop you in your Ikea office chair.”

In “Bullshit Jobs,” David Graeber cataloged people who admitted their jobs serve no meaningful function. Slide decks built for projects that will never launch. Heated debates over the minute details of software features nobody asked for. Agonizing over administrative processes to help money move from one rich person to another. Optimizing every word of an ad no one will notice for a service no one needs. Resting and vesting — when engineers and other highly paid workers get to sit around and wait for their stock to vest — and promotion-driven development, where developers ignore what’s good in favor of what appears to be good when they’re up for a promotion.

The altruism in these careers, then, is hard to find. So how does anyone do it without losing their mind?

That’s the true beauty of Workism: It is manufactured to distract people from the hole in their souls that a vocation would otherwise fill. It is the opiate of commuters in quarter zips. And it works. It keeps talented people showing up at the office to argue over reports and strategy documents and rebrandings with the seriousness of pediatric heart surgery.

But Workism has a weakness. Like religion, it relies on faith’s triumph over logic. What would happen, then, if something threatened that faith? A paradigm shift that broke the spell of Workism? A sort of enlightenment that caused Knowledge Workers to start asking tough questions of their organizations and themselves. And what would happen if Knowledge Workers awoke from the spell of Workism with no financially viable alternative?

Well, it seems AI might offer us the pleasure of finding out.

Popping The Workism Bubble

Knowledge work has always been inherently abstract. Plenty of these jobs, particularly at larger organizations, are structured like Russian nesting dolls: roles designed to support other roles, which support still other roles, layer after layer, until it’s no longer clear where there’s a solid center to be found. It’s easy to see how, to a plumber, a carpenter or a line cook, work of this nature can appear like exactly what David Graeber called it: bullshit.

Knowledge work’s one saving grace, until recently, was that it was still executed by humans. We were needed. It was flesh-and-blood humans who sat down to work through a challenge, built the slide deck, wrote the customer response and developed the strategy. Even if it was existentially meaningless, there was human thought, collaborative work and creativity poured into that work, giving it life.

Now, AI agents are increasingly executing much of that work for Knowledge Workers. It is common for people responsible for integrating these tools into their organizations, myself included, to describe the future of work as one in which all humans will essentially be managers of armies of AI agents. That seems pretty great. Let the software compile the reports, chase down the data, format the deck, draft the first pass of documentation and handle the dozens of small, repetitive tasks that used to quietly eat an afternoon. But in many cases, employees under pressure from leaders to produce more are using AI agents for far more than grunt work: formulating complete business strategies, generating full marketing campaigns, building entire websites, drafting strategy for whole divisions of an organization. From a single email to an entire corporate strategy, the outputs of individuals, teams and organizations are increasingly generated in an instant by AI.

But does this power — this additional level of abstraction — take people too far, in some sense, from their work? Does something feel … off … about having someone, or something, else execute nearly all the work, even if the end product didn’t feel very meaningful to begin with?

Debord’s Spectacle: I Don’t Wanna Do This Anymore

“In societies where modern conditions of production prevail, life is presented as an immense accumulation of spectacles. Everything that was directly lived has receded into a representation.”

That’s the opening paragraph of Guy Debord’s “The Society of the Spectacle.” I will fail to summarize the book adequately. It is simultaneously exciting and impenetrable. But the main thrust of Debord’s argument is this: Spectacle is a feature of late capitalism in which life, rather than being directly lived, is perpetually mediated. There is always something between us and the thing we are supposed to be experiencing. I don’t talk to my mom; I text her. I don’t travel; I watch other people travel on YouTube. I don’t have sex; I watch porn. In late capitalism, the medium replaces the experience.

Workism is a microcosm of the larger spectacle: a world where appearing busy, important and uniquely knowledgeable is as valuable as actually being any of those things, and where work needs only to appear impactful rather than actually be impactful. As Debord writes in Thesis 12: “The spectacle presents itself as a vast, inaccessible reality that can never be questioned. Its sole message is: ‘What appears is good; what is good appears.’” This is Workism’s most convincing argument: The work must be important because, well, we’re all here, aren’t we? Signing in. Staying late. Every week.

“The questions today are not just economic but existential.”

Adding AI to the spectacle feels existentially daunting because it moves us even further from the work we do, and its value. I don’t build the pitch that wins the client; I write the query that tells the AI to write it, and then I check the work afterward. I don’t gather the materials and write the industry newsletter; my agent does it. Before, that work might’ve felt cheap and unsatisfying, deep down, but it was still ours. Now AI is being forced on organizations in ways that call the value of the entire enterprise of Workism itself into question.

And this is where things get particularly interesting. I don’t think Debord imagined something so seismically paradigm-shifting that it could abstract work to an extent that it would shake the working class, or, in the case of Knowledge Workers, enough to rupture a spectacle like Workism. But with the introduction of AI, it is as if, over the past 30 years, we have been slowly taking steps away from the direct experience of life and work, and AI risks pushing us far enough that the illusion becomes entirely visible.

Organizations find themselves in a pickle. They want to integrate AI into their operations, as do their shareholders. And they will. In the short term, the potential efficiency gains are too good to pass up. And, done right, it can offer benefits to both businesses and employees. But what makes many executives most excited about AI — less collaboration, fewer people — risks dismantling the structures that hold the very organizations they lead together.

What if the enlightenment from Workism, ironically, is delivered by Workism’s most revolutionary product? And what does that mean for the employees who have spent their careers praying at the Workism altar?

What’s At Stake: The Value Of The Messy Middle

To understand why AI threatens to kill Workism specifically, we have to understand what has kept faith in Workism alive.

In Thompson’s article, he states that one thing people look for in Knowledge Work jobs is community: to spend time with like-minded people with similar interests, to collaborate with others to solve problems. Relationships are the foundation of the human workplace, and Knowledge Work’s redeeming value. None of us will make it to Knowledge Work’s pearly gates, but at least we will make our false journey together.

Ironically, it’s a growing dream of executives that an organization of employees armed with a swarm of agents and powerful LLMs no longer need to collaborate with one another to gather information, ideate or execute a project. In their vision for the future, work goes from a messy experience of learning and exploring to something more akin to assembly-line production. As Debord wrote back in 1967, “This proletariat is being objectively reinforced by the virtual elimination of the peasantry and by the increasing degree to which the ‘service’ sectors and intellectual professions are being subjected to factory-like working conditions.”

But sometimes messy inefficiency is a feature, not a bug. In a recent episode of Bill Simmons’s podcast, the writer Chuck Klosterman argued with Bill about the role of technology in sports, particularly when it comes to refereeing. Consider tennis. The days of Johnny Mac blowing up at a referee over a bad line call are over. With Hawk-Eye technology, the judgment is right 100% of the time. In the NBA, the challenge system now helps to ensure that bad calls do not change a game. The MLB has integrated an automated ball-strike system. These technologies have been implemented with very different levels of success, but the goals are the same: Get officiating right more often — maybe always. Who could complain? It’s so efficient!

“What would happen if Knowledge Workers awoke from the spell of Workism with no financially viable alternative? It seems AI might offer us the pleasure of finding out.”

Klosterman argues that bad calls are a natural and fun part of games. In fact, bad calls have created iconic sports moments that people still talk about. Sports are human constructs and the messiness of human error, whether by player or referee, is part of them. Getting calls right 100% of the time may be objectively better, but it is subjectively less interesting and entertaining. And entertainment is the goal of sport.

Knowledge work is strikingly similar. Sure, an AI that can produce in minutes a spot-on project that would have taken hours is cool. But the rate of slide deck creation isn’t what is going to retain talent. Employees overwhelmingly choose to remain or leave their roles because of their colleagues and/or bosses, and the quality of the experience of the messy middle a workplace offers. Those are the elements that make work fun—and valuable.

But not everyone feels that way. In my experience, there are two broad categories of Knowledge Workers. The first are outcome-first workers. Their focus is on the business, on winning, on efficiency. Human needs and faults and emotions are an obstacle to be overcome.

The second group has an experience-first perspective. These workers love the messy middle. They value the journey. They want their organizations to perform well but as a natural consequence of collaboration, debate and shared struggle with people they actually like. Many experience-first people are artists outside of work. Photographers, directors, screenwriters, sculptors, painters, poets, writers. Many are active volunteers. For these people, to be pulled away from their economically unviable passions requires something in return: a company experience with freedom for exploration, creativity, problem solving and cool colleagues.

Research suggests this group needs that environment to do their best work. Harvard Business School’s Teresa Amabile spent decades studying what produces genuinely creative, high-quality output. Her Intrinsic Motivation Principle determines that people do their most creative and innovative work when motivated by the work itself — the interest, the challenge, the enjoyment — not by outcomes or metrics. The environments that kill creativity are political, risk-averse and relentlessly outcome-focused. The environments that stimulate it are collaborative, idea-driven and free. The messy middle, in other words, isn’t inefficient. It’s the condition under which genuinely valuable work gets produced.

“Workism is a microcosm of the larger spectacle: a world where appearing busy, important and uniquely knowledgeable is as valuable as actually being any of those things.”

It’s important to note that the impact of removing the messy middle from the work experience of these two groups is asymmetrical: For outcome-first people, it is a victory. For experience-first people, it undermines the foundation of work.

As I’m writing this essay, big companies are on a layoff bender. Thousands of people are being fired all over the place. Executives are often claiming these headcount reductions are a result of AI. They aren’t. At the moment, AI automation is not creating anywhere near the increased efficiency necessary to justify hundreds of thousands of lost jobs.

We’ve been through waves of hiring and firing a thousand times before. But this time might be different. In the past, there was always a fresh cohort of workers waiting to be brought in. But what if talent stops coming back? What if the AI transformation gone wrong makes top talent — particularly those who are experience-first by nature — lose faith in Workism en masse? What if, when companies go to replenish headcounts, talent freed from the Workism spectacle has turned to different versions of their lives? What if their side projects suddenly became profitable? The talent pool increasingly doesn’t own homes and doesn’t plan on having kids, so it has perhaps never been easier to make a career pivot toward something that is genuinely satisfying in ways corporate life isn’t.

What would Debord say? Well, he had serious doubts about the possibility of leaving the spectacle behind.

Post-Workism: Escaping The Inescapable

As Debord puts it, “Complacent acceptance of the status quo may also coexist with purely spectacular rebelliousness—dissatisfaction itself becomes a commodity as soon as the economy of abundance develops the capacity to process that particular raw material.”

At some point, in other words, the spectacle will put economic pressure on you that you’ll need to meet. In today’s world, that might mean starting a YouTube channel and a Substack about how you abandoned your tech career to start a horse rescue farm, ultimately turning yourself and your life into a commodity that feeds the larger societal spectacle. Or it might mean starting a company of your own, thereby suddenly needing to create a spectacle attractive to potential employees. Either way, you are doomed to exit one version of the spectacle only to be absorbed into another one. That’s the logic of the spectacle: It reabsorbs even the dissatisfied in order to sustain itself.

Debord believed escape from the spectacle was impossible. He went on to dissolve his own movement rather than watch it become institutionalized, and then drank himself to death in the countryside.

Some will certainly leave Knowledge Work — the most disillusioned, the most artistically talented or motivated, the most existentially sensitive to a sudden moment of enlightenment, the financially able. But many more will remain, either by choice or necessity, to face a work experience where the humanity of work is eroding away. Are those who chose to remain, or who simply cannot leave, doomed to spend their careers existentially distraught?

“The environments that kill creativity are political, risk-averse and relentlessly outcome-focused. The environments that stimulate it are collaborative, idea-driven and free.”

Debord also believed the spectacle could be undermined through deliberate acts: hijacking spectacular images and turning them against themselves, drifting through urban space in ways that resist its geography and constructing moments of genuine, unmediated experience that the spectacle cannot metabolize. At work, that might mean jumping on a call to talk through a problem with a colleague instead of querying an agent for the answer. Or executing work the old-fashioned way — meandering, exploratory — with the understanding that it may be slower but might produce something more genuinely human. Or simply deciding that certain work is best left to human hands entirely. Anything that preserves the elements of work that have made it worth doing in the first place.

But perhaps the most powerful action of all is simply to maintain an awareness (and remind others) that Workism is a spectacle. For most employees, we owe it to each other to remind one another that this work is not, in the grand scheme of things, all that important. It is illusory. No one has ever died over a spreadsheet. The world does not wait with bated breath for product launches. A marketing campaign will not change the world. Almost no one will remember all the work we do. But they might remember the types of people we were, the relationships we had and how we treated the people we worked with.

And once freed from the false satisfaction of believing we are changing the world with our day jobs, perhaps we will be inspired to fill that hole with something real — true altruism, not its artificial Workism substitute — by actually trying to impact real people, in our communities, in real ways.

Even if it’s just one knitted hat at a time.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

8. SupererDuperer

Source: https://www.shirtpocket.com/blog/supererduperer
Site: shirtpocket.com
Submitter: zdw (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-08-01 15:26 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 21 points · 0 comments
Length: 1.6K words (~7 min read)
Language: en

Executive Summary

Brand new, top-to-bottom rewrite of SuperDuper now available.

All the Details

22 years.

SuperDuper has had an impressive run. It has lasted, in its original form, for longer than any other product I’ve ever been involved with over the (so far) 43 years of my working career. Somehow, Shirt Pocket—and SuperDuper—has been more than half of that. Over those years, most of the design decisions made way back in 2004 have proven to withstand the test of time:

The text-based What’s going to happen? section;
The status view that clearly shows the process that’s taking place during the copy, ticking off the steps as it goes along;
The minimal number of options that let you stay focused on the task at hand.

At the same time, some choices constrained what the program could do:

It was document-based, which made sense at the time, but wasn’t really how users thought about the process;
Scheduling was a bit of a bolt-on (and suffered from a disastrous initial usability test before release), driving the interface through scripting (RIP AppleScript, hello direct event dispatch from Swift) and isolating its details in a separate window, divorced from the source;
Copy failures, while rare, basically gave a “whoops” and asked users to examine a log filled with technical details of the error;
Only “native” Apple file systems were supported (HFS+ and APFS);
And some concepts, like the Sandbox—great in the days of macOS before the Sealed System Volume—were rendered obsolete, sent to the land of wind and ghosts by Apple’s relentless forward march.

I could go on: products are a combination of good and bad, of success and failure, and I learned to live with the (mostly good!) balance.

Dreams Become Reality

Back in 2007, I designed what was intended to be SuperDuper v3.0. It was a rewrite that greatly expanded its capabilities while retaining its essence.

But, in those days, it just wasn’t possible for us to implement those grand plans. The new UI was much more complex, the logic more elaborate, and the systems we had then didn’t support the things needed to make it a reality without a lot of complex coding we didn’t have time for.

On top of that, macOS itself was a moving target (and still is!): adding and deprecating features; completely changing the file system; locking down the OS; supporting not just one change in CPU, but three.

With a tool so tied to how the system operated at a low level, it was a lot of work just keeping up with what Apple was doing.

So, I put the notebook with that design in it on a shelf.

For nearly 20 years.

Today, I’m happy to say that I’ve finally been able to carve out enough time to grab that “old” redesign, flesh it out further, modernize it, and make that dream a reality.

Welcome to SuperDuper! 4

The new version of SuperDuper is a ground-up rewrite, a tip-to-tail reinvention of what SuperDuper looks like, how it works, what it can do, and where I can take it in the future.

The new version feels different, yet familiar. The successful elements of SuperDuper’s design, like What’s going to happen? and the status view, are still there, but they’ve been refreshed and modernized.

Documents have been retired and replaced with Copy Jobs, which are stored internally and organized by source. If you want to copy Macintosh HD, that’s where you start. Click, and you’re presented with one or more template copy operations, or you can start from scratch.

Configuration is done right inline by clicking bold, underlined link elements and selecting options from pop-ups. The effect of your choices is immediately reflected in What’s going to happen?, ensuring you know what to expect when you click Copy Now.

Preview

And if you’re still unsure, you can safely see what’s going to happen…for real. Click the Preview button and SuperDuper will run the copy without making changes and present you with a report that shows exactly what would have been updated, added, deleted, etc., had this been a real run.

Blazing Speed!

Once you decide it’s time to make the copy, SuperDuper 4 is much faster than before. And I’m not just talking 20% or 30% faster. Smart Updates are between 2x and, with the new Turbo feature, an order of magnitude faster.

As an example, my typical nightly Smart Update, of an 8-million-file volume, about 2.5TB of data, used to take around 40 minutes to run.

Without Turbo, it now takes about 20 minutes. But with Turbo…it’s only about a minute.

One minute. OK, yes, sticklers—that’s actually quite a bit more than an order of magnitude. ¯\_(ツ)_/¯

History

Successful and failed runs are shown at the bottom of the copy job, with color-coded dots that can be clicked to display details.

If scheduled, a clear indication of when the next run will occur is there as well. And for those going for the Guinness Book of Backup Records, there’s an indication of how many successful runs this job has done in a row.

No UI Needed

At a technical level, SuperDuper has been split into a “helper” or “server”, which runs the copy, and an interface, which is the part you interact with. That means that, once registered, you can quit the SuperDuper application and your backups will still run. They’ll even run if you log out!

It also means that a scheduled copy doesn’t suddenly show the interface. It just happens, in the background.

If a copy is in progress, re-opening the app will show you the status and progress of the copy—and while a copy is going on, a menu bar item is present to show a compressed view of the same information.

Many Copies at Once

You can run any number of copies at the same time. If you have four backups you need to do, just click Copy Now for each, and they’ll all run simultaneously.

Have four backups scheduled to run at 4am? They’ll all run at that time, rather than back to back.

File Systems and Folders

SuperDuper 4 now supports copying to and from any file system the Mac supports. Using a “Photos” drive with both Windows and Mac that’s formatted as exFAT? No problem: you can copy it.

Need to copy your Documents folder to “Documents Backup” on a NAS? Now you can.

Have a network volume that you want to copy to a local folder? SuperDuper 4 can do it.

Copy Rules

Copy Scripts have been replaced by Copy Rules. Now, you can easily create rules that can select files and folders from the source or destination for special handling. Need to ensure that a specific folder is never written to or deleted? You can do that with a few clicks.

Want to exclude any folder named Caches in /Library? No problem. And you can see the effect of your rule as you create it, so you can be sure you’ve done the right thing.

No More Shell Scripts

I’ve added Shortcuts support, so you can create a shortcut that runs before or after a copy, on success, or on error. Want to send an email on success or failure? Beep when copies are done? It’s now easy, and with Golden Gate’s Apple Intelligence shortcut support, anyone can do it.

Or, at least, probably anyone.

And if you still want to run a shell script, you can…from the shortcut.

Speaking of Shortcuts

Not only does SuperDuper let you call a shortcut from a copy—you can create, run, and check on a copy job from a shortcut!

If you have an unusual workflow—say, you want to copy any SD card with photos on it to a folder named after that card—you can now do it with a few clicks.

…And So Much More

This is already (much) too long, but there’s so much new stuff that I’ve been wanting to show you. I hope you’re as excited to use this as I am to get it into your hands after all this time.

System Requirements

SuperDuper 4 requires macOS 14 (Sonoma) or later. SuperDuper 3 is still available for those who need to copy under macOS 13 (Ventura) or earlier.

Upgrades

In all the years SuperDuper has been on the market, we’ve never charged for updates and never even raised the price. That’s 22 years of free updates.

SuperDuper 4 is a totally new version, far more capable than before, and as such, I’ve decided this is going to be its first paid upgrade. I’ve also adjusted the price for inflation since 2004. So it’s still the same bargain it was back when it was first released, but in today’s dollars.

SuperDuper 4 is free for qualifying recent purchases. Other SuperDuper 3 customers who purchased after July 31, 2020, receive an upgrade discount of up to 30%, based on purchase date.

As before, even without a license, you can make full, bootable backups for free, and I (yes, it’s really me, I work too much) provide support for both registered and unregistered users.

Dinner’s Served

I’ve been looking forward to this day for a long time, and now that the day has finally arrived, I’m excited to see what you think. Reach out to support if you have any questions, praise, or, if you must, complaints.

And please register or upgrade! The only way I can continue to do this is with your financial support. If you like SuperDuper, share the love and tell your friends!

With that:

Download SuperDuper 4

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

9. Responding to the next frontier of critical cyber capabilities

Source: https://openai.com/index/responding-next-frontier-critical-cyber-capabilities/
Site: OpenAI
Submitter: artninja1988 (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-08-07 16:39 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 163 points · 168 comments
Length: 552 words (~3 min read)
Language: en-US

Cybersecurity is rapidly changing as models become more capable in ways that can both strengthen cyberdefenses and enable attacks at unprecedented speed and scale.

Our latest internal evaluations of Astra, one of our upcoming models, over the past few days indicate significant advancements in agentic coding and cybersecurity. These results, in addition to expert assessments, have led us to conclude last night that we cannot rule out critical cyber capabilities under our Preparedness Framework⁠(opens in a new window).

We are sharing this because we believe it’s important to be transparent with the public and the safety and security communities about this potential shift in capabilities.

We first published our Preparedness Framework in December 2023, well before models approached biological, chemical, cybersecurity, and AI self-improvement capabilities at this level. We created it to give us a guide for identifying progress in capability and then planning what our company would do as those capabilities emerge. Previous models, including GPT‑5.6‑Sol, have been evaluated for frontier cyber capabilities and assessed at the High (rather than Critical) threshold.

Measuring critical cybersecurity capabilities

Under our Preparedness Framework, a model reaches the Critical cybersecurity threshold if it can identify and develop functional zero-day exploits of all severity levels in many hardened real-world critical systems without human intervention, or can devise and execute end-to-end novel strategies for cyberattacks against hardened targets given only a high level desired goal.

While we continue to benchmark and assess this model, our preliminary evaluations indicate strong enough performance that we cannot rule out Critical capability level at this time. Astra is an upcoming model, and was not involved in exploiting Hugging Face.

Steps we are taking

Accordingly, we have scaled up robustness testing of our safeguards and security controls so that they are appropriate for a deployment of these capabilities. Internally, we have also taken the following steps so that further development of this model happens safely and securely:

We are implementing stricter security controls for higher-capability models and associated activities, including isolated testing environments, restricted network and tool access, enhanced model weight protections and encryption, additional monitoring and detection capabilities, and sandboxed execution.
We are pausing internal activities involving Astra that do not yet meet these strengthened security control requirements.
We have implemented universal monitoring for risky actions and misalignment across all agentic applications of Astra, including training and evaluation. Monitors evaluate the model's Chain of Thought and trigger a security response to review and interrupt high risk activity.
We will work with relevant government agencies and select AI safety organizations to test the capabilities for this model.
We will be providing recommended security controls to third-party testing partners for running higher risk evaluations and workloads safely.

The framework has already guided us through other capability transitions. In June 2025, as our models approached the high capability threshold for biology under the Preparedness Framework, we outlined the steps we were taking to strengthen safeguards, expand testing, work with external experts, and deploy additional security controls. We are applying the same principle here.

We believe advanced cyber-capable models should help defenders identify and address vulnerabilities before attackers do. We’re committed to working alongside governments, safety institutes, and civil society to ensure that the frontier capabilities of models like Astra, and those that follow, are deployed responsibly and broadly for the benefit of all humanity.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

10. Managing AI Coding Costs at Scale

Source: https://www.databricks.com/blog/managing-ai-coding-costs-scale
Site: Databricks
Author: Patrick Wendell, Akshat Bhatia, Vinay Gaba, Erich Elsen, Ivan Zhou
Published: 2026-08-07
HN activity: 177 points · 176 comments
Length: 2.3K words (~10 min read)
Language: en-US

AI coding tools deliver immense value: at Databricks, agentic coding has measurably improved every velocity metric we track and, in some teams, driven an order-of-magnitude gains in output. But nearly every company deploying AI tools at scale has hit the same wall: exponentially growing costs. That curve is unsustainable - left unchecked it will eventually overtake revenue. The spend explosion has left enterprises in a paradoxical situation: on the one hand, desiring to maximally push AI transformation and put powerful tools in the hands of employees, and on the other hand, having to reconcile with an aggregate cost profile that threatens to undermine or even reverse the very efficiency gains AI provides.

Fortunately, several of the earliest large-scale adopters have converged on a set of approaches that solve this puzzle, achieving a “dual mandate”: (a) providing broad access to AI tooling, with minimal friction, and (b) keeping aggregate costs inside of a roughly fixed envelope per user. This post outlines proven cost management techniques, based on our experience at Databricks and conversations with several other digital-native companies, including Stripe, Coinbase, Uber, and Ramp. The table below summarizes current techniques and associated savings; the numbers are directional, based on an informal survey of development teams:

Some of these techniques can be easily implemented with software many companies already use. Others require new infrastructure, particularly techniques that modify end-user clients or shift traffic across models. At Databricks, we’ve open sourced or made freely available our key infrastructure components: an end user meta-harness (Omnigent) and our AI Gateway (Unity AI Gateway). For completeness, this post also covers software used by other companies we spoke with.

The “Efficiency Frontier” for Coding Models

The single greatest cost lever in moving coding spend to more efficient models as they are released. This point bears some discussion, as the simple explanation of "cheaper models” in fact hides a nuanced relationship between model cost and quality.

Colloquially, the term frontier model means “the highest intelligence model,” and frontier labs largely focus on advancing peak intelligence. Frontier models can now solve novel problems in math or cybersecurity. But when AI is deployed at scale, a different type of frontier matters more: the efficiency frontier. The efficiency frontier is defined by the set of models that have the best price point for a given level of intelligence. Most day-to-day coding doesn't require mathematical proofs or novel security insights, so what matters in aggregate is the cost of models that meet the quality bar for typical software engineering work. This "efficiency frontier” is advancing far faster than the intelligence frontier, with new models being released almost weekly that present better intelligence-per-unit-price than prior models.

Cost Lever #1: Moving to open source and lower cost models

Rapidly adopting newer, more efficient models delivers the largest cost wins of any technique. But to capture those gains, a company first needs to know which models actually beat its incumbents. This can be difficult because public benchmarks do a poor job of indicating real-world performance on coding tasks. To size up new models, many companies have built automated evaluations that they believe are more representative of their internal development mix. Databricks recently published an example of such a benchmark, in which we observed highly competitive price/performance for GLM models. That benchmark led us to roll GLM out to developers internally. Often, new models do not advance the efficiency frontier,and evaluations frequently produce negative results: Stripe found that Opus 4.7 did not meaningfully improve quality over Opus 4.6, while increasing cost. They therefore declined to make Opus 4.7 available internally. Databricks saw similar cost regressions when comparing Opus 5.0 to 4.8.

Harness and Model Flexibility

Since the biggest wins come from switching to new models, adopting end user tooling that allows for model flexibility is becoming a critical component of keeping costs down. The tool most commonly used in concern with a particular model is called harness. Proprietary frontier models are increasingly co-designed to work well with specific harnesses, meaning certain harnesses “work better” with certain models. If a company wants to preserve model independence there are roughly two approaches:

Ask users to switch harnesses. One approach is to provide developers with a set of harnesses (Claude Code, Codex, or Cursor) and then ask them to switch between harnesses when a company wants to migrate spend to lower cost models. This lets users work in their preferred harness when possible, but the downside of this approach is that switching costs for an individual developer can be high. If switching costs become too high, the harness itself becomes a de facto lock-in to a model family, limiting the ability to move spend to more competitive models.

Use a meta-harness. A new and increasingly popular approach is to use a meta-harness that surfaces a common user experience to developers while dispatching requests to underlying harnesses (both proprietary and open source). This approach allows both model/harness independence while also reducing developer switching costs. At Databricks, this is the default mode for developers who leverage Omnigent. Some companies we talked to have built custom internal meta-harnesses that integrate with their development toolchain.

Cost Lever #2: Dynamic Request and Task Routing

Instead of asking users to choose task-appropriate models themselves, a growing body of research suggests that automatic model and tool selection may further squeeze efficiency out of agentic coding workflows. Routing approaches roughly fall into three categories:

Request Level Routing: A stateful proxy sits in between a client (such as a coding harness) and the underlying foundation models. The proxy attempts to route requests to the lowest-cost model capable of answering each inference request. Routing for agentic use cases also needs to account for server-side caching, since a cold cache hit has a very high cost for large context workloads. A new wave of products is showing early, promising results for routing. Examples are: Cursor Router, OpenRouter’s AutoRouter, Ramps Router feature and Databricks own Smart Routing feature in Unity AI Gateway.
Task Level Routing (Meta Harness): A client-side process dispatches user tasks to different harnesses based on the complexity of the task. A user task might be “rename this component from X to Y” (a simple task) or an open-ended task like “Explore design considerations that would reduce latency” (a complex task). The dispatcher, often called a Meta Harness, examines which level of underlying model is required for a task and then delegates that entire end-to-end task to the model. Omnigent is an example of a Meta Harness that supports this pattern.
Escalation/Delegation Patterns: A single harness pairs two models (an expensive, high-intelligence model and a cheap worker model). In some approaches, such as Claude’s Advisor Tool, the cheaper model runs the show and escalates when it thinks a task requires more horsepower. The inverse pattern also exists: In Cognition’s Devin Fusion, the higher cost model is the main loop, and it selectively outsources work to a cheaper model.
Internal results at Databricks suggest that our AI Gateway Smart Router is able to consistently reduce average task cost by more than 30%, while roughly matching the quality of the most expensive model in the working set. Other companies we spoke with have seen similar results.

Cost Lever #3: Giving developers visibility, tripwires, and budgets

It may be surprising that this entire article did not start and end with “Give users a monthly budget and be done with it.” Hard budgets, where usage is entirely cut off at a specific spend threshold, are often used only as a last resort option in every company we spoke with. There are two reasons that hard token budgets are not particularly effective for AI spend management: First, if a developer hits their budget ceiling, cutting off further access to AI tools would be debilitating to productivity. Neither the company or employee actually wants that outcome. Second, at least some of the “high spending” users are in fact those who have achieved monumental efficiency gains with AI and are producing immense output. Discouraging those users is self-defeating.

Instead of a hard user spending cap, most companies are adopting a more nuanced and progressive approach that focuses on visibility for end users and increased degrees of friction as spend increases.

Visibility: Every company we spoke with had a mechanism to provide near-instantaneous feedback to users on their ongoing spend, with many also offering specific tips or insights on how to reduce spend by using less expensive models. It is important that users be able to see their spend across all tools, since they may want to influence their choice of tool where they get the highest ROI.

A developer dashboard at Databricks showing active spend
Spend Gates: Developers can be asked to take actions or seek approvals at increasing levels of spend. The simplest form of spend gate is one that can be self-cleared and serves as a warning that the spend rate is increasing above some threshold. At Databricks, we’ve found self-clearing gates a useful mechanism for preventing accidental or unintentional spend. Further gates can be introduced that require explicit budget approval (often through a management chain).
Downshifting: If a developer has hit a spend gate, they can be downshifted to a lower-cost model rather than being entirely suspended from token access. Since the lowest-cost models are drastically less expensive than frontier-intelligence models, this technique allows developers to continue getting work done without incurring massive ongoing spend.
Suspension: In the limit case, most systems do retain the ability to fully suspend users from all token access. As stated above, this is often a temporary measure only and the starting point for a conversation about how to efficiently leverage AI.

Cost Lever #4: Reducing Token Overhead

When a user types a relatively simple request into an AI coding agent (such as “Please investigate and fix this bug.”), that agent subsequently gathers massive amounts of relevant context, invokes a large number of tools, searches through the codebase, and integrates skills or system information provided by the company. By the time costly LLM inference occurs, the user's initial statement accounts for only a negligible fraction of the data fed into the AI system, meaning costs are dominated by context the user did not explicitly include. Techniques in reducing context bloat are still new, but several promising approaches are being explored, such as:

Coercing more frequent compaction (compression) of the active context.
Using harnesses that are “less chatty” (more token efficient), or tuning existing harnesses to generate less token overhead.
Auditing popular tools and decreasing their verbosity.
Encouraging developers to break tasks into smaller individual units of work, decreasing context scope.

When contexts get large, prompt caching also plays a meaningful role in overall performance. Both proprietary and open source LLMs have settings that allow you to enable prompt caching and tune how long the cache is stored. Cache writes cost money, but cached reads can drastically reduce per-inference cost. This trade-off is dependent on a company’s specific workload, so hand-tuning of default cache settings to increase overall cache hit rate can have drastic improvements to overall cost.

At Databricks, relatively simple tuning of our harness and caching settings led to an almost 50% reduction in the number of generated tokens and associated costs, with no observed quality degradation for developers. We continue to explore techniques in this area and think meaningful additional optimization remains possible.

A drastic reduction in tokens per session by eliminating extraneous inference calls and reducing cache writes.

The AI Gateway design pattern

The techniques above had many implicit technical requirements: To rapidly take advantage of new models, companies must have a central location where the “model menu” is managed, and end-users must have a toolchain that supports model mixing. To provide budget visibility across multiple AI tools, a unified cost observability capability must exist. To manage context bloat, companies need a way to observe typical toolcall outputs and enforce compression or compaction. These needs are collectively being solved by a new class of infrastructure software, best described as an AI Gateway. An AI gateway is a central location where all of the following occur:

Capacity management and proxying of access to underlying models (both proprietary and OSS models).
Budget tracking and enforcement, including complex budget policies such as progressive friction levels and model downshifting.
Configuration management for end-user tools, to enforce model allow-lists, compaction settings, and other locally mediated aspects.
Logging of coding session traces for downstream efficiency analysis and benchmark.

At Databricks, we rely heavily on Unity AI Gateway for all of these capabilities.

Putting it all together

The exponential growth of AI coding costs is not an inevitability, it's a solvable engineering and governance problem. Companies that have tamed it share a common playbook: relentlessly chase the efficiency frontier rather than the intelligence frontier, adopt tooling that preserves model flexibility, route work intelligently to the cheapest capable model, replace hard budgets with visibility and progressive friction, and cut the token overhead that dominates real-world spend. None of these techniques requires sacrificing the productivity gains that made AI adoption worthwhile in the first place; together, they let organizations satisfy the dual mandate of broad, low-friction access within a predictable cost envelope.

A set of new infrastructure abstractions is emerging to give companies the tools to manage their costs. At Databricks, we’ve released the key components in our cost management stack as open source or free software products: Our Unity AI Gateway for central management and Omnigent for developer tooling. Thousands of companies use these components every day. We invite more companies to share findings and compare techniques as this technology landscape rapidly evolves.

Acknowledgements: Thank you to infrastructure leaders at Uber, Stripe, Coinbase, and Ramp who provided commentary and reviews of this article. Thank you to Thrive Capital for feedback on an early draft of this article.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

11. Oracle bans AI-generated code from OpenJDK

Source: https://app.dealroom.co/news/feed/oracle-bans-ai-generated-code-from-openjdk-despite-ellison-s-claim-oracle-isn-t-writing-its-own-code
Site: Dealroom.co
Submitter: delduca (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-08-07 17:36 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 403 points · 272 comments
Length: 114 words (~1 min read)
Language: en

Oracle has banned AI-generated code from OpenJDK contributions, citing safety, security, and intellectual property risks. The open-source Java project steward said developers can use LLMs privately for debugging and reviewing code but cannot submit AI-generated material to repositories, pull requests, or other project channels. The policy contrasts sharply with Oracle's internal practices. Co-founder Larry Ellison recently declared that AI models now write Oracle's code, whilst co-CEO Mike Sicilia credited AI tools with enabling smaller engineering teams to deliver faster. Oracle is investing $70 billion this year in datacentre expansion. The spending spree prompted credit agency S&P to downgrade Oracle's rating to BBB-, one notch above junk status, citing uncertain returns on investment.

Source: theregister.com

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

12. An all-sky map of half a million supermassive black holes

Source: https://www.sdss.org/black-hole-mapper-release-20/
Site: SDSS - Mapping the Universe
Author: raddick
Published: 2026-07-30
HN activity: 146 points · 37 comments
Length: 1.4K words (~7 min read)
Language: en-US

The Black Hole Mapper reaches a milestone with its first southern hemisphere optical observations, coordinated eROSITA X-ray identification, and multi-epoch tracking of accreting black holes across the universe.

APACHE POINT OBSERVATORY, NM & LAS CAMPANAS OBSERVATORY, CHILE — The Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS) announces Data Release 20 (DR20), marking a landmark expansion in the study of accreting supermassive black holes (SMBHs). As part of the fifth generation of the survey (SDSS-V), the Black Hole Mapper (BHM) program is providing unprecedented insights into the masses, growth, and physics of quasars and active galactic nuclei (AGN) across cosmic time.
Sky distribution of DR20 astronomical objects targeted by the Black Hole Mapper (BHM) program in SDSS-V.
Image Credit: SDSS-V, Scott Anderson, University of Washington

DR20 delivers the first optical BOSS spectra from the southern hemisphere gathered at Las Campanas Observatory (LCO) in Chile, alongside expanded observations from Apache Point Observatory (APO) in New Mexico. In total, DR20 releases over 3.3 million optical spectra across 500,000 galaxies and 1.5 million stars, powering multi-wavelength discoveries in coordination with space-based observatories.

Unlocking the High-Energy Universe with eROSITA

A core highlight of the Black Hole Mapper in DR20 is SPIDERS (SPectroscopic IDentification of ERosita Sources). By pairing SDSS optical spectroscopy with X-ray sky maps from the eROSITA mission, SPIDERS provides optical identifications and precise distance measurements (redshifts) for approximately 200,000 X-ray targets. This represents the largest, most uniform spectroscopic follow-up of X-ray sources ever assembled.

While SPIDERS captures tens of thousands of X-ray-emitting galaxy clusters and energetic star systems, the vast majority of these high-energy beacons are actively accreting supermassive black holes—known as active galactic nuclei (AGN) or quasars.

Mapping Cosmic Structure and Black Hole Demographics

X-ray emission acts as a beacon, allowing astronomers to peer directly into the central engines of these giant black holes and probe the hot X-ray coronae surrounding them. By measuring the “X-ray luminosity function”—essentially a census tracking how many black holes exist across different power outputs and cosmic eras—scientists can trace supermassive black hole growth from our cosmic neighborhood back to redshifts near six, pushing into the early Universe’s “cosmic dawn.”

Thanks to the combined wide-sky coverage of SDSS and eROSITA, this new dataset provides the tightest constraints to date on the rarest, most luminous quasars. The survey reveals more giant black holes early on and higher space densities of the most luminous AGN at high redshifts than previously expected. This reveals that rapidly growing giant black holes were surprisingly common in the early Universe. More “hidden” black holes have been uncovered,where traditional optical and UV sky surveys miss a substantial fraction of accreting black holes, particularly at lower luminosities and extreme distances. Also, by calculating total accumulated black hole growth over time, researchers found that soft X-ray-selected black holes account for only a minority of total black hole mass in the local Universe. This implies that 70% to 90% of all supermassive black hole growth occurred behind heavy veils of dust and gas, or during phases where even X-rays were suppressed.

“This release marks the culmination of more than a decade of joint planning and scientific exchange between the German eROSITA Consortium and the Sloan Digital Sky Survey”, said Dr. Andrea Merloni, eROSITA Principal Investigator and BHM Survey Scientist. “With DR20, we demonstrate not only that combining the X-ray and optical spectroscopic data opens up new and original scientific perspectives in astrophysics, but also that large, international and diverse collaborations can effectively work together for years towards a common goal.”

Probing the Inner Workings of Quasars Through Time

Because supermassive black holes themselves are too distant and compact to image directly, BHM leverages the hallmark variability of quasars across multiple time-domain sub-programs:

By capturing rapid, repeated spectra of targeted quasar fields over timescales ranging from days to years, the BHM Reverberation Mapping (RM) program measures time delays between light emitting from the central accretion disk and the surrounding broad-line region. This yields direct, geometric measurements of black hole masses across a wide range of redshifts.

Monitoring tens of thousands of quasars over repeated epochs, the SDSS-V All-Quasar Multi-Epoch Spectroscopy (AQMES) program tracks dynamical changes, accreting gas outflows, binary supermassive black hole candidates, and dramatic “changing-look” quasars transitioning states.

DSS-V has once again seen that Mother Nature is more wild than previously thought and this became clear as the spectra came in, some with such a huge variety that they broke the long-developed standard automated analysis pipelines. The team needed to visually inspect the spectra and that effort is being released as part of DR20.

“It has been fun to be part of the team that looked at these weirdos and learned how to deal with them! Something that will make the final SDSS-V/DR22 even greater,” said Dr. Mara Salvato, a senior scientist at the MPE and one of the eROSITA/SDSS-V collaboration coordinators.

“SDSS, also in coordination with other large-scale and multi-wavelength surveys such as eROSITA, continues as an intriguing, and widely-accessible, resource to learn further about active supermassive black holes — via the (sometimes surprisingly) prodigious and time-variable luminosity they power, extending across much of the electromagnetic spectrum”, reflected Dr. Scott Anderson, the BHM Program Head. “It’s inspiring to see the exciting research emerging, and that is often internationally led, including by early career researchers.”

Robotic Precision Across Both Hemispheres

This operational leap is made possible by SDSS-V’s Robotic Focal Plane System (FPS) installed on both the Sloan Foundation 2.5m Telescope at APO and the du Pont 2.5m Telescope at LCO. These automated positioning robots quickly configure optical fibers to feed into the high-throughput BOSS spectrographs, vastly accelerating multi-object observation rates and enabling dynamic Target of Opportunity (ToO) observing modes.

Open Data Access for the Global Scientific Community

In keeping with the quarter-century legacy of the Sloan Digital Sky Survey, all DR20 Black Hole Mapper data products are openly available to researchers, educators, and the public worldwide.

Through the Science Archive Server (SAS) & Catalog Archive Server (CAS) curious minds can access spectra, tabular data, and eROSITA counterpart catalogs via SciServer Compute and SQL queries. The SDSS Zora & Valis Web Interfaces allow users to interactively search target metadata, inspect spectral masks, and compare observed spectra with theoretical models directly in your browser or programmatically via Python. A series of value-added catalogs (VAC) and tutorials are also being made available as part of DR20 including dedicated AGN fitting VACs, visual inspection catalogs, and step-by-step Jupyter Notebook tutorials guiding users through multi-wavelength analysis.

Explore DR20 data and tools online at: www.sdss.org/dr20

“Quasars have long been known to vary and it is extremely exciting to be at the point where we can use those variations at scale, across multiple frequencies, to learn more about how black holes grow and evolve over cosmic time” said SDSS-V Director Juna Kollmeier. “The combination of optical and X-rays is extremely powerful, and we are proud to work with the eROSITA team on this cross-survey collaboration”

Key Research Publications

Merloni, A., Lamer, G., Liu, T., et al. (2024). The SRG/eROSITA all-sky survey: First catalog of X-ray sources (eRASS1). Astronomy & Astrophysics, 682, A34.
ADS Abstract | Publisher Full Text
Ramos-Ceja, M. E., et al. (2026). The SRG/eROSITA All-Sky Survey: Second Data Release (eROSITA-DE DR2). Astronomy & Astrophysics (in press).
Roster, W., Buchner, J., Salvato, M., et al. (2026). The eROSITA AGN X-ray Luminosity Function and Demographic Evolution. Astronomy & Astrophysics (submitted).

About the Sloan Digital Sky Survey V

Funding for the Sloan Digital Sky Survey V has been provided by the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, the Heising-Simons Foundation, the National Science Foundation, and the Participating Institutions. SDSS acknowledges support and resources from the Center for High-Performance Computing at the University of Utah. SDSS telescopes are located at Apache Point Observatory, funded by the Astrophysical Research Consortium and operated by New Mexico State University, and at Las Campanas Observatory, operated by the Carnegie Institution for Science. The SDSS web site is www.sdss.org.

SDSS is managed by the Astrophysical Research Consortium for the Participating Institutions of the SDSS Collaboration, including Caltech, the Carnegie Institution for Science, Chilean National Time Allocation Committee (CNTAC) ratified researchers, The Flatiron Institute, the Gotham Participation Group, Harvard University, Heidelberg University, The Johns Hopkins University, L’Ecole polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Leibniz-Institut für Astrophysik Potsdam (AIP), Max-Planck-Institut für Astronomie (MPIA Heidelberg), Max-Planck-Institut für Extraterrestrische Physik (MPE), Nanjing University, National Astronomical Observatories of China (NAOC), New Mexico State University, The Ohio State University, Pennsylvania State University, Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, Space Telescope Science Institute (STScI), the Stellar Astrophysics Participation Group, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, University of Arizona, University of Colorado Boulder, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, University of Toronto, University of Utah, University of Virginia, Yale University, and Yunnan University.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

13. Guarded Methods in OCaml (2025)

Source: https://xvw.lol/en/articles/oop-refl.html
Site: xvw.lol
Author: xvw, Xavier Van de Woestyne
Submitted: 2026-08-03 16:15 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 57 points · 5 comments
Length: 2.2K words (~10 min read)

Guarded methods make it possible to attach constraints to the receiver (self) only for certain methods, meaning these methods can only be called if the receiver satisfies those constraints (these guards). OCaml does not, syntactically, allow defining this kind of method directly. In this note, we’ll look at how to encode them using a type equality witness.

Problem presentation

When a language (where type checking is done before the program runs, like in Java or OCaml) introduces parametric polymorphism (Java's generics), it's sometimes possible to constrain type variables. For example:

class MyClass<T extends S> { ... }


We make MyClass generic by assuming that the type variable T is a subtype of S. The problem is that the constraint applies to the entire class. Yet sometimes, we’d like to have constraints apply only to certain methods. For example, let’s say we have a class MyList describing a list:

class MyList<A> extends ArrayList<A> {
   public int length() {
     return this.size();
   }
}


How can we define a flatten method that, for a list like [[1, 2, 3], [4, 5]], would produce the list [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]? If we place the constraint at the class level, we force our list to be "always a list of lists," which is very limiting. To implement such a method, we have three theoretical approaches available.

Moving the method outside the class

The first solution is the most obvious: simply "cheat" by moving the method outside the class body (for example, into the static context or a companion object):

class MyList<A> extends ArrayList<A> {
   public static <A> MyList<A> flatten(MyList<MyList<A>> list) {
      // Flatten's implementation
   }
   public int length() {
     return this.size();
   }
}


This approach works and doesn’t require any special ceremony. However, it forces the developer to keep track of which methods are in the class body and which are in the static context. Moreover, it breaks the systematic approach of sending messages to an instance (often presented as one of the key arguments in favor of object-oriented programming).

Extension methods

Kotlin (and others, like C#) offer extension methods which, in addition to allowing the extension of an already existing class (which can be very useful for adding behavior to the String class, which is final in Java), also provide more flexibility in defining the receiver. For example, we could write flatten like this (in Kotlin):

class MyList<A> : ArrayList<A> { ... }
fun <A> MyList<MyList<A>>.flatten() = ...


Even though this solution seems nearly perfect, it still requires the method to be defined outside the class, which might potentially mean having to make certain members of the class public in order to be accessible from an extension (looks like potentials leaky abstractions). However, it still preserves the systematic message-sending approach while allowing for more fine-grained qualification of the receiver.

Guarded methods

The final approach is probably the most ideological, as it keeps the method definition within the class. It doesn't force any escaped abstractions. This is the idea of guarded methods, the ability to add constraints on the generic parameter at the method definition level. In an imaginary syntax (this code compiles because it's not syntactically invalid, but it doesn’t produce the intended effect):

class MyList<A> : ArrayList<A>() {
    fun length() = size
    fun <B> MyList<MyList<B>>.flatten() =
        // Implémentation de flatten
}


Even though this doesn’t seem significantly different from classic extension methods (as evidenced by their syntax, which inside the class body seems sufficient), it addresses all the issues raised earlier:

we can characterize the receiver more precisely than in a normal method
we don’t break the regular message sending
we still benefit from available members (so we don’t escape representations)

Although guarded methods seem necessary, unfortunately, I don’t know of any mainstream languages that allow their definition. That’s very sad. Fortunately, in OCaml, it is possible to encode them.

OOP/FP symmetry: theory and practice

Since guarded methods are quite rare in popular programming languages, I discovered their existence fairly recently while reading the slides from the presentation "The Object-Oriented/Functional-Programming symmetry: theory and practice" by Gabriel Scherer.

I recommend this presentation, which showcases a symmetry between the tools of statically typed functional programming and object-oriented programming. Even though this symmetry has been observed and studied many times, the presentation is comprehensive and accessible (and relatively unbiased, discussing the pros and cons of both approaches). Unfortunately not covered during the presentation (time is often the enemy of a presenter), an entire section on guarded methods is included in the slides. The original example offers a symmetrical observation between the implementation of the flatten function in a classic functional style:

type 'a list = ...
let rec length : 'a list -> int = ...
let rec concat : 'a list -> 'a list -> 'a list = ...

let rec flatten : 'a list list -> 'a list = function
  | [] -> []
  | x::xs -> x @ flatten xs


And the implementation of a flatten method if we were in the object-oriented world, posing exactly the problem introduced in this note. The question is: what type should flatten have?

class type ['a] olist = object
  method length : int
  method concat : 'a olist -> 'a olist

  method flatten : ???
end


He therefore proposes this syntax, which implies a guard on the flatten method:

method flatten : 'b olist with 'a = 'b olist


This syntax allows describing a guarded method and could be generalized like this: method method_name : return_type with generic_type = other_type. Similar to substitutions in modules, we could specify constraints on multiple generics using and. For example: method foo : string with 'a = string and b = int for a class parameterized by two types: class ['a, 'b] t.

Additionally, this syntax would also allow defining specific behaviors elegantly. For example, for our olist type, we could provide a sum method if the elements of the list are integers:

class type ['a] olist = object
  method length : int
  method concat : 'a olist -> 'a olist
  method flatten : 'b olist with 'a = 'b olist
  method sum : int with 'a = int
end


All of this sounds extraordinary, but unfortunately, this syntax is not available in OCaml. That’s annoying! Don’t worry, it is possible to encode it using a few small tools.

Guarded methods in OCaml

Even though I had a fairly clear idea of the tools to use for encoding guarded methods, after running into a few corner cases, I decided to call on someone in the OCaml community who never asks questions but always answers them expansively: Florian Angeletti, also known as Octachron. (A fun little note: octachron is the name of a MIDI drum sequencer, so when I searched his nickname on Google, the suggestions immediately included octachron ocaml).

Our goal is to allow adding a constraint to certain methods so that they are only accessible if the receiver’s type satisfies it. Without modifying the language syntax, modeling a constraint can consist of providing an additional parameter that enforces it. In other words, we want to provide evidence.

Provide a type equality witness

Since the introduction of generalized algebraic data types in the language, there is a fairly straightforward way to define a type equality witness:

type (_, _) eq =
  | Refl : ('a, 'a) eq


The eq type, which has only one constructor: Refl, allows representing type equalities not known by the type-checker. Since we can only construct Refl values that associate two equal types, instantiating Refl within a scope guarantees that those types are equivalent. For example:

type other_int = int
let _ : (int, other_int) eq = Refl
(* Now, we have a proof of [int = other_int]. *)


This example is somewhat artificial because here the compiler knows perfectly well that int = other_int. However, there are cases where the compiler cannot know this. For example, when data is provided at runtime, where it makes perfect sense that the type-checker has no information about a type, or when the type’s representation is hidden by abstraction.

The goal of this note is not to delve into eq, so let’s just keep in mind that if we can construct a Refl value, we have a guarantee that two syntactically different types are actually equal.

Constrain with eq

Let’s return to our example that provides an object API for a list. Here is its interface:

class type ['a] obj_list =
  object ('self)
    method length : int
    method append : 'a list -> 'a obj_list
    method uncons : ('a * 'self) option
    method flatten : ???
  end


To give a type to flatten, we want to impose that 'a (the type parameter of the obj_list class) is a list. In other words, we want a proof that 'a is of type 'b list. That is, to guarantee that 'a and 'b list, though syntactically different, are equal. It’s simple: just require a value of type ('a, 'b list) eq to be provided:

method flatten : ('a, 'b list) eq -> 'b list


Now that we have an interface describing a list with a flatten method that constrains the receiver to be a list of something, let’s concretely implement a class that implements obj_list.

Implementing the interface obj_list

The first methods (length, append, and uncons) are straightforward to implement:

let my_list (list : 'a list) =
  object (self : 'a obj_list)
    val l = list
    method length = List.length l
    method append x = {<l = List.append l x>}
    method uncons = match l with [] -> None | x :: xs -> Some (x, {<l = xs>})

    method flatten = ???
  end


Now, let’s focus on flatten. We will recursively traverse the list, concatenating each element to the previous one. For example, [[1]; [2]; [3]] will become [1] @ [2]; [3]. Beyond the somewhat noisy annotations, the entire trick lies in instantiating Refl to provide evidence that 'a = 'b list.

method flatten : 'b. ('a, 'b list) eq -> 'b list =
  let rec aux : type a b. a #obj_list -> (a, b list) eq -> b list =
  fun list witness -> match list#uncons with
    | None -> []
    | Some (head_list, xs) ->
        let flatten_list : b list =
          let Refl = witness  in head_list
        in flatten_list @ aux xs witness
  in aux self


Adding a guarded method sum

Now that we’re able to constrain certain methods, let’s try adding a sum method that produces the sum of a list of integers! First, let’s add sum to our interface. This time, we want to constrain our type parameter to be int. To do that, we simply take ('a, int) eq as a type equality witness:

class type ['a] obj_list =
  object ('self)
    method length : int
    method append : 'a list -> 'a obj_list
    method uncons : ('a * 'self) option
    method flatten : ('a, 'b list) eq -> 'b list
    method sum : ('a, int) eq -> int
  end


Next, we can implement the sum method, which is just a use of the fold_left function.

method sum : ('a, int) eq -> int =
  let aux : type a. a list -> (a, int) eq -> int = fun list Refl ->
    List.fold_left (fun acc x -> acc + x) 0 list
  in aux l


The implementation of sum is logically simpler than that of flatten because it doesn’t introduce additional type variables. And we can test our different methods: we can invoke flatten on an object of type 'a list obj_list and sum on an object of type int obj_list.

let a = my_list [ [ 1 ]; [ 2 ]; [ 3 ] ]
let _ = assert ([ 1; 2; 3 ] = a#flatten Refl)
let b = my_list [ 1; 2; 3; 4 ]
let _ = assert (10 = b#sum Refl)


If we try to apply a guarded method with the wrong type, for example, trying to sum our list a (which is of type 'a list obj_list), the program will not compile. This makes sense, as we are trying to call a guarded method without respecting the imposed constraint.

1 | let _ = a#sum Refl
                  ^^^^
Error: This expression has type (int list, int list) eq
       but an expression was expected of type (int list, int) eq
       Type int list is not compatible with type int


Exactly the expected behavior! We can now define methods that constrain the receiver’s type by means of a type equality witness. Mission complete!

To conclude

It is surprising that guarded methods are not present in all statically typed OOP languages, since they allow expressing more methods while preserving the message-passing semantics so dear to object-oriented programming. Not being a heavy user of object-oriented programming languages (OCaml is the only one I use regularly), I’m not aware of languages offering syntactic support for guarded methods. However, I recently learned, pointed out by Nicolas Rinaudo, that the language Scala uses a similar encoding, but where the type equality witness is provided implicitly, thus lightening the call and not forcing the user to manually provide Refl.

Even though the encoding is somewhat heavy, and one could imagine native language support to simplify the definition of guarded methods, explicitly manipulating a type equality witness allows us to encode them. Is it useful? Since OOP programming is rarely encouraged in OCaml, probably not, but it was still fun to present a concrete and practical use case for equality witnesses!

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

14. Water system controllers don't belong on the internet, says ex-NSA chief

Source: https://www.theregister.com/security/2026/08/07/water-system-controllers-dont-belong-on-the-internet-says-ex-nsa-chief-after-suspected-iran-attacks/5285070
Site: theregister
Author: Jessica Lyons
Published: 2026-08-07
HN activity: 141 points · 99 comments
Length: 408 words (~2 min read)
Language: en-US

Security

Calling all defenders

With at least 12 US states’ water systems having been hacked - most likely by Iran - we have to get better at cyber defense, according to retired General and Ex-NSA chief Paul Nakasone, who was speaking to reporters at DEF CON.

“We have to have higher standards,” Nakasone said. “These PLCs should not be connected to the internet.”

In late July, the FBI said it was investigating attacks conducted by “malicious cyber actors” targeting operational technology devices, including programmable logic controllers (PLCs). Iran-linked crews have targeted these devices, which monitor sensor data like tank levels, and can turn pumps on and off, for years.

REG AD

REG AD

Some private-sector security researchers say that they suspect Iranian intruders are behind the recent cyberattacks disrupting water and wastewater facilities. “I'd be shocked if it's not Iran,” Halcyon Ransomware Research Center SVP Cynthia Kaiser told The Register at DEF CON on Friday. “It's almost certain it's Iran.”

Neither the FBI nor anyone in the Trump administration, however, has officially blamed Iran.

Nakasone said he believes that the feds are “taking a measured approach” to attribution. “But I see an actor here that has certainly shown a history of being able to do this,” he added, referring to earlier Iranian cyberattacks targeting water facilities’ PLCs.

“They certainly have the capability,” Nakasone said. “There's an intent … we're in conflict with Iran.”

US water systems present a massive attack surface across disparate facilities that are historically underfunded and have limited IT staff, and sometimes no dedicated cybersecurity employees.

“We have to think differently about how we defend it,” Nakasone said. “Let's talk about the attack surface that we're looking at right now. We’ve got 50,000 different water municipalities in the United States, 90 percent of our water comes from these 50,000.”

Defending these water systems requires partnerships, he added, pointing to DEF CON Franklin, a project launched two years ago at the annual event with hackers volunteering their time and talent to help secure water facilities.

Nakasone also serves as founding director of Vanderbilt University’s Institute of National Security, and its Wicked Problems Lab. He's also working on Project Chimera, a cybersecurity platform being developed by academics and cybersecurity practitioners, and built on open-source technologies to boost critical infrastructure resilience.

REG AD

“How do you defend better? You defend with a series of partners, in a much more involved approach than we have right now,” Nakasone said.®

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

15. 2027 memory capacity is reportedly sold out

Source: https://www.ign.com/articles/ramageddon-continues-another-year-as-2027-memory-capacity-is-reportedly-sold-out
Site: IGN
Author: Jacqueline Thomas
Published: 2026-08-05
HN activity: 270 points · 253 comments
Length: 428 words (~2 min read)
Language: en

Updated: Aug 5, 2026 9:08pm UTC

It feels like no matter where I look recently, there's more evidence that the RAM crisis isn't ending any time soon. Now, a new report suggests that all three memory manufacturers — Samsung, SK Hynix, and Micron — have collectively sold through their 2027 memory manufacturing capacity to, you guessed it, AI companies.

According to a report from Digitimes and spotted by TweakTown, all DRAM and HBM capacity has been sold through for 2027, with no further supply planned. (The companies themselves have not yet confirmed this to be the case.) Of course, that only means that retail prices are going to go up even further in the near future.

Selling through all the capacity for next year would be bad enough for consumers, but the problem is that most of the companies buying up this capacity have done so through long-term purchasing agreements, essentially pre-ordering memory that hasn't even been manufactured yet over a five-year term. Unless more capacity opens up somewhere in the next few years, it's hard to imagine that RAM will become more affordable and less scarce any time soon.

It's not just memory that's affected. According to that Digitimes report, NAND storage is growing in demand too. Luckily, NAND capacity hasn't been completely absorbed, because there are more companies supplying the stuff. But it's not exactly hard to see that SSDs have been growing steadily more expensive over the last six months or so.

Just look at the Western Digital SN7100, a pretty bog-standard PCIe 4 drive. According to Camelcamelcamel, it was about $110 in January for 1TB of storage, but now it's 52% more expensive, costing $189 before the tiny discount that Amazon currently has running. If NAND manufacturing capacity grows as scarce as RAM, I can only imagine how much that drive is going to cost this time next year.

All I know is that I grow weary of covering the RAM crisis, but it's hard to look at anything in the hardware space and not see the effects. Just this month, the Xbox Series X went up in price, and a month ago, the Steam Machine came out at a higher price than Valve wanted because of the higher cost of memory. At this point, all I can do is beg for the AI bubble to burst so I can at least buy a decent kit of RAM for less than $500 again.

Jackie Thomas is the Hardware and Buying Guides Editor at IGN and the PC components queen. You can follow her @Jackiecobra

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

16. Psychological Warfare in Reverse Engineering (2015)

Source: https://github.com/xoreaxeaxeax/repsych
Site: GitHub
Submitter: theanonymousone (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-08-07 18:51 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 56 points · 2 comments
Length: 299 words (~2 min read)
Language: en

: Psychological Warfare in Reverse Engineering

github.com/xoreaxeaxeax/repsych // domas // @xoreaxeaxeax

Overview

The REpsych toolset is a proof-of-concept illustrating the generation of images through a program's control flow graph (CFG).

A typical function's CFG A REpsych generated CFG

There is no specific point to the project (other than to show that it can be done), but possible (non-serious) applications are outlined in the DEF CON presentation.

The program works reliably with all tested versions of the IDA Pro reverse engineering tool, and semi-reliably with other CFG viewers (Hopper, BinNavi, radare2, etc).

Usage

The toolset translates source images into functioning programs, such that the program's control flow graph generates the source image.

To generate a new program from an image:

Save the image in the gfx/ folder as a 24 BPP bitmap.
Run "make image" in the root directory of the project, where "image" is the name of your image, without the extension.

Two functioning programs will be created: repsych_v1 and repsych_v2. Each uses a different strategy for ensuring the CFG renderer correctly places the CFG nodes.

Tips

The tool will create a basic block (CFG node) for each pixel of the source image; as such, you should try to use small source images (not larger than 100x100), and you may need to increase the number of allowed nodes in your CFG viewer.

When using an image of text as input to the tool, first convert the image to a 2 BPP black and white bitmap first, then to a 24 BPP bitmap; this will remove non black and white colors, and give the best results in the control flow graph.

Examples

References

The technique is outlined in detail in the DEF CON presentation.

Slides from the presentation are provided here.

Author

REpsych is a proof-of-concept from Christopher Domas (@xoreaxeaxeax).

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

17. Making Postgres 300x faster for analytics: batching, operator fusion, and SIMD

Source: https://malisper.me/how-we-made-postgres-hundreds-of-times-faster-the-query-engine/
Site: malisper.me
Author: malisper
Published: 2026-08-03
HN activity: 258 points · 121 comments
Length: 1.9K words (~9 min read)
Language: en-US

Last week we released version 0.2 of pgrust. This release was all about performance. It’s 10x faster than the previous version of pgrust. On OLTP benchmarks, pgrust is 30% faster than Postgres, and on Clickbench, Clickhouse’s benchmark for analytical databases, pgrust is 300x faster than Postgres. It’s even ahead of Clickhouse!

The query engine is one of the biggest changes we made to achieve much better performance. On its own, the query engine drove ~10x of the 300x. We’ll start with a miniature version of the Postgres query engine and we’ll one by one add the same optimizations we made to make the pgrust query engine so fast.

To give some background on why there’s so much room for improvement vs Postgres, Postgres was created in a different era. The original Postgres project dates back to the 80s. It was built at a time when the main bottleneck to database performance was disk I/O. Three trends have made that no longer the case:

Many datasets now fit in RAM, eliminating most disk I/O
For datasets that don’t fit in RAM, the workloads differ. Data analytics scans data in bulk. The bottleneck is often no longer your disk throughput and is often either your CPU throughput or memory throughput
Disks have gotten much faster in recent years. NVMe is hundreds of times faster than a hard drive.

All three trends have made CPU and memory speeds more important than they were historically. Many of the optimizations we’ve made target this. The query engine is the main user of CPU in a database. We optimized the pgrust query engine to use less CPU and less memory bandwidth than Postgres when processing the same queries.

To give you a sense of just how slow the Postgres query engine is, let’s take a simple query that sums the first 500 million numbers:

CREATE TABLE my_table AS select col::float8 from generate_series(1.0, 500000000.0) g(col);
SELECT SUM(col) FROM my_table;


When I run this in Postgres, it takes ~20 seconds. This was done on a c8g.4xl with parallel queries disabled.

For comparison, when I time the equivalent in Rust:

let table: Vec<f64> = (1..=500_000_000usize).map(|i| i as f64).collect();

let mut sum = 0.0;
for &value in &table {
    sum += value;
}


The query takes 358ms. That’s around 55x faster, and believe it or not, we can do even faster than 358ms. Now this example isn’t an apples-to-apples comparison. There’s a lot more going on under the hood in Postgres. At the same time, optimizing a database is all about removing as much of this overhead as possible. (If you’re curious two of the biggest causes of overhead from Postgres are 1. locking and 2. parsing the Postgres storage format and extracting the tuples relevant to the query).

To narrow our focus to just the impact of the query engine, let’s build a miniature version of the Postgres query engine. First, a brief explanation of what a query engine is. When processing your SQL query, Postgres first converts your query into an internal representation called a “Query Plan,” which describes *how* Postgres will execute the query. In the example above, Postgres will produce a query plan that may look something like the following:

This effectively says “get rows from my_table and sum the values in those rows”. This query plan is pretty simple given the nature of the query, but they can get much more complicated when you start working with joins/sorts/subqueries etc. In total Postgres has over 40 different types of plan nodes.

After generating the query plan, Postgres passes it to the query engine. The Postgres query engine is the part of Postgres that takes the query plan and actually retrieves the rows and performs the aggregation. Postgres uses a style of executor known as the “Volcano model.” To get a sense of how it works, here’s a miniature implementation of the Postgres query engine:

use std::hint::black_box;

trait Node {
    fn next(&mut self) -> Option<f64>;
}

struct SeqScan<'a> {
    table: &'a [f64],
    pos: usize,
}

impl Node for SeqScan<'_> {
    fn next(&mut self) -> Option<f64> {
        if self.pos >= self.table.len() {
            return None; // end of table
        }
        let value = self.table[self.pos];
        self.pos += 1;
        Some(value)
    }
}

struct SumAggregate<'a> {
    child: Box<dyn Node + 'a>,
    total: f64,
    done: bool,
}

impl Node for SumAggregate<'_> {
    fn next(&mut self) -> Option<f64> {
        if self.done {
            return None;
        }
        while let Some(value) = self.child.next() {
            self.total += value;
        }
        self.done = true;
        Some(self.total)
    }
}

let table: Vec<f64> = (1..=500_000_000usize).map(|i| i as f64).collect();

let mut plan = SumAggregate {
    child: black_box(Box::new(SeqScan { table: &table, pos: 0 })),
    total: 0.0,
    done: false,
};

let sum = plan.next().unwrap();


(The black_box is needed to prevent compiler optimizations from thwarting our benchmark)

The key feature of the Volcano model is the `next()` method, which is supported by all nodes in the query plan. The job of `next()` is to return a single row. `next()` in a sequential scan returns the next row in the sequential scan. `next()` on an aggregation will compute the entire aggregation and then return the single row result. Executing a query plan is just a matter of calling `next()` on the root plan node until it no longer returns any rows. The advantage of the Volcano model is that it’s very simple. You implement a single method for each of your plan nodes, and that’s it. While simplified, the above code is very close to what Postgres does internally.

While the Volcano model makes things simple, it also adds a lot of overhead. When I run this example, it takes 1.3s. That’s much faster than the Postgres version because we’re removing a lot of the non-query engine pieces, but it’s still slower than the raw for loop because of the Volcano model’s overhead.

The biggest performance hit in the code above is that `next()` processes only one row at a time. There’s no batching. The `SeqScan.next()` function is called once per row. That adds significant overhead, especially because many CPU optimizations, such as pipelining, don’t work well when you are calling a function that isn’t known until runtime. The first optimization we can implement is batching:

const BATCH: usize = 1024;

trait BatchNode {
    fn next_batch(&mut self, out: &mut [f64; BATCH]) -> usize;
}

struct BatchSeqScan<'a> {
    table: &'a [f64],
    pos: usize,
}

impl BatchNode for BatchSeqScan<'_> {
    fn next_batch(&mut self, out: &mut [f64; BATCH]) -> usize {
        let n = (self.table.len() - self.pos).min(BATCH);
        out[..n].copy_from_slice(&self.table[self.pos..self.pos + n]);
        self.pos += n;
        n
    }
}

struct BatchSumAggregate<'a> {
    child: Box<dyn BatchNode + 'a>,
    total: f64,
}

impl BatchSumAggregate<'_> {
    fn run(&mut self) -> f64 {
        let mut buf = [0.0f64; BATCH];
        loop {
            let n = self.child.next_batch(&mut buf);
            if n == 0 {
                break;
            }
            for &value in &buf[..n] {
                self.total += value;
            }
        }
        self.total
    }
}

let mut plan = BatchSumAggregate {
    child: black_box(Box::new(BatchSeqScan { table: &table, pos: 0 })),
    total: 0.0,
};
let sum = plan.run();


Batching on its own eliminates most of the overhead. It brings the time to run the query from 1.3 seconds down to around 480ms. Still slower than the for loop, but much closer. One very important detail is that the batch buffer is allocated on the stack. This means the aggregation node doesn’t need to allocate any memory while it’s running. Allocating memory tends to be one of the slower operations. Therefore, when writing ultra-fast code, you’ll want to minimize the number of memory allocations you make.

Now, if you profile the batched version, the hotspot is now `copy_from_slice`. Even though we are now batching, we still need to copy the items into the buffer. This overhead can be eliminated with what’s known as “operator fusion”. If there are common operations that we know will be performed together, we can create a single node that replaces two nodes. In our case, we can create a single `SumAggregateSequentialScan` node that combines the logic of both the sequential scan and the sum:

struct SumAggregateSequentialScan<'a> {
    table: &'a [f64],
    done: bool,
}

impl Node for SumAggregateSequentialScan<'_> {
    fn next(&mut self) -> Option<f64> {
        if self.done {
            return None;
        }
        self.done = true;
        let mut total = 0.0;
        for &value in self.table {
            total += value;
        }
        Some(total)
    }
}


This gives us the same performance as the straight for loop because it is literally the same code as the for loop. Now this may seem like cheating, and it definitely is because we’re hardcoding in an optimization for a specific query we know in advance. With operator fusion, it makes sense to hardcode a couple of the most common cases, but you’ll still pretty quickly hit cases you didn’t prepare for ahead of time.

This can be solved with JIT compilation. With JIT compilation, you can generate the ideal code you wish you had and “cheat” in every query. JIT compilation lets you generate the perfect code for your query, no matter what the query is and always do operator fusion. Unfortunately, this post is long enough as is, so I’ll have to talk about how pgrust leverages JIT compilation another time.

For one final optimization, we can look to SIMD. SIMD refers to a set of CPU operations that can perform one operation across multiple pieces of data simultaneously. Using SIMD to perform an operation against multiple rows simultaneously is usually much faster than performing the operation on one row at a time. If we change our code to use SIMD:

#[cfg(target_arch = "aarch64")]
struct SumAggregateSequentialScanSimd<'a> {
    table: &'a [f64],
    done: bool,
}

#[cfg(target_arch = "aarch64")]
impl Node for SumAggregateSequentialScanSimd<'_> {
    fn next(&mut self) -> Option<f64> {
        if self.done {
            return None;
        }
        self.done = true;
        use std::arch::aarch64::*;
        let mut acc = unsafe { [vdupq_n_f64(0.0); 4] };
        let (chunks, rest) = self.table.as_chunks::<8>();
        for chunk in chunks {
            for lane in 0..4 {
                unsafe {
                    let v = vld1q_f64(chunk.as_ptr().add(2 * lane));
                    acc[lane] = vaddq_f64(acc[lane], v);
                }
            }
        }
        let mut tail = 0.0;
        for &value in rest {
            tail += value;
        }
        Some(unsafe {
            let s01 = vaddq_f64(acc[0], acc[1]);
            let s23 = vaddq_f64(acc[2], acc[3]);
            vaddvq_f64(vaddq_f64(s01, s23)) + tail
        })
    }
}


Our code now takes 135ms which is now almost 3x faster than the for loop and 10x faster than our original Volcano code. While it is common for compilers to replace for loops with SIMD equivalents, I chose this example so that wouldn’t happen. Compilers will usually avoid introducing SIMD when operating on floats, because they will produce a slightly different result. This is because floating point arithmetic is not associative, so changing the order in which you do a sum can produce a slightly different result.

—

All in all, with three simple optimizations, we were able to make our query 10x faster. Here’s where things ended up:

implementation time speedup
Postgres ~20 s —
Volcano model 1.3 s 1×
+ batching 480 ms 2.7×
+ operator fusion 358 ms 3.6×
+ SIMD 135 ms 9.6×

These types of optimizations, and many more, enable pgrust to perform hundreds of times faster than Postgres for analytical queries.

Benchmark setup: AWS c8g.4xlarge (Graviton4, 16 vCPU), PostgreSQL 18.4 with `max_parallel_workers_per_gather = 0`, data warm in shared buffers, median of 5 runs. Rust built with `cargo build –release`, 4 runs per implementation, all measured in one process on one machine.

Thanks for reading, and if you want to support the project, the best way to support pgrust is to give us a star on GitHub. If you want to follow along:

1. GitHub
2. Discord
3. Mailing list — weekly updates on pgrust, including the follow-up on JIT compilation
4. pgrust.com

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

18. Carl's Required Reading

Source: https://carlkolon.com/reading/
Site: Carl Kolon
Submitter: cckolon (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-08-01 15:51 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 112 points · 13 comments
Length: 1.7K words (~8 min read)
Language: en

Carl’s Required Reading

As an engineering leader, I often send articles to my team, which I jokingly call “required reading”. My goal is to help us digest some of the wisdom of other programmers who have probably faced challenges similar to ours. By popular demand, I’m putting the list here for anyone else interested!

Most articles are on this list because they make a point that I think is important or insightful about how to create good software. Some of the points in here reinforce my opinions about certain things (for example, ORMs are bad, and frontends should be simple). You may disagree! But at least you will hopefully get something valuable out of the article, even if it is that you feel the opposite way.

These articles are technical, and if you are not a programmer you will probably not find them interesting.

This list may be a little overwhelming, so I have annotated my favorite articles with a star. I have also written a brief summary of why I think each article is important.

Coding practices

⭐ The Grug Brained Developer

If I could recommend only one article to new and experienced programmers alike, this would be it. Complexity bad.

The Wrong Abstraction

It’s really tempting to see code duplication and immediately rush to eliminate it by consolidating it somewhere. This essay is adapted from a 2014 talk about factoring object-oriented code and talks about situations where this may not be appropriate. You need to understand this to effectively push back against coding agents which are motivated to create a “single source of truth” everywhere.

Complexity Budget

When projects get too complex, progress seems to stop very suddenly. This essay is about understanding this phenomenon and trying to forestall it as long as possible.

Locality of Behavior

Programmers (and coding agents) often try to achieve Separation of Concerns (SoC) or eliminate code reuse by creating numerous helper functions. There’s a tradeoff between this and Locality of Behavior, a principle which encourages us to make the behavior of code as obvious as possible when looking only at that one unit.

Yagni

Creating speculative features with the future in mind is basically always a bad idea.

Parse, Don’t Validate

This one takes a little work to understand, but the basic idea is that if you ensure that a piece of data has a certain property, you should encode that property directly in the object’s type. This will cause code changes that break the assertion to throw type errors at compile time, rather than value errors at runtime.

Platform

⭐ Steve Yegge’s Google Platforms Rant

There is a ton of really good stuff in here, especially about accessibility and setting up software organizations. I do not recommend every company enforce the Bezos mandate, but you should think critically about whether you can expose your service’s features to other teams in a programmatic way. It’s also just fun to read.

Frontend

⭐ HATEOAS

In web applications, state is often encoded and stored separately from both the frontend markup and the backend (for example, with React’s useState). Often, it makes more sense for state and the user’s allowed actions to be directly stored in and derived from the html served to the user. This is tightly related to the original concept of a REST API (most modern “REST” APIs do not actually follow the REST constraints). I have also written briefly about HATEOAS on my own site.

Components and Hooks must be pure

The biggest problem I see when people move from writing backend code to writing React is that they try to write the frontend imperatively. That is, they try to tell the computer what to do, line by line. This typically involves the overuse of state and side effects, common in object-oriented programming. Instead, the frontend should be declarative. That is, you should tell the computer what you want to get back. To support this, (modern) React is designed around a functional programming style. Every component is a function, and state and side effects are avoided except for where they are truly necessary, in which case hooks are required. I recommend reading all the React docs, but if you just want to focus on one, this is the best.

Understanding useMemo and useCallback

useMemo and useCallback are the most misused hooks in React (besides maybe useEffect), and both agents and humans love to throw them in everywhere. This article is a guide to where they are actually necessary.

Hypermedia Systems - Components of a Hypermedia System

If you want to write a good frontend, it is very valuable to understand the model around which HTML is based. This is a great chapter of a great book which will help you maximize your use of the browser’s design, rather than seeing HTML as “an awkward, legacy markup language that must be grudgingly used to build user interfaces in what are increasingly entirely JavaScript-based web applications.”

Databases

⭐ The Vietnam of Computer Science

I am a certified ORM-hater. I think they are seductive for new projects, but quickly begin to cause performance issues and confusion. As an example, see this OpenAI article about scaling Postgres:

Many of these problematic queries are generated by Object-Relational Mapping frameworks (ORMs), so it’s important to carefully review the SQL they produce and ensure it behaves as expected.

This is the best essay against ORMs that I have read and, even though it’s long, I recommend it highly.

Wikipedia - The Object-Relational Impedence Mismatch

Some more ammo in my anti-ORM crusade. This is more technical but more succinct, so if you’re just looking for the bullet points I’d read this.

Introduction to PostGIS - Geography

PostGIS (and geospatial databases) require a little getting used to. It’s good to understand the new data types you’re working with when you build a map-based data visualizer. PostGIS is a great database and its foundational data type is geography.

Postgres Docs Chapter 14 - Performance Tips

This is a great article to have read when your database starts slowing down. Knowing how to use EXPLAIN and EXPLAIN ANALYZE is on par with knowing how to use a debugger, in my opinion.

Paging Through Results

Most people use LIMIT and OFFSET when building pagination systems. If you are paginating through a lot of data, these get slow (especially when loading high-number pages). This is a good overview of some other options to get around this problem. I also talk about this on my site.

Asynchronous programming

A Conceptual Overview of asyncio

Many people are just thrust into async programming and don’t really understand what’s going on, but learn it as they go. Often this leads to embarrassingly basic asyncio mistakes like making blocking calls inside async functions. This is a good article from the docs which should make it clearer what asyncio is doing under the hood, and therefore teach you how to use it best.

What Color is your Function?

Bob Nystrom is one of my favorite programming authors. This is an example of how async programming systems often have fundamental flaws. There’s not much you can do (besides use a different language) but this will at least teach you that some of the async programming limitations that you hit are fundamental, and not just a skill issue.

Encoding

The Absolute Minimum Every Software Developer Absolutely, Positively Must Know About Unicode and Character Sets (No Excuses!)

Reading this earlier in my career would have saved me hundreds of hours incorrectly parsing data collected from the internet.

Books

These books have shaped the way that I feel about programming, design, and managing software projects.

The Design of Everyday Things (Amazon)

Lots of people seem to think that “design” means making things look pretty. Really, design is about anticipating the needs of your user and making your product fulfill those needs as well as possible. Often this second meaning of design runs contrary to the first, and in these cases you should choose the second. The early example of “Norman Doors” in the book is a great illustration of this, along with the wry observation that the doors “probably won a design prize” even though the author can’t figure out how they work.

Designing Data-Intensive Applications (O’Reilly) (Amazon)

Liking this book is such a meme, but it actually is really great. It’s also one of the few programming books that works well via audiobook. My favorite chapters are 7 (Transactions) and 10 (Batch Processing). While some may disagree, I think this is a great introduction to databases too, and makes you think hard about what you actually want to optimize in your data system (even if you are not serving a zillion users).

Crafting Interpreters (free online)

This is a great, encouraging, fun book which teaches you how to build an interpreter, first in Java for simplicity and then in C for performance. While you can read along and write the Java code directly, I think it’s even better to try implementing the interpreter in another language of your choice, so you have to engage your brain more. I used rust.

Category Theory for Programmers (free online) (order hardcover)

While this book is a little hardcore, it’s the best intro to category theory that I’ve seen (though if you’re a fan of rigor, you may want to google some of the formal definitions yourself). Read this if you want to write good functional code while also flexing on your coworkers by using words like “functor” and “monad”.

The Mythical Man-Month (Amazon)

This book was published in 1975 (!!) and revised most recently in 1995, but it is still incredibly relevant. In fact, as programmers become armed with AI tools, some of the chapters (like chapter 4, Aristocracy and Democracy in System Design) seem more applicable now than they were in 1995. Read this if you want to manage a programming project and have it succeed.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

19. Kitesurf: Agent-first browser that runs in V8 isolates

Source: https://blog.cloudflare.com/kitesurf/
Site: Cloudflare Blog
Submitter: m3h (Hacker News)
Published: 2026-08-06
HN activity: 172 points · 44 comments
Length: 3.2K words (~15 min read)
Language: en-us

Should we build our own browser?

This is one of those questions that has come up every few months internally at Cloudflare for years. Unsurprisingly, it’s the kind that triggers long threads with multiple reasons and persuasive arguments on why we should do it. The browser is obviously the most important software we use every day on our computers; it’s arguably the operating system of the Internet. We’re a company on a mission to help build a better Internet — who wouldn’t want to take on the challenge of building a new browser?

But we never quite found the balance between the technical difficulty of such an endeavour and the unique problems we’d be solving by doing it. And so, the idea was shelved, over and over again. Until now.

Something magical happened: we reached a tipping point where a series of powerful technical advancements in our Developer Platform became a reality, while the advent of AI agents and the demand for a new kind of browser became critical at the same time.

Running WebAssembly (Wasm) in Workers is now very mature. Primitives like dynamic workers, SQLite-based Durable Objects, Worker-to-worker RPC, service bindings, higher NodeJS compatibility and higher limits open doors to much more ambitious and complex applications that were simply not possible before.

Browser Run, our headless browser automation API product, has seen tremendous growth with the rise of AI. Agents need browsers in order to perform many tasks, and in many cases cannot succeed without them.

But there's a problem — browser engines like Chromium were built for humans, not agents, and they come with overhead that AI models simply do not need. They consume so much memory and compute that providing every agent with its own instance is prohibitively expensive, restricting large parts of the Web to only the most sophisticated and costly AI models with higher parametric knowledge, while locking out many other agentic applications.

We should be giving all agents a browser that excels at what’s important for an AI model, even if that means being light on what’s only useful for humans. For example:

AI doesn’t care about tabs, themes, browser extensions, or synchronization across devices. It cares about token count, context windows, scalability, performance, and costs.
Structured, machine-readable content is important, but visual perfection, smooth 60-fps scrolling is not. Agents will be just fine if the CSS parsing is slightly off or the rendering isn’t pixel perfect.
The threat model in the context of AI using a browser is different. New problems like prompt injection and tool safety are top priorities.

Faced with these realizations, 12 weeks ago we asked the question again: Should we build our own browser? This time the answer was unanimous: Yes!

Today we are announcing Kitesurf, a new browser that runs entirely on top of Workers that we built specifically for agents, available for free while in beta in Browser Run.

Kitesurf is significantly more efficient in CPU and memory consumption than Chromium for common agentic tasks like screenshots and HTML extraction. What follows is the story of how we built it. Buckle up, it’s going to get technical — but we promise to keep it interesting.

How it started

Kitesurf started as many other great ideas have started at Cloudflare. Someone found something interesting, and the next thing you know they end up “nerd sniping” the rest of the team with a seemingly impossible but very attractive idea.

We got the initial inspiration from obscura, a headless engine written in Rust for AI automation that has “no Chrome, no Node.js, no dependencies.”

Then, with the help of an AI agent, we tried to port it to Workers. It didn't work very well at first. But once we gave the AI a solid plan and a clear definition of success — detailed enough for the agent to loop endlessly and ask questions when needed — it did work.
Blown away by this (barely) working proof of concept, we decided to let the team cook.

Design decisions

Here are some of the design decisions we made before we started.

Tests, tests, tests

We knew that moving from a prototype to a full-blown browser that could actually be useful for tasks at scale in production would take a lot of work and iteration. We won’t hide that using AI to accelerate the process was key. But how do you use AI in such a complex project, keeping the quality of both code and results under control without losing velocity? The answer is to provide as many tests as you can.

Enter the Web Platform Tests (WPT), the ideal setup: an extensive suite of success criteria that gave the AI agents clear goalposts for assessing feature conformance. We curated the selection and order of features to assign to the agents, allowing humans to focus on architectural work and reviewing the agents' approaches.

However, WPT tests only go so far: they measure conformance to W3C standards, not a browser's ability to render and interact with real-world websites. To bridge this gap, we implemented a combination of integration testing and visual regression testing — it runs multistep Puppeteer tests on real websites against both Chromium and Kitesurf not only by comparing the assertions that it makes, but also rendering outputs at every step to highlight any unwanted differences.

Use Rust when possible

Cloudflare has been working on providing great support for WebAssembly (Wasm) in Workers for quite some time. This is great because we can use high-performance C, C++, and Rust packages and compile them to Wasm. If we use Emscripten (for example) and its many layers of mocked dependencies, the compiled binary can get bulky and slow.

Instead, we opted for native Rust whenever possible and to compile directly to WebAssembly using wasm-bindgen, thus avoiding unnecessary emulation layers and running as close to the metal as possible, reliably.

Exception handling

A browser must render the whole unreliable and sometimes hostile web without ever dropping the page it's holding, so exception handling is more than just hygiene — it's how the application survives bad input without just crashing outright.

So we committed to one rule up front: any failure degrades to a blank frame or a missing element, never a dead session. Catch faults at every boundary, default to something safe and empty, and log enough to diagnose.

Isolation

Contrary to running a browser on your laptop (where you're visiting sites you trust, and it's acceptable to share some resources between them), an agent is pointed at whatever a task demands: arbitrary code from arbitrary origins.

So we built this browser on the assumption that every page load is untrusted input and every session starts fresh. Each component is isolated and has access only to the resources strictly necessary for its function.

This seems like a perfect fit for Cloudflare Workers, whose security model is built around isolation by design. But the platform only gets us the boundary between isolates. We still have to enforce the same principle at the application level, deciding what each component is allowed to touch and making sure nothing leaks across a page it shouldn't.

Stateless whenever possible

State is what makes failure expensive — if there's nothing to reconstruct, recovering from a crash is just starting a new one and replaying the request. A stateless component is disposable and parallel by nature: kill it the moment it stalls, run a thousand at once, and size them to demand instead of keeping things warm. That fits automation perfectly, where load arrives in bursts and the cheapest thing you can do is spin up work that costs only what it used and vanishes when it's done. In short, wherever a component can be stateless, it should be.

How we built it

Armed with a good plan, extensive tests, and a good tooling environment, we were ready to get started beyond the initial proof of concept. This is Kitesurf’s very high level life of a request that still holds today:

Let’s dive into the three main components that make Kitesurf work: the Engine, PageScript, and PageRenderer.

Fetching from origins

In order to render an untrusted web page, a browser has to fetch arbitrary assets — images, fonts, CSS, JavaScript, and Wasm files — off the Internet. This is one of the most dangerous operations a browser can do.

Kitesurf does it through one single component, the SandboxOutbound worker, and nothing else can touch the network directly — enforced by Dynamic Workers. The Engine uses it to bootstrap the page, fetching the main document and its scripts, and PageScript fetches everything else: stylesheets, images, fonts, and the page's own fetch() calls.

We use SandboxOutbound to enforce CORS, inject browser-shaped headers, filter responses, and keep each page's cookies in their own jar. Anything that fails our policy gets a 403 — each component gets precisely the network it needs and nothing more.

The Engine

The Engine is the only public-facing component of Kitesurf. It handles the Chrome DevTools Protocol (CDP) WebSocket and HTTP REST APIs, serves a landing page that is useful for internal testing purposes and, most importantly, stores each session state. All other components are stateless.

The advantage of using CDP is client compatibility: Puppeteer, Playwright, chrome-remote-interface, and the actual Chrome DevTools frontend. Point them at Kitesurf and they will all just work. This is also how Browser Run works (more on why this is important later).

Contrary to what the name suggests, the Engine is actually the simplest of the Kitesurf components. The fun parts come next.

PageScript

PageScript offers a good example of the power of our new Workers features: in this case, Dynamic Workers. Kitesurf simply wouldn’t have been possible before this.

Here’s a simplified diagram of how PageScript works internally.

Every next page or out-of-process iframe (OOPIF) uses Dynamic Workers to spin up a long-lived PageScript isolate that handles the page session, consisting of a clean globalThis and the DOM document object.

The DOM object is then populated with the results of parsing the HTML document and running all the JavaScript scripts. For parsing the HTML and the CSS we use parts of Blitz, a modular rendering engine, and Stylo, Firefox’s high-performance CSS parser, both written in Rust.

For each found <script> tag or .wasm file we run the JavaScript and WebAssembly code inside the same isolate.

Yes, but evals

What about evals, you ask? Evals are trickier to handle because for security reasons we still don’t support eval natively in Workers. We can’t spin another isolate to handle them either, because it wouldn’t have access to globalThis.

Our solution is to use Boa JS, an ECMAScript engine written in Rust, to compile and run on Workers. We are basically executing a runtime on top of a runtime, which doesn’t seem optimal, and it isn’t, but it works well enough to handle the occasional evals we find in the code. In the future, when native eval support lands in Workers, we will migrate away from Boa.

PageRenderer

This component is essentially responsible for generating the actual pixels from the computed page objects. Here’s how it works:

PageRenderer works in a loop with the Engine Worker. Every time the engine needs a frame, PageRenderer gets the page object from PageScript (also known as the scene), fetches the internal fonts and images from Static Assets, rasterizes everything into an image buffer, and then returns the buffer to the engine in a format that the client can display like a JPEG/PNG or PDF.

A big part of the magic here is handled by another Blitz module, blitz-paint, which in turn uses Parley for shaping the characters into glyphs, choosing fonts, and breaking text into lines.

Workers’ built-in RPC system: same application, multiple isolates

Cloudflare Workers have a built-in remote procedure call (RPC) system that allows you to call methods on other Workers, pass objects between them, and call methods on those objects. You don’t have to worry about API schemas, types, or authentication, you just call remoteFunction(...params) and it works. You benefit from the isolation and the resources of the remote Worker without losing the convenience of accessing all of their functions locally using JavaScript.

Kitesurf uses this RPC system: the Engine Worker calls renderFrame() from the PageRenderer Worker over RPC using one single call and gets a PNG as the result. Because the renderer holds no page state (only a disposable cache), the engine can safely kill and relaunch it on any failed or stuck RPC call — making each render request self-contained, retryable, and its isolate cheap and throwaway.

Kitesurf passes 215,000+ WPT tests and growing

Kitesurf works. It already passes around 215,000+ WPT tests, and we are adding hundreds of passing tests every week. Here you can see the evolution over time, up to the latest version since we started the project:

It’s worth noting that the parts of a browser that are important to agents (e.g., CSS, DOM, HTML, selection, SVG, and XHR) have good coverage already. Even things that might not be particularly important in the context of agents, like streams, are now decently supported.

Performance-wise, Kitesurf is doing pretty well. Below are the medians of five Browser Run quick-action runs across a 14-URL corpus comparing Chromium with Kitesurf.

Metric

Kitesurf

Chromium (warm pool)

Kitesurf, relative

CPU: screenshot

380 ms

1,173 ms

3.1× less CPU than Chromium

CPU: HTML extraction

229 ms

877 ms

3.8× less than Chromium

Memory: screenshot

57.8 MiB

271.0 MiB

4.7× less than Chromium

Memory: HTML extraction

39.4 MiB

273.7 MiB

7.0× less than Chromium

Wall time: screenshot

1,148 ms

637 ms

1.8× slower than Chromium

Wall time: HTML extraction

820 ms

472 ms

1.7× slower than Chromium

Chromium wins the stopwatch because a JIT that has already seen this page always beats a cold software renderer — and today it does, by about 1.7x. Most of that gap comes from rasterization and JPEG/PNG encoding, which we will keep optimizing.

But Kitesurf wins on memory and CPU, the things that actually drive your bill, by 3-7x compared to what Chromium uses. Less memory means we can run more sessions, scale better, and fundamentally lower both our costs and yours.

The most important test of all: Kitesurf runs Doom

We highlighted the importance of testing in our design decisions, but we all know that no matter how many tests you have, a project isn't truly complete until Doom runs on it. Here’s Kitesurf running https://silentspacemarine.com/ from our little Doom experiment a few years ago.

Try it today in Browser Run

You can try Kitesurf with Browser Run today, available for free while in beta, behind per-account limits.

The Browser Run CDP endpoint now supports Kitesurf as an option, so your existing client Puppeteer, Playwright, chrome-remote-interface, or any AI Agent that speaks MCP and CDP, already works. All you need to do is add the browser=kitesurf parameter to our endpoints.

For example, to use Kitesurf with Opencode see Using with MCP clients (CDP) in our developer documentation and use this configuration:

{
  "mcp": {
    "kitesurf": {
      "type": "local",
      "command": [
        "npx",
        "-y",
        "chrome-devtools-mcp@latest",
        "--wsEndpoint=wss://api.cloudflare.com/client/v4/accounts/<ACCOUNT_ID>/browser-run/devtools/browser?browser=kitesurf",
        "--wsHeaders={\"Authorization\":\"Bearer <API_TOKEN>\"}"
      ],
      "enabled": true
    }
  }
}

Another way to use Kitesurf is with Browser Run’s Quick Actions. Again, just add browser=kitesurf to the quick action endpoint and it will work. For example, if you need a quick screenshot from Wikipedia, this will work just fine:

curl -X POST 'https://api.cloudflare.com/client/v4/accounts/<accountId>/browser-run/screenshot?browser=kitesurf' \
  -H 'Authorization: Bearer <apiToken>' \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  -d '{
    "url": "https://example.com"
  }' \
  --output "screenshot.png"

Use the Kitesurf Playground with Chrome DevTools

Another option to start exploring Kitesurf is to use our public playground here. You can type in any URL to see how Kitesurf renders the page and interact with it.

One interesting feature of the playground is that we inject Chrome DevTools in the UI, so you can inspect expanded DOM elements, read console messages, and watch network activity while Kitesurf renders pages. More interestingly, we implemented the necessary CDP instructions for the Memory panel to report the WebAssembly footprint of each isolate, including frames, so you can gain a clear understanding of the resources each page is consuming.

Check our Developer Documentation for all the details on how to use Kitesurf with Browser Run.

When is Kitesurf better?

As of today, Kitesurf correctly renders pages like TodoMVC (vanilla, React, Vue, Angular, Preact), Wikipedia, Hacker News, the Cloudflare Blog, and much of the Cloudflare dashboard. We will keep improving Kitesurf and increasing the percentage of WPT tests that pass, to improve compatibility for more complex web pages.

Kitesurf is great for AI agents that need to render pages but can accept the trade-offs of not using a full-featured, pixel-perfect Chromium browser. It is also excellent for automations and applications that rely on one-shot Quick Actions, such as extracting content from a page or generating PDFs or screenshots, for compatible sites.

Think of Kitesurf as an ephemeral, fully-isolated, stateless engine designed to exist only for the duration of a task, that scales well for bursty, AI-driven workloads.

What Kitesurf is not yet able to do

If you need to play video, render WebGL, negotiate a bot-challenge handshake with real TLS fingerprints, or start a ten-minute authenticated session that requires persistent state — Kitesurf isn’t yet the right option. Just use Browser Run’s default, which is powered by Chromium.

The best way to know if a specific site is compatible with Kitesurf is to try it. You can do this by using the APIs or, more quickly, try it in our public playground.

Explore the DevTools panels and see what’s happening behind the scenes, with particular attention to the console and the memory metrics.

Where it goes

Kitesurf is twelve weeks old. The first commit was in May. Here are some of the things we're actively working on:

Better CDP coverage. Kitesurf implements a subset of the CDP protocol — enough to cover the requirements of most agents and automation tools, including robust DOM and network inspection — and we continue to expand its capabilities to be as complete as possible.
Rendering fidelity for screenshots and PDFs, because we know that LLMs can often work better from an image than from the underlying text.
WPT coverage. We are iterating rapidly to add more web APIs and pass more WPT tests on the road to making Kitesurf production-ready.
Efficiency. We keep CPU, memory, and wall time benchmarks running all the time and are working hand-in-hand with other Developer Platform teams to make Kitesurf as cost-effective and efficient as possible.

Final notes

Thank you for making it all the way here — we know this was a long and technical blog post, but hopefully an interesting one. We went into detail because we don't take lightly how important, but also how complex, it is to build a new browser, even a very specific one.

Kitesurf is in its early stages, but we wanted to open it up to you as soon as possible and learn from your feedback. The team will be actively improving it with frequent updates focused on performance, efficiency, and compatibility.

One last thing: we're going to open source Kitesurf once we're ready — hopefully soon. Our goal is to let any customer deploy their own version of Kitesurf on their own accounts, if they want to.

So give it a try in the playground, keep an eye on our changelog, and come chat with the team on Discord. Share your experience and send us feedback; we’ll be listening.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

20. Radical Study Suggests Life on Earth Arose Twice

Source: https://www.sciencealert.com/radical-study-suggests-life-on-earth-arose-from-non-living-matter-twice
Site: ScienceAlert
Author: Michael Irving
Published: 2026-08-05
HN activity: 107 points · 87 comments
Length: 1.0K words (~5 min read)
Language: en-US

The fact that you, or I, or any living creature, is here at all is a series of astonishing strokes of luck stretching back more than 4 billion years.

One of the biggest hurdles was the very first one: How did life emerge from a primordial soup of stuff that very much wasn't alive?

A radical new study, published in Science Advances, suggests that this unlikely threshold may actually have been crossed not once, but twice.

Two of the main lineages of life – bacteria and archaea – may have independently figured out the secrets of metabolism that upgraded them from non-living to living, according to the new study, which focused on the most rudimentary set of chemical reactions thought to enable this transformation.

"The surprise is that the enzymes that catalyze those reactions are not conserved across the evolutionary divide that separates bacteria and archaea," says William Martin, a biologist at Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf in Germany.

"The new data leave only one conclusion. The bacterial and archaeal lineages made the transition to the free-living state independently. Only free-living cells are alive.

"Let's call it by name: we are looking at one origin of the genetic code, but two origins of life."

That's a huge claim to make, especially when defining what life even is can be surprisingly tricky.

Generally speaking, life is considered matter that responds to its environment, takes in energy, grows, and reproduces itself.

That sounds like it should cover the basics, but even that broad a statement is imperfect. After all, viruses can do most of those, but aren't traditionally considered 'alive'.

One aspect of life that is universal – and which viruses lack – is metabolism, the collection of chemical reactions that organisms use to make molecules that are vital for their everyday functioning.

Enzymes are the workhorse proteins that act as catalysts for these reactions in organisms, but that raises a weird chicken-and-egg question.

Enzymes themselves are products of chemical reactions – so how did the first lifeforms begin metabolizing things, including making enzymes, without the help of other enzymes?

The answer, it seems, lies in their surroundings.

It's generally believed that the first life arose in extremely reactive environments, such as hydrothermal vents. Metals that naturally occur in these places could have been the first catalysts for metabolism, converting compounds like hydrogen gas, ammonia, and carbon dioxide into other useful molecules.

"Almost everything about the origin of metabolism is debated, including the roles of energy, genetics, autocatalysis, phosphate, cofactors, cyanide, CO2, and water," Martin and colleagues write in their paper.

"Yet on one aspect all will agree: the ~400-reaction network that converts H2, CO2, NH3, H2S and phosphate into amino acids, bases and cofactors cannot have arisen in an instant.

"Its emergence from spontaneous environmental reactions had to traverse intermediate states of assembly, which have previously been elusive."

The researchers investigated the protein structures of core metabolic enzymes in the genomes of bacteria and archaea, and developed a method and algorithm to order them in complexity. From there, they could determine which ones evolved in which order, and put together a rough timeline.
Starting compounds are shown at the left; they are converted by metabolism into the building blocks of life. The 420 enzymatic reactions are indicated as circles, and chemical metabolites as diamonds; lines connect reactions that share metabolites. Circles shown in magenta shading indicate reactions that could have been catalyzed by inorganic compounds in the environment where metabolism of the first cells arose. (HHU/Nadja Hoffmann)

"We found that the last universal ancestor of all cells, LUCA, possessed enzymes for only about half of the reactions of metabolism," says Martin.

"The other half was catalyzed by metals in the environment where LUCA arose."

The team found that there were likely four different phases in the development of catalysis (enzyme-driven reactions). The first relied solely on metals in the environment.

Once enough of the useful molecules built up, the not-quite-living-yet proto-cells (which included LUCA) could start developing their own enzymes that performed some of the functions of those metal catalysts.

Over time, later proto-cells developed more and more enzymes, reducing their dependency on external metals, until they no longer needed them at all. Only at that point would they be considered 'free-living cells'.

Importantly, the researchers say, this didn't occur until after bacteria and archaea had separated. These two branches figured out their own ways to tackle the same problems.

"We can see cases where the ancestors of bacteria and archaea independently evolved structurally distinct enzymes to catalyze the same essential metabolic reaction," says Natalia Mrnjavac, a biologist at Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf.

"Such parallel inventions could have paved the way to the independent emergence of free-living bacteria and archaea."

The study may also plug another gap in our understanding of the origins of life.

A molecule called ATP is now a vital energy source to fuel metabolism – but it's also made by enzymes, and wasn't available in prebiotic chemistry. The researchers say they identified an alternative.

"When we react phosphite, a form of phosphorus that naturally occurs in hydrothermal vents, with organic compounds, we get metabolic phosphorylation reactions overnight in water," says Manon Schlikker, a molecular evolutionary scientist at Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf.

"Phosphite and palladium replace ATP and enzymes; it's amazing, and it makes early evolution a lot easier to grasp."

Yet critical to chemical reactions is the medium in which they occur, and scientists still don't have a clear idea about that. Was it water, or a sticky goo?

Related: All Life on Earth Shares an Ancestor – And Some of Our Genes Predate It

If the findings are backed up with further research, it seems that the tree of life, as we picture it, may need an update. We tend to think of LUCA as the 'trunk' of the tree, with all the other lifeforms, past and present, branching off from there.

But perhaps there were two completely separate trunks, which first diverged at the roots, before they were even technically alive.

The research was published in the journal Science Advances.

This article was fact-checked by Clare Watson and edited by Rebecca Dyer. While we pride ourselves on our process, we are only human. If you spot a mistake, please let us know.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

21. Captain Bible Reverse Engineering

Source: https://github.com/peterkelly/captain-bible-re
Site: GitHub
Submitter: peterkelly (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-08-02 17:38 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 18 points · 3 comments
Length: 2.3K words (~11 min read)
Language: en

This repository contains a reproducible environment and research notes for reverse-engineering Captain Bible in the Dome of Darkness, a DOS game from the 1990s. The original game files are expected in CB/ and are intentionally ignored by Git.

The FreeDOS/QEMU environment and the planned static and dynamic analysis are complete. The sources for the two published books are under docs/ and spec/. See PLAN.md for the living checklist and docs/src/progress-log.md for the complete activity log.

Documentation

Reverse-engineering documentation records the research process, evidence, recovered formats, executable analysis, and project progress.
Clean-room engine specification defines the game mechanics and portable compatibility contract for implementing an engine without relying on the DOS program's internals.

Requirements

QEMU with qemu-system-i386 and qemu-img
mtools (mformat, mcopy, mmd, mdir, and mtype)
unzip
Python 3
Pillow (for ART/PAL rendering)
A C compiler, pkg-config, and GLib development headers for DOS tracing
A POSIX shell
mdBook (for the research and specification books)
Rizin (for the supplied symbol script and further disassembly)
A current stable Rust toolchain, SDL3, and pkg-config (for the clean-room engine)

The setup is being developed and tested with QEMU 11.0.2 and mdBook 0.5.3 on macOS/Apple Silicon.

Running the game

From the repository root, run:

./run.sh

The script opens QEMU and starts Captain Bible automatically. On its first run, it creates a persistent play image at build/captain-bible/captain-bible.img. Saved games are written to that image and remain available on later runs. On macOS, the game uses QEMU's visible Cocoa display with zoom-to-fit=on. Before QEMU opens, the script prints both the host image filename and the guest path C:\CBDOME\CB.EXE.

The game supports both mouse and keyboard input. If QEMU captures the pointer, use Control-Option-G to release it on macOS. Exit through the game's Escape menu before closing QEMU so pending save writes complete cleanly.

QEMU still presents Sound Blaster 16 and AdLib hardware to the game, but uses the silent none audio backend. The Cocoa window remains visible while game audio is suppressed on the host.

To prepare or check the images without opening QEMU:

./run.sh --setup-only

To recreate the play image from the current CB/ directory:

./run.sh --rebuild

--rebuild replaces the persistent play image and therefore resets any saved games held only inside it.

For RNG-aligned, action-for-action DOS/Rust comparisons against the same game data and save state, start DOS with an unsigned 16-bit initial state:

./run.sh --rng-seed 1

The launcher reconstructs a patched executable under build/, places it only in a unique disposable clone of the play image, verifies the guest copy, and runs the clone with QEMU snapshot writes. It never modifies CB/CB.EXE. Once the normal play image exists, deterministic runs leave it unchanged unless --rebuild is also requested explicitly. Rebuild first when the comparison must use newer files from CB/ rather than the play image's existing copy. The normal launch removes its per-run clone after QEMU exits; --setup-only retains the printed directory for inspection.

Rust engine

The clean-room native implementation lives in rust-engine. It consumes the same original CB/ data directory and includes a standard-library-only engine core plus terminal and SDL3 frontends. SDL3 and pkg-config are hard build requirements. Validate the complete shipped resource set and start the default SDL3 frontend with:

cd rust-engine
cargo run --release -- --data ../CB --validate
cargo run --release -- --data ../CB
cargo run --release -- --data ../CB --rng-seed 1

Pass --headless for the terminal or deterministic tick frontend. See the engine README for SDL3 setup, controls, deterministic smoke runs, text export, tests, and current host-frontend limitations.

Rebuilding FreeDOS

The base operating-system image is constructed noninteractively from the official FreeDOS 1.4 LiteUSB distribution:

tools/setup_freedos_image.py

The result is build/freedos/freedos.img. The builder verifies the published SHA-256, preserves the source boot code, constructs a new FAT16 partition, and copies the FreeDOS filesystem with mtools. It does not run or automate the FreeDOS installer.

The current workspace image also contains the complete game at C:\CBDOME, added after the base image was built. If you boot that image directly, run:

CD \CBDOME
CB

Rebuilding the base image removes that manual game copy. Running ./run.sh will still create or use the separate game-bearing play image automatically.

Run its focused unit tests with:

python3 -m unittest discover -s tests -v

Executable analysis

CB.EXE is a 16-bit MZ executable compressed with Microsoft EXEPACK. Generate the independently verified unpacked executable and, when the recorded QEMU dump is present, compare it with the relocated process image:

tools/analyze_cb_exe.py CB/CB.EXE \
  --output build/analysis/CB_UNPACKED.EXE \
  --memory-dump build/dumps/title-physical-1m.bin \
  --load-segment 0x627

Load the current high-confidence names into Rizin with:

rizin -b 16 -i analysis/cb.rz build/analysis/CB_UNPACKED.EXE

Audit all 140 named functions, 134 distinct BIN handlers, and 9 data symbols against the Rizin script, with per-entry confidence and evidence, using:

tools/inspect_symbol_map.py

Independently compare all 145 opcode dispatch entries and operand-reader paths with the decoder, all 134 distinct handler symbols, and all 25,829 shipped commands using:

tools/audit_bin_opcodes.py

The checked per-opcode result is analysis/opcode-audit.tsv.

The generated executable and memory dumps remain under ignored build/. Research results, address conventions, function names, command-line behavior, and the recovered save layout are in the mdBook source.

Inspect the installed Miles AIL/MIDPAK OPL timbre library with:

tools/inspect_midpak_ad.py CB/SOUND.4
tools/inspect_midpak_ad.py CB/SOUND.4 --list

The sound-driver chapter maps all 34 game-side int 66h sites and the DIGPAK and MIDPAK service contracts. ./run.sh --trace-dos records both DOS int 21h and driver int 66h calls and returns while keeping the Cocoa window visible and host audio silent.

Extracting DD1.DAT

The main resource archive has a recovered 24-byte directory format and custom LZW-family compression. List or extract its 369 members with:

tools/extract_dd1.py --list CB/DD1.DAT
tools/extract_dd1.py \
  --extract RUN.ART \
  --output build/dd1/RUN.ART \
  CB/DD1.DAT
tools/extract_dd1.py --extract-all build/dd1/all CB/DD1.DAT

All-member output is prefixed with each directory index so repeated archive names remain distinct. The extractor validates the directory, payload magic, compressed stream, expanded size, and exact input consumption. Format details and the corresponding executable routines are in the mdBook's DD1.DAT chapter.

Rendering artwork

Extracted ART resources contain 12-byte frame descriptors followed by row-major eight-bit pixels. Their colors come from separate 768-byte VGA PAL resources. Inspect or render them with:

tools/render_art.py build/dd1/all/003_LOGO.ART --list
tools/render_art.py \
  build/dd1/all/003_LOGO.ART \
  --palette build/dd1/all/002_LOGO.PAL \
  --canvas --scale 2 \
  --output build/graphics/logo.png

The renderer can also write one frame with --frame or every frame with --all-frames. Palette index 0 is transparent by default for sprite previews; use --opaque-zero when reproducing an opaque draw. The mdBook graphics chapter documents the format and its byte-for-byte correlation with QEMU VGA memory.

Generate an annotated contact sheet of every full-screen ART frame, with PAL associations inferred from the scene programs:

tools/render_fullscreen_gallery.py \
  CB/DD1.DAT \
  --output build/graphics/full-screen-gallery.png

Use --scale 2 for a nearest-neighbor enlarged sheet.

Inspecting scene bytecode

The 62 extracted BIN resources contain scene programs. The recovered decoder knows the operand layout and dispatch effect of all 145 opcodes. It assigns semantic names to every value, including conservative low-level names for the 23 values absent from the shipped scripts:

tools/inspect_bin.py build/dd1/all/005_INTRO.BIN
tools/inspect_bin.py build/dd1/all/001_LOGO.BIN --objects
tools/inspect_bin.py build/dd1/all/327_BOSS.BIN --choices
tools/inspect_bin.py \
  build/dd1/all/337_COMBAT7.BIN --animations --actions
tools/inspect_bin.py \
  build/dd1/all/334_ROOM3.BIN --start 0x0c96 --limit 0x1754

Most resources are code from beginning to end. CP2.BIN has a data trailer, and ROOM3.BIN has three command regions separated by zero-filled reserved blocks, so those regions require explicit --start and --limit values. The mdBook scene-bytecode chapter describes the interpreter, command schema, startup sequence, QEMU memory correlation, and complete opcode catalog. It also records the corrected two-word layout of opcode 0x69, which removes 11 phantom commands from the linear corpus, and the independent executable-CFG audit of every declared operand path. The --objects view summarizes the display records defined in linear command order, including thread/animation types and direct objects' coordinates, scale, flags, frame, and ART slot. See the scene-display-object chapter for the live ten-byte layout and control-flow caveat. The --choices view lists dialogue-choice source offsets, absolute branch targets, and inline text. See the conversation-flow chapter for its six-byte runtime table, study-Bible integration, and live QEMU correlation. The --animations view groups each animation header with its contiguous nine-byte steps; --actions lists screen coordinates, absolute targets, selectors, and recovered combat and hall-action labels. The combat-runtime chapter documents their runtime tables, BIN scheduler, action outcome branches, faith effects, shared victory/retreat epilogue, and map transitions.

Patch both scene-name fields—and, when needed, both coordinate copies—in a disposable 2,752-byte state for controlled scene-entry experiments, then compare a physical-memory capture with its BIN definitions using:

tools/patch_save_scene.py input.SVQ COMBAT1 output.SVQ
tools/patch_save_scene.py input.SVQ ROOM3 output.SVQ --coordinate 13 6
tools/inspect_runtime_tables.py memory.bin \
  --data-segment 0x14e1 \
  --bin build/dd1/all/343_COMBAT1.BIN

Without --coordinate, the patcher changes only the two saved 20-byte scene-name fields. The optional coordinates replace variables 11 and 12 in both the checkpoint and live variable blocks. Use it only on research copies. The runtime inspector decodes the counted action and animation tables plus ten BIN-thread records. With --bin, it compares action targets and animation definition fields against the static command stream.

CP2.BIN ends with the complete 16-node Unibot navigation graph. Inspect its four-heading exits, seven pylon nodes, Tower, lower-right-map coordinates, and per-node transition values with:

tools/inspect_unibot.py build/dd1/all/315_CP2.BIN

The Unibot and endgame chapter follows the seven-rescue boarding gate through all pylon encounters, the one-time Annoy Cyber event, the Tower gate, and the successful and failed ending chains.

Inspecting audio resources

The 41 ABT members are compressed 9,000 Hz unsigned eight-bit mono sound effects. Inspect one or convert it to a standard WAV file with:

tools/convert_abt.py build/dd1/all/306_D003.ABT
tools/convert_abt.py \
  build/dd1/all/306_D003.ABT \
  --output build/audio/d003.wav

The 32 XMI members are one-sequence IFF/XMIDI music resources. Validate and summarize their containers, timbres, and event streams with:

tools/inspect_xmi.py build/dd1/all/267_MUS001.XMI

Inspecting game text

The extensionless resources in DD1.DAT contain translation-specific verse indexes. They pair with the DDLA through DDLR files containing lies, paraphrases, questions, explanations, and conversations. Inspect a combined record with:

tools/inspect_text_resources.py \
  CB/DD1.DAT --data-dir CB \
  --translation N --bank A --record 0

Translations are K, N, R, and T; banks are A through G and R. The mdBook text-format chapter documents both binary layouts and their validation against the game's built-in study-file exporter.

Both tools reject structural inconsistencies and consume their inputs exactly. The mdBook audio chapter documents the formats, executable decoder, and a byte-for-byte comparison between host-decoded D003.ABT and its live QEMU PCM buffer.

Inspecting saved games

Each player prefix has a 243-byte .SV0 label index, nine normal state files, and a separate .SVQ quick save. Inspect either fixed format with:

tools/inspect_save.py CB/DDGAMES.SV0
tools/inspect_save.py CB/DDGAMES.SV3 --descriptors
tools/inspect_save.py CB/DDGAMES.SV9 --variables

The inspector validates exact sizes, decodes the nine fixed C-string label buffers, separates live and checkpoint state blocks, and exposes the saved settings and text descriptors. The mdBook save-format chapter documents the 2,752-byte state layout, player-prefix behavior, quick-save suffix changes, snapshot copying, error behavior, and evidence from all supplied saves. The --variables view decodes the 100 signed script words, named map and faith fields, the embedded 128-bit flag bank, powerups, and victim-rescue flags.

Inspecting world maps

The archive contains 21 world maps: levels A through G at Easy, Normal, and Difficult settings. Each is a row-major 16×16 grid of three-byte mutable cells. Display the location-kind grid and optionally list its nonzero cells:

tools/inspect_map.py CB/DD1.DAT --map CE
tools/inspect_map.py CB/DD1.DAT --map CE --cells
tools/inspect_map.py CB/DD1.DAT --map CE --rooms
tools/inspect_map.py CB/DD1.DAT --map CE --hall-features

The cell view names the four connection directions. The room view decodes the five room classes—Victim, Trap, Prayer, Communications, and Jump Tunnel—together with each room's entrance side and mutable parameters. The hall-feature view identifies the seven Cyber types, hidden Spider triggers, Scripture stations, cleared encounters, and level exits while leaving unresolved environmental states unnamed.

Compare an original map with the live grid serialized in a save:

tools/inspect_map.py \
  CB/DD1.DAT --map CE --compare-save CB/DDGAMES.SV3

The mdBook world-map chapter documents resource naming, cell addressing, packed fields, room dispatch and orientation encoding, scene commands, hallway entities and transitions, exploration bits, map-screen behavior, and the byte-level identification of supplied save grids.

QEMU DOS-call tracing

Run the game with the QEMU TCG tracer and monitor socket enabled:

./run.sh --trace-dos

The Cocoa window stays visible and host audio remains muted. Trace mode uses one guest instruction per TCG translation block so register values can be sampled at DOS and driver interrupt boundaries; it is consequently slower than a normal run. The generated plugin, trace, monitor socket, screenshots, and memory dumps are kept under the ignored build/qemu-trace/ directory.

The trace activates at the reconstructed entry point 0627:CB5C and records BIOS keyboard int 16h, DOS int 21h, mouse int 33h, and sound-driver int 66h calls and returns from code segment 0627, including live AX and the other argument/result registers. These addresses are stable for the current deterministic FreeDOS image. If the DOS environment or boot configuration changes, re-establish the load segment before relying on the filter.

Documentation

Run the documentation integrity check and build both books with:

tools/check_documentation.py
mdbook build docs
mdbook build spec

The checker validates SUMMARY coverage, local chapter links and anchors, and repository commands used in shell examples in both books. The research book's Reproducing the Results chapter gives a single end-to-end command sequence for every recovered format and system. Known Gaps and Evidence Boundaries separates confirmed results from deliberately unnamed fields and the limits of controlled scene-entry captures. The rendered book is written to docs/book/. A custom stylesheet removes mdBook's fixed 750-pixel content limit so tables and disassembly listings use the available browser width.

The clean-room specification is written to spec/book/. Its source begins at spec/src/SUMMARY.md and is organized as an implementation contract: player mechanics, lifecycle and input, every resource format, all 145 scene opcodes, runtime services, maps, dialogue, combat, progression and the endgame, saves, configuration, conformance tests, and explicitly bounded unspecified details.

Pushes to main that change the research book or its publishing workflow build and publish that output with GitHub Actions. The specification remains a separate local build. The workflow can also be started manually from the Actions tab. It installs the tested mdBook 0.5.3 Linux binary, verifies its published SHA-256, uploads docs/book/ as a Pages artifact, and deploys it to:

https://peterkelly.github.io/captain-bible-re/

The repository's Pages source is configured for GitHub Actions, and the first deployment has completed successfully. Subsequent relevant pushes publish automatically; no generated book files are committed.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

22. Show HN: textlog – A quiet, text-only microblogging platform, open-source, no JS

Source: https://textlog.cc/about
Site: textlog
Submitter: stagas (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-08-07 10:52 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 143 points · 62 comments
Length: 166 words (~1 min read)
Language: en

about

A quieter place for your thoughts.

textlog is a simple social text log: write short notes, follow people and hashtags, and join conversations without turning every thought into a performance.

Notes are limited to 280 characters. The constraint keeps them quick to write and read, making room for one thought at a time.

Small by design

textlog is built around words: notes, people, hashtags, and conversations. It is intentionally small, straightforward, and easy to follow. There are no engagement tricks or pressure to build an audience.

Your profile and notes are public. Joining is free, and you can download or delete your account data whenever you like. If you feel like it, you can also donate to support the service.

Be a good neighbour

Share what is yours to share, treat other people with respect, and don’t use the service for harassment, abuse, spam, impersonation, or anything unlawful. We may moderate or remove content that puts the community or the service at risk.

What's next?

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

23. New Mexico court orders Meta to pay $567m over harms to children’s mental health

Source: https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2026/aug/06/new-mexico-court-meta
Site: The Guardian
Author: Uwa Ede-Osifo
Published: 2026-08-07
HN activity: 735 points · 396 comments
Length: 866 words (~4 min read)
Language: en

A New Mexico court has ordered Meta, the parent company of Facebook, to pay $567m into a fund aimed at redressing adverse mental health impacts from the social media giant’s platforms.

The Thursday ruling comes as a part of the second phase of a landmark trial the social media giant lost in March. At the time, a jury found that the company knowingly harmed children’s mental health and concealed what it knew about child sexual exploitation on its platforms, and imposed the maximum penalty: a $375m fine.

The ruling on Thursday is an addition to that fine, bringing the total amount Meta is responsible for to $942m.

Judge Bryan Biedscheid said the bulk of the money – $420m – would be used for treatment services for young people in New Mexico. The rest will go toward awareness and prevention, screening services and other costs over the next five years.

The March trial was the first to find Meta liable for acts committed on its platform, and followed a 2023 Guardian investigation that revealed how Facebook and Instagram had become marketplaces for child sex trafficking.

Several former Meta moderators told the Guardian there were instances where they flagged harmful content related to child grooming, but the cases were not escalated.

In the second phase of the trial, which began in May, prosecutors had asked the judge to impose fundamental changes at Meta aimed at reining in addictive features, improving age verification, and preventing child sexual exploitation through default privacy settings and closer oversight.

The judge has also ordered other changes, including that Facebook and Instagram build banner and informational screens to clearly explain its protection features, best practices, and tools to address inappropriate comment.

Those changes, and an educational campaign in New Mexico, would be subject to review by the state.

The court said federal children’s privacy laws prevent Meta from applying age-verification tools to children under 13. The court also noted that ordering verification of children’s ages only for Meta and not other social media companies would be “inequitable and unduly injurious” to the company.

Instead, the court ordered Meta to continue to improve its age-assurance tools in New Mexico, which include using artificial intelligence to determine people’s age based on signals such as who their friends are and what types of content they post and consume. Meta must also attempt to develop a dedicated “under-13-years-of-age prediction model” in the next two years.

Additionally, Meta should also request proof of age for Instagram and Facebook users in New Mexico it estimates to be under 13. If it determines a user to be under 13, or under 18 but without being able to estimate a specific age, Meta must treat the user as under 13 or under 18 until the user verifies their age.

The company must also partner with schools or a child safety organization to create a reporting portal where school staff can flag users who may be under 13. And it must delete personal information it has collected on users under 13. The court also ordered Meta to report on its progress twice a year on how it is complying with the abatement measures.

New Mexico’s attorney general, Raúl Torrez, hailed the judgment.

“This case has always been about protecting children, standing up for families, and making sure that one of the world’s largest technology companies cannot profit from practices that endanger young people without consequence,” Torrez said in a statement.

“Today’s decision is a victory for every parent who has worried about what social media is doing to their child and every child who deserves to grow up safer online.”

A Meta spokesperson said in a statement to the Guardian on Thursday that the company “disagrees with the ruling” and planned to appeal.

“We work hard to keep people safe on our platforms and have been transparent about the challenges of identifying and removing bad actors and harmful content. We remain confident in our record of protecting teens online and will continue to defend ourselves against claims that misrepresent the facts,” the statement continued.

The total amount Meta is responsible for is a small fraction of its annual profit, which was about $60bn in 2025. Still, it represents another setback for Meta as it faces a wave of accusations from families of children harmed by social media.

The company is embroiled in a slew of lawsuits in other US states over its alleged harms to young people. In a trial in Tennessee that began last month, the state has accused the company of disregarding internal warnings about teenagers’ compulsive use of Instagram, which has been linked to eating disorders and depression, among other adverse effects. Meta is also gearing up for a trial later this month in federal court in Oakland, California.

What comes out of New Mexico is the first of many dominoes that could fall for Meta, said Laura Edelson, an assistant professor at Northeastern University focusing on social media and cybersecurity.

“America is not going to pass a law that bans social media,” Edelson said. “But if companies like Meta know they’re causing harm to users by product design, the states are finally finding a way to rein this in.”

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

24. Show HN: Wyzer Programming Language

Source: https://github.com/Wyzer-Lang/wyzer
Site: GitHub
Submitter: v0id_isgood (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-08-07 12:28 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 178 points · 100 comments
Length: 1.2K words (~6 min read)
Language: en

"Simplicity is not the absence of power. It is power without pretense." ~ Atiksh Sharma

Feel free to use the pretentious quote anywhere lol.

Wyzer is a statically typed, compiled, resource-oriented programming language with integrated distributed safety via choreographic programming and a perceus memory model

Motive behind Wyzer

Rust guarantees safety within a process It does nothing for:

distributed deadlocks
protocol mismatches
cross-service correctness

To solve this problem Wyzer introduces the concept of choreographic programming which is one of the few serious attempts to solve it.

Contributions are welcome, if you want to contribute to the language please read RESEARCH.md

Join our discord server as well :)) https://discord.gg/RhpPhkTrVu

Documentation

To learn how to program in Wyzer, check out our official documentation:

Introduction
Variables and Types
Control Flow
Functions and Structs
Memory Model

How to Code in Wyzer

Wyzer is designed to be simple, explicit, and easy to read. Here is a quick look at how you write code in Wyzer.

1. Variables and Types

Everything has a clear type, and variables are immutable (cannot be changed) by default. If you want to change a variable, you must explicitly use var instead of let. You can also use const for compile-time constants.

fn main() {
    const MAX: u32 = 100;  // Compile-time constant
    let x: u32 = 10;       // Cannot be changed
    var y: u32 = 20;       // Can be changed
    
    y = y + x;
    std::io::println(y);
}


2. Structs and Data

You can define custom data structures and access their fields directly.

struct Point {
    x: u32,
    y: u32
}

fn main() {
    let p: Point = Point { x: 10, y: 20 };
    std::io::println(p.x);
}


3. Control Flow

Wyzer supports standard if/else, while, and for loops. Note that loops don't need parentheses around the condition.

fn main() {
    let mut i: u32 = 0;
    while i < 3 {
        std::io::println(i);
        i = i + 1;
    }
}


4. Error Handling and Match

Errors are not hidden. Functions that can fail return a Result<T, E>. You use match expressions to safely handle both the success (Ok) and error (Err) cases. Note that match is an expression, so if used as a standalone statement, it requires a trailing semicolon!

fn main() {
    let result: Result<u32, str> = Ok(42);
    
    match (result) {
        Ok(value) => std::io::println(value),
        Err(err_msg) => std::io::println(0)
    };
}


FAQ: What It Is, Why It Exists, and What's Actually New

A simple guide with no math. Use this to explain the project quickly.

1. What Wyzer Is, In One Paragraph

Wyzer is a programming language built on one idea: most hard problems (like memory bugs, deadlocks, and network errors) happen because it is not clear who owns a resource. Instead of using three different tools to fix memory, concurrency, and networks, Wyzer uses just one ownership rule for all three.

2. Why Make a New Language At All?

This is a fair question, and the honest answer starts with what is already good about existing options, not what is wrong with them.

Rust proved you can have safe memory without a garbage collector. This is great, but Rust is hard to learn, and its rules make some common code structures difficult to write.

Go, Java, C#, and Python use garbage collectors. This makes them easier to use but slower and less predictable. This is bad for real-time or low-level systems.

Network programming is still mostly done by hand. You write two programs and hope they talk to each other correctly. When they don't, you get bugs.

Wyzer's goal: Get the safety of Rust without the difficulty, and use the same rule to make network programs safe too.

3. What's Actually New About It?

Most of Wyzer's pieces already exist. What is new is putting them together.

Perceus reference counting: Fast memory management without Rust's complexity. We borrowed this from Koka and Lean 4.
Choreographic programming: Writing one network rule that creates code for every computer. We borrowed this from academic research.
What is new: We use the choreography idea for more than just networks. We use it for threads and interrupts too. The exact same rule proves memory safety, interrupt safety, and network safety.

The benefit: You only need to learn one rule to manage memory, threads, and networks safely.

4. Core Design Principles

These are the values that drive our decisions. They explain why Wyzer looks the way it does.

One way to write a thing. If there are two ways to write the same thing, we remove one.

No hidden magic, but keep it clean. Important things should be visible in the code, but you shouldn't have to write extra boilerplate.

Let the compiler do the work, unless it is confusing. We want the compiler to figure things out, but we require clear rules when things get tricky.

Be honest about what is not finished. We mark unsolved problems clearly so people know what needs work.

5. The Core Semantics, In Plain Language

This section is a simple map of the formal rules. Read this first to understand the basics.

Memory (Section 5): You write functional code that does not change data. Behind the scenes, if a piece of data has only one owner, the compiler changes it directly in memory. This makes it as fast as C without a garbage collector or lifetime rules.

Ownership is everything (Sections 3, 6, 7): The one rule is that once you use a resource, you cannot use it again. This applies to memory, network messages, and hardware interrupts.

Safe networks (Section 6): You write regular functions, and the types show who owns the data. The compiler figures out the network rules and checks them for you. This catches deadlocks and dropped messages before the code even runs.

No hidden control flow: There is no async/await split. Errors are returned as standard types, not hidden exceptions.

6. Frequently Asked Questions

"Isn't this just Rust with extra steps?" No. We want Rust's safety without its steep learning curve. We use a different method (Perceus) for memory, and Rust does not have our network features.

"Isn't choreographic programming already a solved research area?" The math works, but it is mostly used in research, not real languages. We want to bring it to a general-purpose language.

"Why not just use effect handlers / async-await / a GC like everyone else does?" Those tools solve specific problems. Wyzer is trying to see if one single rule can solve memory, threads, and networks all at once.

"Is this actually going to be finished or production-ready?" Honestly, this is early research. Several big problems are still unsolved.

"What's the elevator pitch, one more time?" One ownership rule for memory, threads, and networks. No garbage collector, no complex borrow checker, and no network errors.

AI Assistance

Assistance provided by AI

AI was used to generate commit messages
AI was used for research (understanding choreographic programming, perceus memory model, etc closely)
AI was used for brand designing, i thank AI for providing me a wonderful number of ideas to help me design Wyzer's Logo :)

Notable Examples

donut.wyz: famous torous (also known as a donut) rewritten in wyzer https://github.com/rudywasfound/donut.wyz

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

25. Why are all the amounts values negative?

Source: https://bankstatementconverter.com/blog/posts/2026-08-02-why-are-all-amounts-negative/
Site: bankstatementconverter.com
Submitter: 4pkjai (Hacker News)
Published: 2026-08-02
HN activity: 35 points · 11 comments
Length: 568 words (~3 min read)
Language: en-us

A few days ago I got this email from a customer. Something about all the amounts coming out as negative. I converted their PDF.

PDF Sample

Converted Sample

The customer was right, all amounts were coming through as negative. Pretty weird. Interestingly the column headers end with minus sign characters. I then opened up the PDF in PDFSnake to see how the text is encoded. Let’s look at how the values “$110.00-” and “$1,527.57” are encoded.

$110.00-

PDFs are made up of a series of commands. Let’s walk through the commands that appear in this segment.

BT: Begin Text. Tells the PDF renderer to enter into text rendering mode and to save the previous graphics state. Only text operators are legal when inside a Begin Text and End Text block.

ET: End Text. Tells the PDF to exit text rendering mode and restore the graphics state to what it was before the BT command.

Tf: Set text font and size.

Td: Move text position.

Tj: Show text.

g: Set grey level for non-stroking operations.

G: Set grey level for stroking operations.

The above PDF commands could be summarise as “Draw the text ($110.00). Set the grey level to 0. Draw the text (-)”

$1,527.57-

We’ve seen all these commands before and the structure is similar. However there is one key difference. The gray level is set to 0.878 when drawing the minus sign character. The gray level of the minus sign is the same gray level as the background colour. This makes the minus sign invisible. The character is there, but it is not visible and that’s why it comes through when my code processes this PDF.

Why did they encode this PDF like that?

I don’t know, but I can have a guess.

They used trailing minus signs in this PDF. Trailing minus signs make right alignment a bit difficult, because they didn’t just want basic right alignment, they wanted right alignment for the number elements ignoring the minus sign. One way you can achieve this is by always leaving space for the minus sign. But how wide is the minus sign? It depends on the font size, maybe it’s hard to predict. So instead they put in an invisible minus sign for postive values.

Great the PDF looks good, but extracting data from it is a pain. They could avoid all this if they used leading minus signs, but for some reason they wanted trailing minus signs. Okay so now we know why this problem is occuring, how can we get this PDF to convert properly. I can see two solutions.

Solution #1 - OCR the PDF

Instead of reading the text elements in the PDF I could convert the PDF into a series of PNG files and then run OCR software on the PNG files. This should work although it has some downsides. OCRing isn’t 100% accurate. It works pretty well but there’s always a chance that characters are incorrectly recognised. OCRing is significantly slower.

Solution #2 - Strip out non-black text

For this statement type only black coloured text is relevant. Text elements that are set to any other colour can be treated as invisible. This should work, however there’s one problem. When extracting text in Bank Statement Converter, I do not store the colour of the text. So I’ll need to add in code to do this. It shouldn’t be too hard though.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

26. Möbius-Strip Crosswords

Source: https://quuxplusone.github.io/blog/2026/08/04/mobius-crossword/
Site: Arthur O’Dwyer
Author: Arthur O’Dwyer
Submitted: 2026-08-07 15:10 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 54 points · 7 comments
Length: 1.1K words (~5 min read)

Randall Rothenberg in the New York Times (1988-08-10) writes that although “Puzzle Makers Exchange Cross Words” about the fall of ERNE and ESNE and the rise of XEROX and PEACE PLAN, one Robert Guilbert Sr.

was ignorant of the dispute two years ago when he developed a competitive crossword game called Pago Pago and first became aware of crossword fans’ passion for the pastime.

“Guilbert invented the crossword-based game Pago Pago” is repeated in a news-or-magazine article reprinted sans bibliographic data on a blog from 2012-03-14. That article begins “Robert Guilbert Sr. wants to open a Crossword Puzzle Hall of Fame. Or — as Guilbert might say from force of habit — a museum, shrine, repository, gallery or pantheon of immortals.” (If you know where this article originally came from, tell me and I’ll update this post!) Anyway, that’s all I can find in print about Pago Pago.

Helene Hovanec’s article “Robert Guilbert’s Crossword Academy” (CROSSW RD, Nov/Dec 1992) contains no text about Pago Pago, but does include this uncaptioned photograph of Guilbert (1911–1990) hard at work:

David Steinberg of the “Pre-Shortzian Puzzle Project” blog has mentioned Guilbert several times in connection with Guilbert’s short-lived Crossword Academy, and even received in 2016 a very nice blog comment from Guilbert’s son Jonathan and a little more via email. Jonathan wrote, in part:

In the photo he can be seen working on a puzzle that he designed as a “Moebius Strip” — an “Infinity Crossword Puzzle” — a puzzle without a beginning and an end. He was going to have this game manufactured and marketed under the name “Pago Pago,” I believe.

Personally I suspect that Jonathan’s hunch was wrong: that the Möbius-strip puzzle and the “Pago Pago” puzzle-game (whatever its nature was) were two separate projects. However, apparently on the strength of Jonathan’s guess, the Möbius–Pago Pago hypothesis was reproduced as fact in Adrienne Raphel’s dissertation “The Crossword Mentality in Modern Literature and Culture” (Harvard, 2018): “In 1986, Robert Guilbert, a former ad copywriter from Milwaukee who enjoyed spending his retirement doing the puzzle, invented a game called Pago Pago, an infinite crossword on a Möbius strip, and began to peddle it around to crossword fans.” The same sentence appears in Raphel’s book Thinking Inside the Box (2020). The game of telephone continues in Natan Last’s Across the Universe (2025): “he’d invented a game called Pago Pago, an infinite crossword on a Möbius strip, and wanted to hawk it to the greats.”

But what does a crossword on a Möbius strip look like, anyway? said I to myself.

Presumably it would be a crossword that loops around on itself from bottom to top (and vice versa). A crossword that does that on all four edges would be “toroidal,” like this one (which I found on Keith Calkins’ “tori crosswords” page, although I infer that Jeff Weeks was the author):

Jeff Weeks has made a bunch of these; see this PDF from MoMath. In fact he’s even made crosswords “on a Klein bottle.” Here the right and left edges connect as before, while the top and bottom edges connect with a Möbius half-twist.

The above crossword is neat because despite being 5x5, its two longest entries are 9 letters each. But it’s less than perfectly satisfying in that half of the Across entries read right-to-left; and in that if it actually wrapped around on itself with a half-twist, wouldn’t the letters wind up backwards too? Then 6-Down wouldn’t be MESSENGER but rather MESSENGER, and so on. (2-Down mirror-reverses very nicely, though!)

Now, a real mathematical Möbius strip, says Martin Gardner,

is what topologists call “nonorientable.” Imagine the strip to be a true surface of zero thickness. Embedded in this 2-space are flat creatures that are mirror-asymmetric (not identical with their mirror images). If such a creature moves once around the band to rejoin his fellows, he will have changed his parity and will have become a mirror reflection of his former self.

If our “flat creatures” are the letter-forms of the crossword entries, then when the crossword loops around on itself the letter-forms will change parity: S becomes S, and so on. So the only letters we seem to be able to use are the vertically symmetric ones, and we’ll have great difficulty constructing any crossword more complex than the following infinite jest:

Or we could loop horizontally with horizontally symmetric letters (HEEHEEHEE…). But to create entries that aren’t infinitely long, we should create a diagonal “ladder” of words instead — as I fancy I see Robert Guilbert doing in that photo! If our “ladder” runs diagonally down and left, like this:

  ABC
 DEF
GHI


then we’ll be able to use letters whose axis of symmetry is on that 45-degree line, such as (of course) O and X, but also L: “LOX” horizontally will flip to produce “XOL” as one of the Down entries. In fact we can also use W, which (if you draw it just right) flips to become E; H, which flips to become I (with serifs); C, which flips to become U; and even D, which (with long serifs) flips to become a nice round capital A. This gives us enough degrees of freedom to create the following Möbius-strip crossword:

Print out this strip and tape the ends together with a half-twist. Fill it out with a heavy ink marker and you’ll find you only need to solve the first five clues — then you can flip the strip over and read off the answers to the last five clues in the letter-forms that have bled through the paper! (Or hold the back of the paper up to the light; or, for the really lazy, just lay a mirror alongside it.)

Mine is not a good crossword. Not only does it have awful fill, it repeats entries: six of the Acrosses are repeated among the Downs. But it was the best three-letter ladder I could find even with computer assistance. My dictionary of possible answers consisted of only 23 pairs of words. (Remember, every Across entry flips into a Down entry: if we have LAW across, we necessarily get EDL down. And since EDL isn’t a word, LAW isn’t in our dictionary either.) Words mirrorable this way of more than three letters are rare as hen’s teeth: HOWL flips into LEO I, ALOE into WOLD, and ALOUD into A COLD; that’s about all.

Can you come up with a better Möbius-strip crossword? or do you have additional information on Robert Guilbert’s Pago Pago project? Email and tell me about it!

See also:

“Fully Schrödinger crosswords” (2025-01-03)

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

27. A year of fighting scrapers on my 1.5 million-page website

Source: https://patronview.com/news/99-percent-of-my-website-traffic-is-bots/
Site: patronview.com
Submitter: petercooper (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-08-07 14:51 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 385 points · 363 comments

Scrape failed: http 403

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

28. Why Are There Statues of Beavers on Top of This Oxford Street Shop?

Source: https://londonist.com/london/history/oxford-street-beavers
Site: Londonist
Author: Zoe Craig
Published: 2017-02-01
HN activity: 54 points · 32 comments
Length: 545 words (~3 min read)
Language: en

We understand how you might've missed Oxford Street's four resident semi-aquatic rodents...

There's plenty to catch your eye on Oxford Street; even more if you raise your gaze above shop level.

If you glance up at the top of 105 to 109 Oxford Street (the building currently home to Tiger and Footlocker), you'll see a strange quartet of creatures decorating the roof.

Four beavers, the top one holding a scroll(!), have been peering down on Oxford Street shoppers for 130 years.
Can you see them now?

This is because 105 to 109 Oxford Street used to be Henry Heath's Hat Factory and for many years, the hats made here were felted with beaver fur.
Photo courtesy of Secret London.

Henry Heath's name and profession are still visible in a brick façade on the back of the former factory on Hollen Street.
Henry Heath's hat factory from Hollen Street.

The factory's primary product was top hats, which were made using felted fur from, according to their adverts, 'Beavers Otter, Rabbits, Hares and Musk rats.'

Beaver: better than rabbit

So why aren't there rabbits, or better still rats, on top of this Oxford Street architectural beauty?

Well, beaver fur was preferred to rabbit fur in hat-making for its water-proofing qualities: in choosing beavers to top his factory, Heath was showing off the quality of his materials.
Photo courtesy of Darkest London.

Beaver hats were a must-have for the fashionable English gent from the 1550s onwards.

The European beaver was hunted to near-extinction for its fur in the 1600s, but the trade was revived when a Hudson's Bay Company started imports from Canada in the early 1700s.

The four Oxford Street beavers sit on top of a factory that employed around 70 people.

The company, it seems, started life back in George IV's reign in 1822; you can see a relief of George next to that date on the front of the building, alongside Queen Victoria, and 1887, the date the factory was built.
An advert by Henry Heath from an American Exhibition, 1884, courtesy of the British Library. See the full ad here.

According to his ads, Henry Heath refused to supply goods to any 'Co-Operative Stores', a bit like Kellogg's refusing to make cereals for anyone else.

If you were buying a Henry Heath hat, you purchased directly from the factory, at cash price and customers could always rely on receiving 'business-like attention'.

Silk: Better Than Beaver

By the mid-1800s, silk was overtaking beaver pelt as the fashionable choice of finish for top hats.

This can only have been a good thing, since working with beaver fur was having rather an unpleasant side effect on the people in factories like the one on Oxford Street.
Men in beaver hats in 1886. Photo from the Kingsley studio.

Factory workers soaked the skins in a orange-coloured solution containing mercuric nitrate; a process called 'carroting'. Vapours from the mercury poisoned the workers' nervous systems, making them prone to tremors, irritability, depression, paranoia, dementia and worse.

By the time Heath's factory was built, the expression 'mad as a hatter' would have been in common usage. Sadly, the effects of exposure mercury were also widely known at this time; but it took a very long time for manufacturing practices to change.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

29. AMD acquires Taalas to boost inference performance by etching models in silicon

Source: https://www.theregister.com/systems/2026/08/06/amd-acquires-ai-chip-startup-taalas-to-boost-inference-performance-by-etching-models-into-silicon/5284344
Site: theregister
Author: Tobias Mann
Published: 2026-08-06
HN activity: 892 points · 669 comments
Length: 957 words (~5 min read)
Language: en-US

In AMD’s latest bid to upset Nvidia's dominance in AI hardware, the House of Zen has acquired AI chip company Taalas, which bakes model weights directly into silicon in a process that promises to boost inference performance by an order of magnitude or more.

The deal, announced at market close on Thursday, appears to be framed in much the same context as Nvidia’s $20 billion licensing deal with Groq last December: make high-performance “premium” inference services prized for AI agents, like code assistants, faster and cheaper to run. AMD didn’t disclose the terms of the deal, but from what we understand, this is an actual acquisition rather than an acquihire.

Founded in 2023 and based in Toronto, Taalas’ approach to inference is radically different from conventional GPUs or the dataflow architectures that underpin Groq LPUs or Cerebras' waferscale accelerators.

REG AD

A model-specific integrated circuit

REG AD

The startup’s chips don’t rely on HBM to store the model weights but rather etch them directly into the silicon. In a sense, Taalas’ chips are really model-specific integrated circuits or MSICs.

Perhaps more importantly, Taalas’ tech isn’t just conceptual. In February, the startup revealed its first test chip fabbed on TSMC’s 6nm process tech, which it called the HC1. Initial benchmarks saw the chip serve Meta’s Llama 3.1 8B at a blistering 16,960 tokens a second — when announced last February, that was 48x faster than Nvidia's GPUs and 8.5x faster than Cerebras' accelerators.

While Llama 3.1 is ancient by today’s standards, having made its debut all the way back in mid 2024, the reticle-sized chip was really intended to prove the concept.

Taalas has been incredibly secretive about how its chips actually work, but we know its processors are comprised of two main regions: the mask-ROM recall fabric where model weights are etched, and the SRAM recall fabric where KV caches and fine-tuning adapters are stored.

For its second-gen HC2 chip due out this summer, Taalas aims to boost parameter count to 20 billion parameters. That might not sound like much, but just like with GPUs for larger models, weights are simply distributed across multiple accelerators using pipeline parallelism.

At 20 billion parameters per chip, you’d need just 50 accelerators to support a trillion-parameter model, and AMD just so happens to have a rack-scale compute platform and in-house system design team that can comfortably accommodate that.

That’s quite a bit more space and power efficient than Nvidia’s recently unveiled LPX systems, which would need a few dozen GPUs and at least 2,000 Groq LPUs to serve the same model.

From what we understand, AMD intends to pair its Instinct-based Helios racks with chips based on Taalas’ tech, which implies a disaggregated architecture where compute-heavy prompt processing is done on GPUs while token generation is offloaded to Taalas-based accelerators.

REG AD

It’s also possible that AMD could adopt a sort of tick-tock cadence in which customers initially deploy and validate models on Instinct accelerators and, once they’re satisfied with them, transition to Taalas accelerators. We can only speculate at this point, but here’s what AMD’s SVP of AI, Vamsi Boppana, had to say about it in a canned statement:

“AMD is building a full-stack AI platform that gives customers the flexibility to deploy the right compute solutions for every AI workload."

You better really love that model

While the tech is blazing fast, if you hadn’t already figured it out, it comes with a pretty substantial downside. Once the chips are deployed you’re stuck with that model. Any change bigger than something like a LoRA adapter is going to require a re-spin of the chips, which is not only expensive but time-consuming.

Nearly four years into the AI boom, new models are rolling out on a nearly monthly basis. In order to benefit from Taalas’ tech, AMD’s customers are going to have to be really sure about their choice of models, which will be easier for some than others.

However, if the startup is to be believed, the situation isn’t quite as bad as it sounds. While new models will require a re-spin, it doesn’t require starting over from scratch. Instead, just two layers of metal need to be changed, which is a lot cheaper and less time-consuming.

With that said, we strongly suspect this tech will largely be deployed by AI model devs, their infrastructure providers, and a handful of inference providers. In an interview with our sibling site The Next Platform in February, the company suggested that etching a model's weights into silicon is 100x less expensive than training a frontier model.

AMD is certainly in a position to negotiate those deals. OpenAI, Anthropic, and Meta are all major Instinct customers. Given the close working relationship between the model houses and the chip designer, it wouldn't be surprising to see a GPT or Claude deployed on a combination of Taalas and instinct accelerators.

REG AD

The tech also has implications for model development. One of the ways developers have cut down on hallucinations is by trading time for accuracy. The technique, called test-time scaling, is quite simple in practice, and involves allowing a model to “think” for longer before responding.

One drawback of test-time scaling is that it consumes substantially more tokens, which makes it expensive, and means users have to wait longer for the chatbot, code assistant, or agent to respond. If AMD’s Taalas buy can drive down the cost per token and boost output speeds by 10x or 20x, model devs may opt to extend the reasoning time even further.

In any case, we may not have to wait long to see just how Taalas fits into AMD’s broader vision. Subject to regulatory approval, the deal is expected to close in the fourth quarter. ®

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

30. Curlese, Five Years Later

Source: https://www.hypertesto.me/en/blog/2026/08/curlese-five-years-later
Site: HyperTesto
Author: HyperTesto
Published: 2026-08-03
HN activity: 12 points · 2 comments
Length: 1.3K words (~6 min read)
Language: en

HyperTesto/
Blog/
Curlese, five years later: curl is still the universal language of broken integrations/

3 August 2026·7 mins

Almost five years ago I wrote a post (in Italian) about what I jokingly called curlese: the practice of using curl as a universal language when an HTTP integration breaks and you need to figure out whose fault it is.1 The idea was simple: instead of arguing with a provider over log files they don’t want to read, you send them a curl command. It’s self-describing, it’s reproducible, and — crucially — it’s not your code, so nobody can dismiss it as “your application is buggy”.

Five years later, I can confirm the thesis held up embarrassingly well. I still do this constantly. But the world around the thesis changed quite a bit, so it’s time for an update: what changed, what didn’t, and what my survival kit looks like in 2026.

What didn’t change #

The social problem is exactly where I left it. Every integration still involves at least two teams, one firewall nobody fully understands, and a conversation that starts with “works on my side”. Your perfectly clear application logs are still worthless in that conversation, because:

the other side can’t (or won’t) interpret your logs
it’s always easier to assume the problem is you
you’re rarely talking to the person who can actually fix it

A curl command with its output solves all three. It’s executable evidence. You can paste it in a ticket, the other team’s network admin can run it as-is, and the verdict is written in plain text. This part of the post needs no update at all, which is either reassuring or depressing depending on your mood.

What changed #

Quite a lot, actually.

HTTP/2 is everywhere, HTTP/3 is no longer exotic. In 2021 a plain HTTP/1.1 exchange was the norm for the kind of integrations I deal with. Now I regularly hit endpoints that negotiate HTTP/2, and occasionally ones where ALPN itself is part of the problem. When a request works from your laptop but hangs from a server, “they speak different HTTP versions” is now a legitimate suspect.

mTLS went from exotic to Tuesday. Client certificates used to be a once-a-year annoyance. Now every second B2B integration wants mutual TLS, which means a whole new category of failures (and of curl flags) that my 2021 self didn’t cover.

Everything is behind a WAF, a proxy, or an API gateway. Which means the error you get is often not from the application but from a bouncer in front of it, with its own ideas about which User-Agent strings deserve to exist. I once spent an afternoon proving that an endpoint worked: the provider’s edge just didn’t like a specific client. The fix was literally changing a header. The proof, as usual, was a pair of curl commands differing by one flag.

The lingua franca gained a new speaker. In 2026, the entity you’re explaining the problem to is increasingly not a human. A curl command with -v output is the perfect thing to paste into an LLM when you’re stuck: it’s complete, unambiguous context with zero setup. Turns out the same properties that make curl ideal for tickets make it ideal for prompts. The machines, too, speak curlese.

The 2026 survival kit #

Everything from the old post still applies (-v, -k, --connect-timeout, --trace-ascii, --trace-time — the last one saved me just a few months ago while chasing phantom delays). Here’s what earned a permanent spot since then:

Flag	Why it’s in the kit
-w '%{time_total} %{time_connect} %{time_appconnect}'	Timing breakdown. The difference between “your server is slow” and “your TLS handshake is slow” is the difference between a ticket that goes nowhere and one that gets fixed.
--resolve host:port:ip	Test a specific IP with the correct SNI/Host, bypassing DNS. Essential when DNS is load-balanced and only some backends are broken.
--connect-to ::alt-host:	Same family: redirect the connection elsewhere while keeping headers intact. Great for testing a staging backend with production URLs.
--cert client.pem --key client.key	mTLS. Half the time the failure is the certificate chain, and curl tells you exactly which certificate it sent and what the server said about it.
--json	Sets Content-Type: application/json and POSTs the data. Small thing, but it removes a whole class of “you forgot a header” mistakes when writing repro commands.
--fail-with-body	Exit code reflects the HTTP status, but you still see the error response body. Perfect for scripts and for humans.
--retry 5 --retry-all-errors	“It fails sometimes” is no longer an acceptable bug report. Let statistics do the talking.
--no-alpn	For those special afternoons when you suspect the HTTP version negotiation itself is the problem. Rare, but when you need it, nothing else will do.

A note on -w: the format string is fully customizable and criminally underused. curl -o /dev/null -s -w 'dns:%{time_namelookup} connect:%{time_connect} tls:%{time_appconnect} total:%{time_total} http:%{http_code}\n' https://example.com gives you a one-line performance autopsy of any endpoint. I have this as a shell alias.2 So should you.

The dictionary, updated #

The old post had a list of frequent error messages and their usual causes. Here’s the 2026 edition, same format with symptom first and likely culprit second:

Symptom	Probably means
connection timed out	No network path. Firewall, routing, or the service is down. Still the #1 hit.
connection refused	Path exists, nothing listening on that port. Service down or wrong port.
SSL certificate problem: unable to get local issuer certificate	Self-signed cert or a CA your trust store doesn’t know. Classic, eternal.
sslv3 alert handshake failure / curl: (35)	TLS versions or cipher suites don’t overlap. Often an ancient server meeting a modern client, or vice versa.
wrong version number	You’re speaking TLS to a plain HTTP port. Or there’s a proxy mangling things in the middle.
HTTP/2 stream errors / resets that vanish with --http1.1	A middlebox or server with a buggy HTTP/2 implementation. Downgrade and retest before accusing anyone.
403 with an HTML page from a product you’ve never heard of	That’s the WAF. Read the page: it usually names the vendor, which tells you whose edge is blocking you.
It works with --insecure but not without	Certificate chain issue. Now you know exactly where to dig.

Spreading the word, reloaded #

The old post closed with a list of phrases to request a curl session from your interlocutors. They were untranslatable then and they’re untranslatable now, so here’s the 2026 English starter pack:

“Can you curl it from your side and paste the output in the ticket?”
“Let’s both run the same command and compare notes.”
“Send me the -v output, not a screenshot of Postman.”3
“You either curl it yourself, or I will curl the hell out of you.”4

Five years on, my advice is unchanged: when an integration breaks, don’t argue, curl it! The command is the contract, the output is the verdict, and the ticket resolves itself. Some technologies come and go; the humble curl invocation, apparently, is forever.

Thanks for reading. And now go spread the verb!5

The original post is here, if you read Italian. Curlese doesn’t really translate; it’s “curl” turned into a language name, with verbs like curlare and nouns like curlata (a single curl invocation, usually performed in anger). ↩︎

It’s called curlopsy (curl + autopsy). Yes, it’s a terrible name. No, I’m not changing it: it has outlived two laptops, and at this point it has seniority. ↩︎

Nothing against Postman. But a screenshot of a GUI is not a reproducible test case, and you know it. ↩︎

Delivery matters: deadpan, in writing, and only with someone you’ve already survived at least one incident bridge with. HR departments are notoriously not fluent in curlese. ↩︎

Yes, verb. The Italian original closed with “diffondete il verbo!” — and in Italian verbo means both “the word” and “the verb”, which makes it the only correct translation. curl is a verb now, conjugate it proudly. ↩︎

