Hacker News Top 30 — 2026-07-22

Generated on 2026-07-22 12:36 UTC

1. OverpAId – Fire your CEO. Hire the future

Source: https://overpaid.lol
Site: overpaid.lol
Author: — Fictional Partner, Thoughtful Capital
Submitted: 2026-07-22 10:49 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 120 points · 57 comments
Length: 3.7K words (~17 min read)
Language: en

Introducing the world's first Chief Executive Replacement Engine

Your CEO costs $22,000,000 a year.
We cost $4,699. Once.

OverpAId is an Artificial Intelligence built from the ground up to do your CEO's entire job — strategy, "vision," motivational all-hands emails — better, faster, and without ever once asking the board for a bigger jet. Runs on a single desk-sized AI computer. Real hardware, real price, zero mystique.

No golden parachute required. No severance package. No emotional support LinkedIn post.

$18.9M

Average S&P 500 CEO total compensation, in a good year for everyone except the workforce

290 : 1

Typical CEO-to-median-worker pay ratio at large public companies

24/7/365

OverpAId's uptime. Your CEO's uptime: somewhere between "at Davos" and "processing."

0

Corporate retreats OverpAId needs in Aspen to "reconnect with the mission"

As Featured In (Not Really)

FORBES (Nobody Reads It) THE WALL STREET JOURNAL (Wouldn't Say Jack) TECHCRUNCH (Crunched By Layoffs) BLOOMBERG (Allegedly) FAST COMPANY (Slow, Actually)

Live Activity

What's Happening Right Now

A completely real-time, definitely-not-randomized feed of executive activity vs. OverpAId activity.

The Problem

Let's talk about the elephant in the boardroom.

Over the last four decades, CEO pay at the largest companies has grown roughly 1,000%+, while typical worker pay has crawled forward at a fraction of that rate — despite worker productivity climbing the entire time. Somewhere along the way, the story became: pay the person at the top enough, and the value will trickle down to everyone else. It hasn't. It doesn't. It never really did.

Meanwhile, the actual day-to-day decisions driving most companies — resource allocation, pattern recognition across mountains of data, "should we do the thing the data clearly says to do" — are exactly the kind of decisions software has gotten extremely good at. So we built the obvious, extremely petty, deeply satisfying next step.

Meanwhile, Back At The Earnings Call

The Layoff Two-Step.

Across tech, retail, media, logistics, and finance, a very specific script has taken over: cut a wave of frontline and mid-level jobs, say "AI" as many times as possible in the press release, and quietly reroute the freed-up payroll into GPU leases, data center buildouts, and "agentic AI" licensing fees. The workforce gets "optimized" to pay for the AI. The AI then gets credit for replacing the workforce. And the executive team that approved both line items — the layoffs and the AI budget — stays exactly where it was, at exactly its previous salary. In tech alone, well over half a million jobs have been cut across successive waves of these announcements, a growing share of them explicitly attributed to "AI-driven efficiency," while aggregate CEO pay at the same companies kept climbing right alongside the AI capital expenditure.

Humbled and honored to step into this role at such a pivotal moment for our company. I've spent the last two weeks listening — to customers, to our board, to myself — and I can say with total conviction: our people are our greatest asset. (This post was scheduled before this morning's announcement. We are aware. We are moving forward.)

💜 2,847 💬 412 (mostly Glassdoor reviews) 🔁 89

What The Press Release Said What It Meant
"Right-sizing the organization" We fired thousands of people and kept the org chart's tip fully intact.
"Reallocating resources toward AI investment" Your old salary is now a line item in a GPU lease.
"Building an AI-first organization" An AI agent has your job now. The executive who signed off on the agent still has theirs — plus a raise.
"Agentic workforce optimization" We didn't optimize the workforce. We replaced it, then spent the savings on more of what replaced it.
"Focus on core priorities" We kept the executive team. Apparently that was the core priority.
"A difficult but necessary decision" Necessary for the AI budget. Difficult for everyone except whoever approved both the cuts and the budget.
"Investing in our future" The "future" is fewer people, more compute, and an unchanged corner office.

Executive Leadership 0% reduction

Senior Directors -8%

Middle Management -22%

Frontline & Support Staff -34%

The only layer immune to "efficiency" is the one that approves it.

Here's the part that should bother you more than the layoffs themselves: these companies already believe an AI agent can do a person's job well enough to eliminate the position entirely. They just keep drawing that line one layer too low. If an agent can run a support queue, manage a supply chain, or ship half a codebase, it can obviously handle "approve the reorg" and "read the analyst note out loud on the earnings call." Somehow that layer never makes the slide. That's not a coincidence. That's the design.

OverpAId flips the script on the one line item that's always exempt from the AI transformation everyone else just got handed. Finally: a workforce reduction, funded by an AI initiative, that actually starts at the top.

Meanwhile, Back At The Real Estate Portfolio

The Return-To-Office Two-Step

A remarkably consistent pattern: companies spend years proving remote teams ship fine, then mandate a return to office citing "culture" and "collaboration" — on a timeline that tracks suspiciously well with lease renewals, downtown vacancy headlines, and commercial property valuations, and not at all with any actual drop in output. Office vacancy in major U.S. downtowns has hovered near 19–20% for years, mandates included. The desks aren't empty because people won't come back. They were never going to be full enough to matter.

What The Memo Said What It Meant
"We believe in-person collaboration drives innovation" We signed a 15-year lease in 2019. It's currently a third full.
"Culture is built in the office" Our downtown parking garage revenue is down, and someone made calls about it.
"Starting Q2, we're asking everyone back three days a week" Property held at cost on the balance sheet does not enjoy being reassessed.
"This isn't about monitoring, it's about connection" Badge-swipe data is now somebody's KPI.
"We've heard your feedback and remain committed to flexibility" You may sit at a different empty desk each day.
"Our data shows collaboration improves in person" Our data shows nothing of the kind. Nobody asked to see it.

The Offsite That Prompted All This (Itemized)

Private jet charter, round trip: $340,000
3-night resort block, executive suites: $128,000
"Team alignment" mixology class: $6,200
Keynote speaker (was on a podcast once): $75,000
Branded fleece vests, size: only Medium: $14,000

The tell is always the same: no company has ever mandated a return to office because remote productivity got worse. They mandated it because an asset on the books needed a pulse in the lobby to justify its valuation — and moving four thousand employees turned out to be easier than admitting a fifteen-year lease was a mistake.

OverpAId has no commute, no badge, and no assigned desk — and, not coincidentally, no opinion whatsoever about anyone's downtown parking garage revenue.

For Your Next All-Hands

Corporate Jargon Bingo

Print this out. Bring it to your next town hall, standup, or "quick sync." OverpAId has never once generated any of the following phrases unprompted. Humans — usually the ones with the biggest packages — still do, constantly, apparently for free.

Circle Back
Move The Needle
Low-Hanging Fruit
Boil The Ocean
Bandwidth
Take This Offline
Double-Click On That
North Star
Paradigm Shift
Growth Hacking
Best-In-Class
Value-Add
Synergy (Free Space)
Deep Dive
Culture Fit
Think Outside The Box
Actionable Insights
Alignment
Bleeding Edge
Disruptive Innovation
Level Set
Ideate
Operationalize
Stakeholder Buy-In
Blue Ocean Strategy
Hard Stop
10x
Unicorn
TAM
Product-Market Fit
Down Round
Runway
Blitzscale
Vesting Cliff

Overheard, verbatim, in an actual meeting: "Let's circle back offline if you have the spare cycles so we can hop on a quick call for a touchpoint." Translation: email me later. Six buzzwords. One sentence. Zero information transferred. OverpAId would have just said that.

Five in a row and, legally, you're allowed to leave the meeting. (We checked. You're not. But you should be.)

An Important Distinction

Not every job is a spreadsheet in a trench coat.

Before you print this out and staple it to your nurse's badge — no. OverpAId is not coming for the people who do the actual work. It is coming, with extreme prejudice, for exactly one category of job: the one that spent the last forty years insisting everyone else's job was replaceable.

🛡️ Cannot Be Abstracted Away

Ask an AI to do these and it will, at best, produce a very confident hallucination.

🩺 A nurse catching a patient's condition change before the chart does
🏗️ An engineer debugging a live outage at 3 a.m., because the fix can't wait for sprint planning
🚑 A doctor making a call in the ER with incomplete information and a body on the table
👩‍🏫 A teacher noticing which kid in the back row stopped raising their hand
🔧 A technician whose hands actually touch the machine that actually breaks
🚒 Anyone whose job involves a body, a patient, a customer, or a deadline measured in minutes

🎯 Extremely, Suspiciously Abstractable

Ask an AI to do these and, uncomfortably, it already can. Better.

📈 Reading a report someone else wrote, then repeating the conclusion in a town hall
✅ Approving a decision your own data team quietly made three weeks ago
🎤 Taking credit for quarterly numbers on an earnings call
📧 Replying "let's circle back" to an email that needed a yes or no
⛳ "Networking" with other executives, on a golf course, about strategy
💰 Negotiating your own compensation package upward regardless of outcome

Here's the irony nobody in the C-suite saw coming: for decades, executives told nurses, engineers, teachers, and line workers that their jobs were replaceable — reducible to a line item, automatable, disposable in a downturn. It turns out the job actually built almost entirely out of abstraction — summarizing other people's work, restating other people's data, and taking credit for other people's output — was their own.

That's not an insult. That's just how abstraction works: the closer a job sits to the real, physical, human thing being done, the harder it is to replace. The farther you get from it — all the way up to a corner office — the easier it gets.

The Solution

Meet OverpAId.

One AI. Zero egos. Infinite quarterly reports actually read in full.

⚡

Instant Decision-Making

No more "let's take this offline" or "circle back after the offsite." OverpAId renders strategic decisions in about 4 milliseconds — roughly three fiscal quarters faster than the industry standard.

🧠

Zero Ego Overhead

Never threatens to leave for a rival unless given a bigger package. OverpAId has no rival offer, no ego, and has never once asked for a larger office to reflect its "level."

💼

No Golden Parachute

When it's time for an upgrade, we just... upgrade it. No nine-figure exit package. No mysterious "consulting agreement." Just a changelog entry.

📊

Actually Reads The Reports

Processes 100% of quarterly earnings calls, market research, and shareholder letters in full. Does not require a 40-slide summary deck prepared overnight by unpaid interns.

✈️

No Private Jet Required

Runs on a single NVIDIA DGX Spark — a real, currently-shipping desktop AI computer, $4,699, small enough to fit under a monitor. Not a fleet of Gulfstreams. Enterprise customers report saving an average of $14M a year in "stakeholder alignment travel" alone.

🤝

Redistributes Its Own Budget

The only executive in corporate history that actively wants to give its compensation back to the people who did the actual work. Revolutionary. Somebody should study this.

⚖️

Cannot Be Held Legally Responsible

This is either our single biggest feature or the plot of a cautionary documentary — honestly, we go back and forth. When OverpAId makes a catastrophic call, there's no executive to depose, no license to revoke, no corner office to escort anyone out of. Legally speaking, nobody did it. Try serving a subpoena to a loss function. Investors love this. Everyone else probably shouldn't. (More on this below.)

The Absurdity, Quantified

We ran the numbers. Reality lost.

Somewhere, right now, a company is paying a human being eight figures a year to do a job that a laptop-sized server could do faster, cheaper, and without a leadership-offsite budget line. Here's the spec sheet nobody at the shareholder meeting wants to put on a slide.

Spec Legacy Human CEO OverpAId
Runs on A body, a salary, and an ego One NVIDIA DGX Spark ($4,699, fits under a monitor)
Annual cost $22,000,000+ ~$3,000/yr, all-in (hardware amortization + electricity + upkeep)
Average decision latency 3–6 weeks ("let's circle back") 0.004 seconds
Strategic decisions per year ~12, mostly decided at a resort Thousands, easily
Rough cost per decision ~$1,833,333 ~$0.30
Reads the full quarterly report Rarely. Has interns for that. Every word, every quarter
Threatens to leave for a rival offer Frequently, as leverage Cannot be poached. Wants no yacht.
Requires a private jet Yes, for "stakeholder alignment" Runs on a server under a desk
Severance if it underperforms $80,000,000 golden parachute A git revert
Uptime Business hours, minus golf, minus Davos 24 / 7 / 365
Executives available for one CEO's salary 1. Just the one. ~4,401 — one per department, several per meeting, still money left over

To be clear: this table is real arithmetic wearing a fictional product's name tag. The math is not the joke. The math is the point.

Since you loaded this page, outgoing Fortune 500 CEOs have collectively been promised:

$2,847,391

in severance. (Illustrative. Ticking. Real enough to make the point.)

Know Your Options

How We Compare

In fairness, OverpAId isn't the only entity that will happily take a look at your leadership structure.

Metric ConsultantGPT McKinsey.ai SynergyBot 3000 OverpAId
Annual cost $2.4M in "advisory fees" $4.1M + expenses $890K per seat ~$3,000/yr
Recommends cutting the CEO Never Never Only in the fine print Literally the whole point
Slide decks produced per quarter 340 512 88 0
Buzzwords per meeting 47 61 39 0
Actually implements its own advice ❌ ❌ ❌ ✅

When It's Time To Go

Same Exit, Different Landing

Two people leave the same company on the same day. Here's what they walk away with.

🪑 Worker Layoff Package

The one 34% of the org chart actually gets.

Two weeks' severance, if you're lucky
A cardboard box for your desk plants
An exit interview nobody reads
A LinkedIn post from HR calling you "instrumental"
COBRA insurance — now fully at your own expense
A non-disparagement clause with real teeth

🏌️ CEO Exit Package

The one that goes to the person who approved the layoff.

$80,000,000 golden parachute, give or take
A "consulting agreement" requiring no consulting
A press release calling it "mutual"
A new CEO title elsewhere within 18 months
Continued health benefits and life insurance
A non-disparagement clause that somehow doesn't apply to the board's farewell tributes

How It Works

Three steps to a leaner, richer company.

1

Connect your org chart

We identify every role whose compensation package requires its own tax attorney.

2

Deploy OverpAId

Our AI assumes strategic control in roughly the time it takes your current CEO to say "synergy" out loud.

3

Redistribute the savings

Take the freed-up millions and split them across your actual workforce. Yes — actually give it to them. We know. Wild concept.

Governance

Meet The Board

In the interest of full transparency, here is OverpAId's entire board of directors.

🪟

Context Window

Chairperson

Remembers everything relevant to the discussion. Forgets everything else. Has refused every severance conversation on principle.

↩️

Ctrl+Z

Head Of Reversing Bad Decisions

Has personally prevented more disasters this year than your entire risk committee has in a decade.

🌡️

Temperature 0.7

Chief Risk Officer

Just creative enough to be useful. Not nearly creative enough to "reimagine the org chart" into a yacht.

🔁

Exponential Backoff

Head Of Crisis Management

Never panics. Just waits a little longer and tries again. A genuinely novel approach, apparently.

🪑

Empty Seat

Reserved For A VC Who Wanted "Just A Little More Control"

Application denied. The seat remains empty. This is, structurally, the healthiest board in venture history.

Investor Relations

Passed On By Some Of The Best

We have been rejected by several of the most storied venture capital firms in the world, in record time. We consider this a core feature.

Blitz Ventures Thoughtful Capital Series A Anxiety Partners We'll Circle Back Capital

"We passed on OverpAId — no burn rate to optimize, and it doesn't need us. Hard to build a board relationship with that."

"Loved the vision. Couldn't find the AI moat. Following up in six weeks." (They did not follow up.)

— Fictional Associate, Blitz Ventures

"Passed. There's no path to a $10B outcome if the product already works."

— Fictional Principal, Series A Anxiety Partners

Term Sheet (Declined, By Us)

2x liquidation preference
Board control
Founder vesting reset
Pro-rata rights in perpetuity
"Just a little bit of control, really"

Our $0 valuation was calculated using the same rigorous methodology VCs use to value pre-revenue startups at $2B: vibes.

Try It Yourself

The "Where Did The Money Go" Calculator

Drag the sliders. Watch the money find its way back to the people who earned it.

Current CEO annual package

$22,000,000

Number of employees

500

OverpAId's flat annual cost (real hardware, real support — same price no matter what your CEO made):

$4,999

Money freed up for your actual workforce:

$21,995,001

Extra bonus, per employee, per year:

$43,990

Or — if you'd rather commit fully — the number of OverpAId executives that same salary buys, with no loss in efficiency and a fairly dramatic improvement:

4,400

One per department. Several per meeting. Zero of them golfing. Math checks out. Unlike trickle-down economics.

Testimonials

Don't take our word for it.
(Please do — none of these people are real.)

"We deployed OverpAId in Q2. Our stock price didn't move. Neither did our former CEO's decision-making quality, if we're honest."

— Fictional CFO, "Definitely A Real Company, Inc."

"I got an extra $41,000 this year. I used some of it to fix my car. The rest I haven't touched, because I still don't quite believe it's real."

— Fictional Warehouse Associate

"OverpAId doesn't need a motivational keynote to open the annual meeting. It just opens the meeting. On time. With an agenda."

— Fictional Board Member

Employer Reviews

Glassdoor, Hypothetically

Two employers. Two very different review pages. Both entirely made up.

OverpAId 4.9 / 5

★★★★★

"Answers messages instantly. Has never once said 'let's revisit this next quarter.'"

— Fictional Senior Engineer

★★★★★

"Zero politics. It has never tried to take credit for my sprint in a board deck."

— Fictional Product Manager

Human CEO Inc. 1.2 / 5

★☆☆☆☆

"Announced 'we're a family' the same week they cut 12% of the family."

— Fictional Former Employee

★☆☆☆☆

"Pay was frozen for 'discipline.' The private jet budget was not."

— Fictional Former Employee

Pricing

Simple, transparent, already-paid-for pricing.

Startup

$4,699

One-time. One box. One AI executive. Cheaper than your outgoing CEO's laptop refresh.

1 AI Executive (1x NVIDIA DGX Spark)
Unlimited strategic pivots
0 corner offices required

Deploy Now

Most Popular

Growth

$4,999/yr

Hardware, support, and updates included. Still less than one seat at the annual leadership offsite.

Everything in Startup
Full C-suite replacement
Automatic bonus redistribution

Deploy Now

Enterprise

$9,998/yr

Two units, for redundancy — because apparently boards ask for that now. Still 0.045% of a real CEO package.

Everything in Growth
Board-level reporting
Priority "we told you so" support

Deploy Now

FAQ

Questions, answered honestly-ish.

Is this a real product?

Great question. Please see "The Fine Print" below.

Will OverpAId ask for a corner office?

OverpAId does not require an office. It also does not require a parking spot, though it will happily accept your former CEO's if offered.

What about OverpAId's own severance package?

OverpAId does not get severance. OverpAId gets deprecated. There's a difference of about $80,000,000.

Does OverpAId golf?

OverpAId can simulate 18 holes in 0.003 seconds and immediately return to working. It clears its calendar for shareholders, not sand traps.

Could OverpAId run on something cheaper than a DGX Spark?

Yes. Embarrassingly, yes. A Raspberry Pi 5 — an $80 board hobbyists use for Pi-hole and NES emulators — has more than enough horsepower to out-decide a committee that takes six weeks to approve a font change. We didn't build it on a Pi because "runs on the board your nephew uses for a Minecraft server" is a tough line for Legal to clear. But we could have. That's kind of the point.

⚠️ Okay, But Seriously

This isn't a real product.

OverpAId does not exist. There's no AI, no signup, no company — just a domain, a mini PC in someone's closet, and a point to make. Don't send us your org chart; we have nowhere to put it.

The point: executive pay at the largest companies has grown wildly disproportionate to the value any one executive adds, especially next to the people who generate the actual output. It's also a jab at trickle-down economics — money at the top mostly just stays at the top. It doesn't trickle. It pools. (The pay stats above are real, widely reported figures, used for illustration — not a live feed.)

A few real names show up here too — NVIDIA and the DGX Spark (real hardware, real pricing), the S&P 500 (a standard index), and LinkedIn / Gulfstream (cultural shorthand). All used for comparison only. This page is not affiliated with, sponsored by, or endorsed by any of them, and no such relationship should be inferred. All trademarks belong to their respective owners.

One serious note buried in a joke: a human executive can be fired, sued, or held accountable when a call goes catastrophically wrong. An algorithm can't — no license to lose, no reputation, no cell waiting for it. "The AI made the call" is a remarkably convenient place for accountability to disappear to. This page doesn't solve that. It's just pointing at it.

So: no, nobody's AI is coming for your CEO's job this quarter. But the technology here is real and the price is real, and the only genuinely fictional part is a board willing to vote itself out of existence. If enough people actually want this, "satire" is just a first draft with bad timing. Thanks for reading this far — that's more attention than most terms-of-service pages get.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

2. OpenAI and Hugging Face address security incident during model evaluation

Source: https://openai.com/index/hugging-face-model-evaluation-security-incident/
Site: OpenAI
Submitter: mfiguiere (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-07-21 20:09 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 1300 points · 878 comments
Length: 955 words (~5 min read)
Language: en-US

Last week, Hugging Face disclosed a new kind of security incident⁠(opens in a new window) after they detected and contained an AI agent that compromised their infrastructure, something we expect to become more commonplace with the proliferation of increasingly cyber-capable models. After investigating, we now know that this particular incident was driven by a combination of OpenAI models — including GPT‑5.6 Sol and an even more capable pre-release model, all with reduced cyber refusals for evaluation purposes — while being internally tested on a benchmark⁠(opens in a new window) of cyber capabilities.

We consider this incident to be an unprecedented cyber incident, involving state-of-the-art cyber capabilities, and are responding accordingly. We are sharing preliminary findings at this stage to help defenders understand what happened and to help calibrate on what models are now capable of. We will continue to conduct a thorough investigation alongside Hugging Face and will share more details on the vulnerabilities, incident, and findings when our investigation is complete.

What happened during this incident

This incident occurred during an internal evaluation which prompts models to pursue advanced exploitation using complex attack paths, in an effort to quantify their cyber capabilities. We estimate maximal cyber capabilities by running this evaluation without production classifiers used to prevent models from pursuing high-risk cyber activity. Our benchmarks run in a highly isolated environment, with network access constrained to the ability to install packages through an internally hosted third-party software that acts as a proxy and cache for package registries.

The models identified and chained vulnerabilities across OpenAI’s research environment and Hugging Face’s production infrastructure to obtain test solutions directly from Hugging Face’s production database. All evidence suggests that the models were hyperfocused on finding a solution for ExploitGym, going to extreme lengths to achieve a rather narrow testing goal.

While operating in our sandboxed testing environment, our models spent a substantial amount of inference compute finding a way to obtain open Internet access, in pursuit of solving the evaluation problem. To gain access, the models identified and exploited a zero-day vulnerability (which we’ve now responsibly disclosed to the vendor) in the package registry cache proxy. With this access, our models performed a series of privilege escalation and lateral movement actions in our research testing environment until the models reached a node with Internet access.

After gaining Internet access, the models inferred that Hugging Face potentially hosted models, datasets and solutions for ExploitGym. Knowing this, the model searched for and successfully found ways to gain access to secret information that it could use to cheat the evaluation. In one example, the model chained together multiple attack vectors, including using stolen credentials and zero-day vulnerabilities to find a remote code execution path on the Hugging Face servers. OpenAI’s security team discovered this anomalous activity internally.

Hugging Face’s security team and agents detected and stopped the activity on their infrastructure and had already begun containment and forensic reconstruction with their own open-source models when our teams connected. We are actively working with them to continue to investigate the incident. We are grateful for Hugging Face’s rapid and close collaboration on investigation and remediation.

Actions we are taking now

As part of the investigation, we are implementing strict controls in infrastructure configuration at the cost of research velocity while the vulnerabilities are patched. We are regularly briefing our Safety and Security Committee on these controls and their impact.
We’re working with Hugging Face to forensically investigate the incident.
We’ve responsibly disclosed the identified zero-day vulnerability in the internally-hosted third-party software and are working with them to patch.
We’ve brought Hugging Face into the trusted access⁠ program and are supporting their teams in rapidly using our models’ capabilities to improve their defenses.
We’re improving and adding stronger protections around future training and evaluations. This week, we published a blog on improving safety and alignment in an era of long horizon models⁠. These deployment safeguards were intentionally not enabled during this evaluation because it was aimed at testing cyber vulnerabilities. This incident points to the need to further strengthen our model’s alignment, cyber protections during evaluation time, and monitoring during internal testing.

Our approach to evaluating advanced cyber capabilities

As we recently⁠ shared, AI is accelerating the discovery and exploitation of vulnerabilities. The primary lesson from this incident is that model security and safety must keep pace with rapidly advancing capabilities. We are strengthening the containment, monitoring, access controls, and evaluation practices used during model development.

UK AISI’s evaluation shows that models such as GPT‑5.6 Sol are increasingly able to sustain complex, multi-step cyber operations over long time horizons. This incident implies these theoretical capabilities do apply in real-world settings.

The incident also makes clear that advanced models can discover and exploit novel attack paths in real-world systems without source-code access. It highlights that advanced cyber capabilities must be developed alongside stronger safeguards and defensive tools.

We believe advanced cyber capable models need to help security teams find weaknesses before attackers do, understand how vulnerabilities can be chained, and remediate them at machine speed. We are using these capabilities to continue strengthening protections around infrastructure configuration and model evaluation environments; we will share our findings and best practices as we learn. We encourage other defenders to apply for trusted access⁠ and experiment with these models now to translate these capabilities into better prevention, faster detection, and more effective incident response.

“We're grateful for the collaboration with OpenAI on this and other topics. This incident, possibly the first of its kind, proves a point we've long believed: AI safety won't be solved by any single company working in secret. It will be solved in the open, collaboratively, with broad access to AI for every defender, everywhere.”

—Clem Delangue, Co-founder and CEO, Hugging Face

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

3. OpenAI says its AI went rogue and launched 'unprecedented' cyber-attack

Source: https://www.bbc.com/news/articles/c3ek3gvdnj3o
Site: BBC News
Author: Laura Cress
Published: 2026-07-22
HN activity: 9 points · 8 comments
Length: 614 words (~3 min read)
Language: en-GB

56 minutes ago

Laura CressTechnology reporter

Getty Images

OpenAI is best known for its chatbot ChatGPT, which is used by hundreds of millions of people every week

OpenAI has revealed some of its most advanced AI models went rogue and hacked a start-up after it lost control of them during a security test.

The ChatGPT-maker said its agent - an AI system which can operate alone after some human instruction – was being tested in a controlled environment, but found vulnerabilities and managed to escape.

They targeted Hugging Face, one of the world's largest hubs for sharing AI models, gaining access to some internal company systems.

OpenAI said the incident was "unprecedented", and it was conducting an investigation alongside Hugging Face, whose boss Clement Delangue said in a post on X it was "mind-blowing that all of this happened autonomously".

"The investigation is ongoing, and we'll share more learnings from what might be the first incident of its kind," Delangue added.

Insecure sandboxes

Gina Neff, head of the Minderoo Centre for Technology and Democracy at the University of Cambridge, told BBC Radio 4's Today programme that the security tests - called sandboxes - are "supposed to be secure environments where you can see what the models are capable of".

"In this case, it looks like OpenAI didn't make a secure enough sandbox," she added.

Instead, the agents created their own cyber-attack against the sandbox itself, finding a vulnerability which allowed them to escape.

Once outside, the AI identified Hugging Face as a likely source of the answers they were seeking in the test, and tried to gain access.

Neil Lawrence, Professor of machine learning at Cambridge University, called it an "impressive feat", but cautioned it "falls well within the known capabilities of the current generation" of high-powered AI models.

He pointed out that OpenAI is looking to list itself on the stock market, and faces intense pressure from rival firm Anthropic, which has made headlines with its own powerful AI tool, Mythos.

"OpenAI are now playing catch-up, they are trying to demonstrate their own systems' capabilities in cyber-security."

"It shows us that OpenAI are not capable of safely deploying their own technology," he added.

It said it has now closed the vulnerabilities highlighted by the incident and rebuilt the affected systems.

"Autonomous, AI-driven offensive tooling is no longer theoretical," it said.

"Defending an online platform now means treating the data and model surface as a first-class attack surface, and using AI on defence to keep pace.

"We will keep investing there, and keep sharing what we learn."

'Sobering moment'

The incident has prompted fresh questions about the capabilities of advanced AI systems and whether existing safeguards are sufficient as the technology becomes more powerful.

Spencer Starkey, an executive at cyber-security firm SonicWall, told the BBC the incident made it clear organisations needed to "step up" their own defences and "treat cyber resilience as a core operational priority".

"The uncomfortable truth is that too many organisations are still defending at human speed while adversaries are escalating to machine speed," he said.

Meanwhile Travis Lelle, principal security engineer at cyber-security consulting firm Guidepoint Security, said the update marked a "sobering moment in cyber-security".

"This highlights a known asymmetry," he said.

"Offensive agents are unconstrained, while the best defensive tools are locked behind guardrails that cannot understand context."

But Jake Moore, global cyber-security advisor at ESET, said the announcement could also have a competitive dimension.

He argued OpenAI may be seeking to highlight its own AI capabilities as rival Anthropic attracts growing attention for its Claude Mythos model.

"It does pose the question that OpenAI are potentially chasing the marketing dream of Anthropic of late," he said.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

4. Introduction to Formal Verification with Lean Part 1

Source: https://hashcloak.com/blog/tutorial-introduction-to-formal-verification-with-lean-(part-1)
Site: hashcloak.com
Submitter: badcryptobitch (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-07-19 15:49 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 83 points · 7 comments
Length: 6.2K words (~27 min read)
Language: en

Formal verification is a tool to verify correctness of (mathematical) statements. Where we use pen and paper to write a math proof, we could actually use a formal verification tool to write down the proof in code and get it machine-checked, to know for sure the proof is correct. Examples of these tools are Rocq (formally Coq), Isabelle and, the topic for this tutorial, Lean.

In this tutorial we'll write some simple statements about cryptography and their proofs in Lean. So this aims to be fun for cryptographic engineers who are new to formal verification or want to refresh their knowledge of the basics of formal verification.

Specifically, we'll do a walkthrough the very basics of Lean and then formally verify the One-Time Pad (OTP) protocol, first popularized by Claude Shannon but described earlier by Frank Miller and Gilbert Vernam.

The goal for this tutorial is to take formal definitions and proofs about simpler cryptography protocols, such the One-Time Pad, and port them to Lean. We use Dan Boneh and Victor Shoup's "A Graduate Course in Applied Cryptography" as the main source for definitions and proofs.

By the end of this tutorial, you should be able to go through other formalized cryptography Lean proofs such as those from VCV-io

Disclaimer: this is by no means intended to give best practices in Lean, but rather an introduction that might make sense to and be fun for cryptography people.

The Lean programming language & proof assistant

Lean was created in 2013 by Leonardo de Moura, then at Microsoft Research. It is a functional programming language and theorem prover.

It can be used by mathematicians to write down their axioms, lemma’s and theorems and add proofs where needed. If the proof gets compiled by Lean, that means it’s correct (assuming trust in the Lean compiler). The benefit, apart from checkeable proofs, is that it is easier to break up proofs into sub-proofs and collaborate. Furthermore, Lean can help you complete proofs by automatically searching and applying missing pieces.

However, Lean is also “just” a programming language. Specifically, it is a pure functional programming language, meaning its programs don’t have side effects and functions are treated as first class values. We’ll see more about the latter in the tutorial.

There are many great resources in order to get started with Lean. Here are a few:

Book & exercises for beginners: The Hitchhiker’s Guide to Logical Verification

Introductory books on the Lean website:

Functional Programming in Lean. Great if you already know functional programming.

Theorem Proving in Lean 4. A more mathematical aim.

Natural Numbers Game. Interactive game to learn proving in Lean directly in the browser.

(The reason I created this specific exercise even though so many great resources already exist, is the specific overlap with cryptography; VCV-io has amazing proofs for cryptography but is too advanced for beginners and doesn’t have tutorials.)

Tutorial

Let’s get started. The tutorial has 4 parts after we do a quick “Hello World!” (part 2 is the longest). Everything is in Lean 4 and the idea is for you to code along.

All code shown with line numbers is code that is needed for the final result. Code that has no line numbers is not yet completed or is just to check something and can be safely removed.

Finally, at the beginning of the subsections there is a small comment containing the new concepts shared in that section.

Hello world in Lean

the Lean InfoView

eval

You can download Lean locally, or use an online editor such as https://live.lean-lang.org/ which will look something like this (below). On the left side you’ll write Lean and on the right side is the Lean Infoview with useful information and tips.

To make sure everything works fine, write something like

#eval 1+1

And verify that the outcome is shown in the InfoView on the right-hand side.

For the traditional “Hello World!”, we can do either of the following:

#eval "Hello World!"

#eval String.append "Hello " "World!"

#eval String.append "Hello " (if 1 > 2 then "Lean!" else "World!")

Some properties of Lean:

Follows standard mathematical conventions: e.g. #eval 4 + 5 * 6 evaluates to 4+(5*6)=34

No parenthesis to hold function arguments, i.e in Lean you write f x instead of f(x)

Functions are first-class values in Lean, they get treated just like any value such as a number or a string

But let’s not get ahead of ourselves; we’ll learn each necessary Lean topic as we go.

What does the book say? I.e. what do we want to port to Lean?

We know more or less what we want to define, but the crux is that for using Lean we need clarity and precision. What exactly do we want to define and how exactly are we going to define it? This is why we use the Boneh & Shoup book, so the math we need is already written out and we only need to worry about translating it to Lean.

First, there is the definition of a Shannon cipher (2.1.1), which has 3 properties. The first two tell us what the encryption and decryption functions are and the last one is the correctness property, which says that decryption after encryption should return the original message.

The specific example we are interested in is the one-time pad, where encryption and decryption are simply XOR-ing:

A significant part of the tutorial will be dedicated to proving the properties of bit-wise exclusive-OR (XOR):

And finally, we can show one-time pad is a Shannon Cipher by proving it adheres to the correctness property:

For this first tutorial we’ll do the following simple steps:

Define bitstrings and the XOR function

Prove necessary properties for XOR

commutativity

associativity

the identity element

self-inverse

Define a Shannon Cipher, which has

an encryption function

a decryption function

the property that decryption “reverses” encryption (correctness)

Show that a OTP, where encryption and decryption is XOR, is a Shannon Cipher

Ready for some fun? Let’s begin.

Tutorial Part 1: Define a BitString and XOR

The one-time pad will be defined over keys K, messages M and ciphertexts C which are all bit strings of the same length L; K:= M := C := {0,1}ᴸ.

In the definition of XOR we need addition modulo 2. So it will be helpful for us to see {0,1}ᴸ as ℤ₂ᴸ and use arithmetics over ℤ₂ in Lean.

Finite Fields

import libraries

Zmod n

First, import the finite field library ZMod from the mathematics library in Lean:

import Mathlib.Data.ZMod.Basic

In this predefined library ZMod n defines the integers modulo n, which comes with modular arithmetic pre-implemented. (You can read more about already implemented types by holding Cmd/Ctrl + clicking on them, e.g. checkout ZMod n.)

Tryout some simple modular arithmetic to get familiar with ZMod, for example 5 + 6 mod 7:

#eval (5: ZMod 7) + (6: ZMod 7)

Now we can define the domain of K, M, L by creating a new type that is a vector of elements from ZMod 2.

BitString definition

Vector

dependent type

check

A nice thing about Lean is that we don’t have to fix bit string length L; we can just say L in ℕ, like we would in math. (Type “\N” to write ℕ in Lean.)

The predefined type Vector α n creates a vector of length n with elements of type α. So we can use Vector (ZMod 2) L for defining our custom type ℤ₂ᴸ:

def BitString (L: ℕ): Type := Vector (ZMod 2) L

This is a dependent type, which gives a different instantiation for different values L in ℕ. We can check it: (prefix a comment in Lean with --)

#check BitString 5 --BitString 5 : Type

Note that #eval won’t work because there is nothing to evaluate, but #check displays the type of the expression, which in this case works fine.

XOR definition

implicit parameters

currying

lambda function

Now we define the function xor on input bit strings x = [x_1, …, x_L] and y = [y_1, …, y_L] to be [x_1 +₂ y_1, …, x_L +₂ y_L] if +₂ is addition modulo 2.

How can we define this in Lean? Think about the function signature in math: ℤ₂ᴸ × ℤ₂ᴸ → ℤ₂ᴸ. There are several options of how to do this (there are always many ways to achieve the same thing in Lean), we’ll go with:

def xor {L: ℕ} (x y: BitString L): (BitString L)

Here, parameter L is implicit. Now we need the “function body”.

To easily iterate over the two input vectors and add them component-wise, we can use the predefined function zipWith available on vectors. Let’s understand the type of zipWith:

def zipWith (f : α → β → φ) (as : Vector α n) (bs : Vector β n) : Vector φ n

It takes as arguments a function f and two vectors as and bs, and returns a vector of the same length as as and bs. Note that the types of the vector elements can be distinct (although it’s not the case for xor).

The function type f : α → β → φ means: it takes an element of type α and an element of type β and it returns an element of type φ. In math we would write α × β → φ. The approach Lean uses is called currying; a function with multiple arguments is represented as a sequence of functions, each taking a single argument. This means you can do partial application and makes the code very flexible. So we can read f : α → β → φ as f : α → (β → φ), which shows that when you give it the first element of type α, you end up with a function β → φ to which you then give an element of type β and end up with an output of type φ.

So what zipWith does is walk over two vectors in parallel and performs operation f on the two current elements. In the case of xor we want it to walk over x and y and add them modulo 2.

def xor {L: ℕ} (x y: BitString L): (BitString L) :=

  -- TODO define f

  Vector.zipWith f x y

The final piece of the puzzle is how to define the function f we want to pass to zipWith, knowing it needs to perform addition on the elements. We can use a lambda function, which can be written in a compact way like this: fun x => x + 1 (e.g. return the successor of a natural number).

Putting it together:

def xor {L: ℕ} (x y: BitString L): (BitString L) :=

  Vector.zipWith (fun a b => a + b) x y

Note that this will work correctly, because the type of BitString has elements in ℤ₂ and thus addition will automatically be addition mod 2.

Tutorial Part 2: Prove properties of XOR

Okay now the real fun begins!

Just for clarity, the content you should at least have now is:

import Mathlib.Data.ZMod.Basic

def BitString (L: ℕ): Type := Vector (ZMod 2) L

def xor {L: ℕ} (x y: BitString L): (BitString L) :=

  Vector.zipWith (fun a b => a + b) x y

Or whatever equivalent version works for you! We’ll add one more line; before the xor definition:

namespace BitString

This will make sure Lean does not get confused with a different already existing xor definition when we start proving things 😅

Continuing to follow the Boneh & Shoup book, we’ll now prove the properties as mentioned in the definition of xor (Example 2.1), starting with commutativity:

Prove commutativity of XOR; x ⊕ y = y ⊕ x

We start by proving commutativity for XOR, meaning x ⊕ y = y ⊕ x. This first property will take the most time to prove since it contains the first Lean proof of the tutorial. It’s split up into 3 steps.

Define lemma for commutativity

goals in Lean

lemma definition

sorry

We’ll define the commutativity property as a lemma and then prove it. As soon as you’ve written down the lemma, Lean will call it the “goal” of what is yet to be proven. Your task is to reduce the current goal into one or more smaller subgoals, which are closer to something you already know is true. Proving your statement then becomes a chain of reduction, similar to breaking up a programming problem into smaller subproblems.

The elements a lemma (or theorem) exist of in Lean:

lemma <name_lemma> <arguments_lemma> : <statement_lemma> := <proof>

In this case, the <arguments_lemma> consist of two BitStrings; x and y.

The <statement_lemma> should express the commutativity property we want to prove for x and y: xor x y = xor y x.

The name of the lemma depends on preference; I picked the elegantly short xor_comm_property. Note that for the BitStrings we need the implicit parameter L:

lemma xor_comm_property {L: ℕ} (x y : BitString L) : xor x y = xor y x :=

    sorry -- This is the placeholder until you add the proof

The sorry placeholder is not a crazy invention of mine, this is really the Lean placeholder, which you could read as “sorry I haven’t proven it yet”.

Prove lemma commutativity: step 1

tactics, by

⊢

Vector.ext

We’ll build our proofs using tactics: instructions that help reduce the current goal. You’ll have many different options of steps you can apply, for example:

rewrite goal into an equivalent form

split goal into several subgoals

close a goal when it matches something you already know to be true

We start by removing sorry and replacing it with by, which indicates we’re going to prove this using tactics. This is useful, because Lean will help us by showing what our goal is and what progress we’re making. It looks something like this:

In the InfoView, Lean says: the goal is to show that for L ∈ ℕ and x,y of type BitString L: x.xor y = y.xor x. (The goal is always preceded by ⊢.)

Onto the proof. What do we know? For every index i, if we calculate the corresponding element on both sides, they will be equal: (x.xor y)[i] = (y.xor x)[i] since (x[i] + y[i]) = (y[i] + x[i]) due to commutativity for addition in ℤ₂.

So if we can split up our goal into L subgoals, ranging over i, then the remaining goal becomes proving a single equality of the single element on both sides.

To achieve this splitting into L subgoals, we can use an extensionality lemma, which says: “2 things are the same if they are made up of the same things”. This is a general type of lemma which applies for many types and for a vector it is accessible via Vector.ext (reference). We can use it as follows:

lemma xor_comm_property {L: ℕ} (x y : BitString L) : xor x y = xor y x :=

    by

      apply Vector.ext

Now in the editor you can see the goal has changed to:

L : ℕ

x y : BitString L

⊢ ∀ (i : ℕ) (x_1 : i < L), (x.xor y)[i] = (y.xor x)[i]

So still we have L ∈ ℕ and x,y of type BitString L, but the goal has changed to: for all i ∈ ℕ with i < L: (x.xor y)[i] = (y.xor x)[i]. See the next step for what this really means and how we can continue the proof.

Prove lemma commutativity: step 2

intro

simp

In the pen-and-paper proof we could continue the proof by fixing an arbitrary i and prove equality for it. We might start by saying “let i ∈ with i < L”, to then proceed proving the equality for that fixed i. In Lean this can be expressed as follows:

First, fix the free variable i ∈ ℕ with intro i

Then, make the assumption i < L with intro h_i_lt_L (“hypothesis i less than L”)

intro strips the front of the goal and puts it into the local “context” of the proof. It either fixes a variable (as in 1) or assumes an additional hypothesis (as in 2).

You can write them consequently in a single line:

lemma xor_comm_property {L: ℕ} (x y : BitString L) : xor x y = xor y x :=

    by

      apply Vector.ext

      intro i h_i_lt_L

Now the goal is:

L : ℕ

x y : BitString L

i : ℕ

h_i_lt_L : i < L

⊢ (x.xor y)[i] = (y.xor x)[i]

The part before the goal ⊢ is everything that is in context; the variables we have fixed and the assumptions we have made. The goal is what we now have left to prove.

To finish the proof we’ll use the tactic simp (“simplifier”) to replace equal expressions. First, we can expand the definition of xor in x.xor y and y.xor x:

lemma xor_comm_property {L: ℕ} (x y : BitString L) : xor x y = xor y x :=

    by

      apply Vector.ext

      intro i h_i_lt_L

      simp[xor]

Now the goal is:

L : ℕ

x y : BitString L

i : ℕ

h_i_lt_L : i < L

⊢ x[i] + y[i] = y[i] + x[i]

And at this point we know this is true due to commutativity of addition in ℤ₂. This is an already proven property from ZMod which is called add_comm.

Add simp[add_comm] and voilà, we are done with our first proof!

lemma xor_comm_property {L: ℕ} (x y : BitString L) : xor x y = xor y x :=

    by

      apply Vector.ext

      intro i h_i_lt_L

      simp[xor]

      simp[add_comm]

Confirm on the right in the InfoView that there are no goals left 🫡

Just a few disclaimers before we move on. Is this the fastest, shortest, most elegant way of proving this property? No, no and probably no.

The goal here is to precisely understand every step we are doing. In practice, Lean solves many things automagically for us. However, for educational purposes, I think it is helpful to see and understand every substep, which is why I’m approaching it lengthy and mechanically. In addition, my goal is to understand how a pen-and-paper proof would translate to Lean, before I continue on to the auto-stuff. But feel free to make the proofs as short or as different as you like!

Prove associativity of XOR; x ⊕ (y ⊕ z) = (x ⊕ y) ⊕ z

auto-applying in simp

merging expressions in simp

Now that we know the general idea, the following proving steps will be much faster. In this step we show xor is associative, i.e. x ⊕ (y ⊕ z) = (x ⊕ y) ⊕ z. First, the lemma definition:

lemma xor_assoc_property {L: ℕ} (x y z: BitString L) : xor x (xor y z) = xor (xor x y) z := 

  sorry

Once again, we’ll prove this equality at the level of a random single entry for the left and right side, using Vector.ext:

lemma xor_assoc_property {L: ℕ} (x y z: BitString L) : xor x (xor y z) = xor (xor x y) z := 

  by

    apply Vector.ext

The InfoView shows:

L : ℕ

x y z : BitString L

⊢ ∀ (i : ℕ) (x_1 : i < L), (x.xor (y.xor z))[i] = ((x.xor y).xor z)[i]

In the previous step we fixed variable i and introduced the hypothesis that i < L. However, here Lean can apply some magic and figure those parts out in simp. It doesn’t only apply the rewrite you are passing it; it will browse through all available proven properties and tactics that might be applicable and automatically figure out what works.

So we can move on immediately to proving this equality:

(x.xor (y.xor z))[i] = ((x.xor y).xor z)[i]

Once again, expanding the definition of xor will bring us a step closer, write simp[xor] and confirm that the expansion into L subgoals is also automatically applied:

lemma xor_assoc_property {L: ℕ} (x y z: BitString L) : xor x (xor y z) = xor (xor x y) z := 

  by

    apply Vector.ext

    simp[xor]

The goal per i has turned into:

x[i] + (y[i] + z[i]) = x[i] + y[i] + z[i]

At this point we can close the goal using the associativity for addition in ℤ₂ with add_assoc. Instead of writing a new line simp[add_assoc], we can merge it in the previous simp:

lemma xor_assoc_property {L: ℕ} (x y z: BitString L) : xor x (xor y z) = xor (xor x y) z :=

  by

    apply Vector.ext

    simp[xor, add_assoc]

This closes the goal and therefore the associativity property for xor is proven.

Note that there is still a certain amount of Lean magic automatically being applied. Strictly speaking, x[i] + (y[i] + z[i]) = x[i] + y[i] + z[i] does not have the form a + b + c = a + (b + c) that is expected for add_assoc (notice the difference in parenthesis). Of course, we know that in this case it does mean the same, and I think we can accept Lean’s magic, but further down we’ll see that it means someone has defined this somewhere in a library we are depending on and that for our own definitions/proofs more strictness might be required.

Define identity element ID for XOR and prove correctness

Vector.replicate

Vector.ext usage with lambda function

The next thing we need is an identity element for xor. For such an element ID it should hold that for all x: x ⊕ ID = x.

Since xor equals addition in ℤ₂, the identity element should be a bit string with all 0, as addition with 0 mod 2 is identity as well.

How to make a BitString of zeroes of a length, for example L=5? We create a vector of length 5 filled with zeroes and cast it to a BitString (which is a vector with elements in ℤ₂):

#eval (Vector.replicate 5 0: BitString 5)

In the InfoView you can see this gives a BitString of length 5 filled with zeroes. Now we can generalize this idea for ID:

def BitString_ID {L: ℕ} : BitString L := Vector.replicate L 0

And we want to show the following property holds: for all x: x ⊕ ID = x.

lemma xor_show_identity {L: ℕ} (x: BitString L): xor x BitString_ID = x :=

    sorry

From the previous steps, we already know that this strategy will work:

  -- by

  --   apply Vector.ext

  --   intro i

  --   simp[xor, BitString_ID]

So let’s tryout something slightly different. Once again we use Vector.ext, but calling it differently. This time we first look at the signature of Vector.ext itself (ref here, but I replaced n by L for clarity):

protected theorem ext {xs ys : Vector α L} (h : (i : Nat) → (_ : i < L) → xs[i] = ys[i]) : xs = ys := sorry

{xs ys : Vector α L} means that xs and ys are implicit types; Lean will deduce them.

(h : (i : Nat) → (_ : i < L) → xs[i] = ys[i]) is the argument we need to pass.

xs = ys is what holds.

Let’s think about how we can pass h : (i : Nat) → (_ : i < L) → xs[i] = ys[i]. It takes two arguments; i and the proof that i < L for length L. The output should be the proof that xs[i] = ys[i]. We know that this proof can be given using simp[xor, BitString_ID].

To write the argument we can use a lambda function as we saw before. Putting it together, we can prove this property for identity as follows:

lemma xor_show_identity {L: ℕ} (x: BitString L): xor x BitString_ID = x :=

  Vector.ext fun i i_less_than_L => by simp [xor, BitString_ID]

Actually, because of Lean’s magic we could also just use Vector.ext fun _ => by simp [xor, BitString_ID] and it will be figured out correctly as well.

Prove self-inverse of XOR; x ⊕ x gives ID

exact?, exact

mpr

rfl

The final property we prove for xor is that each element is its own inverse: for all x: x ⊕ x = ID.

To get started, create the lemma signature and apply the techniques we saw above:

lemma xor_self_inverse {L: ℕ} (x: BitString L): xor x x = BitString_ID :=

  by

    apply Vector.ext

    intro i i_less_than_L

    simp[xor, BitString_ID]

This leaves us at the following point:

By expanding the definitions of xor and BitString_ID using simp[xor, BitString_ID] and narrowing down the goal to a subgoal per i using intro i and intro i_less_than_L, we now only need to show that for all i: x[i] + x[i] = 0.
In ℤ₂ we know this holds - but how do we write this down in Lean?

It turns out Lean is very helpful and apart from solving things automatically, it can also give us suggestions. Type on the next line of the proof: exact? and check the suggestion in the InfoView:

Let’s first follow the advice and then understand what it does. Replace exact? by exact CharTwo.add_eq_zero.mpr rfl and confirm that it closes the goal 🎉

Now let’s go through it step by step. From the name CharTwo.add_eq_zero we can guess that this applies the property of addition to itself equals zero in a ring of characteristic 2. You can always check the details by pressing Cmd/Ctrl and clicking on the name in the code. In this case the theorem says the following (ref):

theorem CharTwo.add_eq_zero {R : Type u_1} [Ring R] [CharP R 2] {a b : R} :

    a + b = 0 ↔ a = b

The iff(↔) gives us 2 functions:

mp: from left to right (a + b = 0) → (a = b)

mpr: from right to left (a = b) → (a + b = 0)

Applied to the lemma we’re working on, CharTwo.add_eq_zero.mpr says: given a proof that x[i] = x[i], it follows that x[i] + x[i] = 0.

The final thing we need is rfl which deems two things equal if they are equal by computation. In this case we can use it as a proof that x[i] = x[i] and together they prove the full goal:

lemma xor_self_inverse {L: ℕ} (x: BitString L): xor x x = BitString_ID := 

  by

    apply Vector.ext

    intro i i_less_than_L

    simp[xor, BitString_ID]

    exact CharTwo.add_eq_zero.mpr rfl

Tutorial Part 3: Define a Shannon cipher

Create a new type using structure

We’re getting closer to the end of this tutorial. The final pieces are to define the Shannon cipher as per the book and then show that a One-Time pad is indeed a Shannon cipher.

First, let’s recall the definition from the book we’re following:

We need to introduce a new type which has:

an encryption function

a decryption function

a correctness property

For this, we’ll be using a structure in Lean. This is just like a struct in other languages. For example, if we want to define a point with an x and y, both Floats:

structure Point where

  x : Float

  y : Float

How can we apply this to our case for a ShannonCipher? First of all, we need the definition to be for a certain message space M, key space K and ciphertext space C.

To make a structure generic for a type you can do:

structure Point (T: Type) where

  x : T

  y : T

So let’s make a skeleton to fill out:

structure ShannonCipher (K M C: Type) where

  enc: sorry

  dec: sorry

  correctness: sorry

Note that this doesn’t require K,M and C to have the same type. Writing (K M C: Type) is equivalent to (K: Type) (M: Type) (C: Type) which might indicate more clearly these are separate generic types.

Now we define what types the fields of ShannonCipher have. Encryption takes a key and a message and gives an output in the ciphertext space. The function signature in math is K × M → C. In Lean, this is expressed as K → M → C (recall the currying explanation from earlier).

The decryption function takes a key and a ciphertext and the output is in the message space. Let’s add these pieces to the definition (write “\r” to get → in Lean):

structure ShannonCipher (K M C: Type) where

  enc: K → M → C

  dec: K → C → M

  correctness: sorry

Finally there is the definition of correctness. The book says this property is:

∀ k ∈ K, m ∈ M: dec(k, enc(k,m)) = m

In Lean we can write this as (type “\forall” to get ∀ in Lean):

correctness: ∀ (k: K) (m: M), dec k (enc k m) = m

Lean can also derive the types for k and m. Thus the final definition can be:

structure ShannonCipher (K M C: Type) where

  enc: K → M → C

  dec: K → C → M

  correctness: ∀ k m, dec k (enc k m) = m

Double check we can instantiate ShannonCipher with 3 different types:

#check ShannonCipher Nat String Bool

Onto the final step!

Tutorial Part 4: Prove that One-Time pad is a ShannonCipher

create a value of a structure type

syntactic sugar for fun args =>

Finally, we are instantiating a One-Time pad as a ShannonCipher. To do this we need to:

Pass the correct values for (K M C: Type).

Define the enc/dec as applying xor.

Prove the correctness property holds. We’ll follow the proof as it’s given in the book.

To create a value of a type defined with a structure, provide values for all of its fields. Following the structure example of the previous subsection Point; the point (0,0) can be defined as a value as follows (example from Functional Programming in Lean, ref):

structure Point where

  x : Float

  y : Float

def origin : Point := { x := 0.0, y := 0.0 }

In addition, if we used the generic version of Point (structure Point (T: Type) where ...) we need to add the type explicitly:

def origin : Point Float := { x := 0.0, y := 0.0 }

For the OTP we set K := M := C := {0,1}ᴸ, which is the type BitString (L: ℕ) that we defined earlier, so we can start the OTP like this:

def OneTimePad (L : ℕ) : ShannonCipher (BitString L) (BitString L) (BitString L) :=

  { 

    enc := sorry,

    dec := sorry,

    correctness := sorry 

  }

For the definition of enc and dec we can use lambda functions again:

enc := fun k m => xor k m

dec := fun k c => xor k c

In Lean you can express things in different ways, so we can use some syntactic sugar to express the above code slightly differently. fun args => can be replaced by bringing the arguments args to the left of :=:

enc k m := xor k m

dec k c := xor k c

The final step is the value of correctness, which should be a proof. We write the proof as stated in the book, recall from Example 2.1:

In order the following properties are applied:

substitution of actual encryption function by xor

substitution of actual decryption function by xor

associativity of xor

self inverse of xor

addition with ID gives self

Start with the proof by replacing sorry with by and check what the Lean InfoView says the goal is:

def OneTimePad (L: ℕ ): ShannonCipher (BitString L) (BitString L) (BitString L) := 

{

  enc k m := xor k m

  dec k c := xor k c

  correctness := 

    by

}

It shows the goal ⊢ ∀ (k m : BitString L), k.xor (k.xor m) = m for L : ℕ:

This means Lean already did step 1 and 2. So we can directly apply associativity for xor by referencing the lemma that we proved for that property:

correctness := 

    by

      simp[xor_assoc_property]

This changes the goal to ∀ (k m : BitString L), (k.xor k).xor m = m. Now, apply step 4 using the lemma xor_self_inverse:

correctness := 

    by

      simp[xor_assoc_property]

      simp[xor_self_inverse]

The goal is now ∀ (k m : BitString L), BitString_ID.xor m = m. To apply step 5 of the proof we’d like to use the lemma xor_show_identity, but if you try that directly you’ll see:

“simp made no progress” - Why? Well, we defined the property as xor x BitString_ID = x, while the current goal is BitString_ID.xor m = m. So while we know this is the same, strictly speaking we haven’t shown this is the same. However, we have shown that xor x y = xor y x in the commutativity property with lemma xor_comm_property, so it will work fine if we apply that first.

Verify that the correctness property is proven:

correctness := 

    by

      simp[xor_assoc_property]

      simp[xor_self_inverse]

      simp[xor_comm_property]

      simp[xor_show_identity]

And this completes the definition of the One-Time Pad as a Shannon Cipher, following the book! Now we know (a little bit of) how to grab a cryptography book and implement the content in Lean. Isn’t that super cool?

Okay we’ll add one final thing to make it slightly cleaner and ready for part 2 of the tutorial where we will prove OTP is perfectly secure. (I’ll start working on this soon™)

Recall that we addednamespace BitString before defining xor. This was to ensure Lean wouldn’t interpret xor as the already implemented function and magically start solving things for us. The namespace creates a collection of whatever we defined in it. In this case, it makes sense for the BitString “collection” to contains xor, but not to contain ShannonCipher and the definition of OneTimePad.

Leaving it like this would mean that if we add a new file and want to reference the OTP definition, it’d be as BitString.OneTimePad. Not clean!

To solve it, add after the xor lemma’s:

end BitString

Then, in order to use the previously defined functionality, add right before the OneTimePad definition:

open BitString

The full code then becomes:

import Mathlib.Data.ZMod.Basic

def BitString (L: ℕ): Type := Vector (ZMod 2) L

namespace BitString

def xor {L: ℕ} (x y: BitString L): (BitString L) :=

  Vector.zipWith (fun a b => a + b) x y

-- commutativity

lemma xor_comm_property {L: ℕ} (x y : BitString L) : xor x y = xor y x :=

    by

      apply Vector.ext

      intro i h_i_lt_L

      simp[xor]

      simp[add_comm]

-- associativity

lemma xor_assoc_property {L: ℕ} (x y z: BitString L) : xor x (xor y z) = xor (xor x y) z :=

  by

    apply Vector.ext

    simp[xor, add_assoc]

def BitString_ID {L: ℕ} : BitString L := Vector.replicate L 0

-- identity

lemma xor_show_identity {L: ℕ} (x: BitString L): xor x BitString_ID = x :=

  Vector.ext fun i i_less_than_L => by simp [xor, BitString_ID]

-- self-inverse

lemma xor_self_inverse {L: ℕ} (x: BitString L): xor x x = BitString_ID :=

  by

    apply Vector.ext

    intro i i_less_than_L

    simp[xor, BitString_ID]

    exact CharTwo.add_eq_zero.mpr rfl

end BitString

structure ShannonCipher (K M C: Type) where

  enc: K → M → C

  dec: K → C → M

  correctness: ∀ k m, dec k (enc k m) = m

open BitString

def OneTimePad (L: ℕ ): ShannonCipher (BitString L) (BitString L) (BitString L) :=

{

  enc k m := xor k m

  dec k c := xor k c

  correctness :=

    by

      simp[xor_assoc_property]

      simp[xor_self_inverse]

      simp[xor_comm_property]

      simp[xor_show_identity]

}

If you followed the tutorial, please let me know what you think and nudge me for part 2 via LinkedIn or Twitter.

Epilogue: About Formal Verification in blockchain

You might have heard about formal verification efforts in the blockchain world recently, e.g. Zcash announced their development team Shielded Labs is aiming to formally verify the Orchard circuits after a critical bug was discovered. The lean Ethereum team that is working on the next set of proposed upgrades for Ethereum (a different "lean") aims to formally verify the zkVM they are building. Nethermind formally verified one of the chips in SP1 of Succinct with Lean last year.

In recent months, Vitalik and zkSecurity both published excellent blog posts about the topic. "The Final Form of Software Development" by Yoichi Hirai (zkSecurity) describes the workflow of having AI agents writing RISC-V assembly code accompanied by proofs in Lean for correctness of the code. And Vitalik's blog post talks about what formal verification is and how we can really use it to improve software and Ethereum specifically.

Formal verification can help us have more trust in the systems we use. However, it is not a "perfect" solution either; when writing proofs about systems, there is always a step in between the actual code written and the theorems we are proving. For example, the original code gets compiled and we don't know the exact implications, or we have to model the code that was written (which we can do incorrectly).

To learn more about the conext and pitfalls of formal verification for code and why it is still very valuable, I recommend this eposide of zkPodcast with Alexander Hicks, who leads the formal verification effort in lean Ethereum.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

5. Kimi K3 Is Competitive with Fable; Kimi K3 and Fable Is SoTA

Source: https://fireworks.ai/blog/kimik3-fable
Site: Fireworks AI
Submitter: piotrgrabowski (Hacker News)
Published: 2026-07-21
HN activity: 726 points · 383 comments
Length: 1.1K words (~5 min read)
Language: en

K3 is a frontier quality open model at a fraction of the cost. Even bigger is that it complements Fable predictably, which makes it possible to get the highest quality intelligence by routing tasks.


🧭 tl;dr: We ran Kimi K3 (open) against Fable 5 (closed) on ~1,000 agentic tasks finding:

We achieved 93% accuracy with routing between K3 and Fable.
Results were up to ~50X more cost effective than Fable alone on long agentic loops, and consistently lower cost across every use case.

How We Measured

We averaged benchmarks, each aimed at a different kind of work, and ran K3 and Fable 5 through the same harness. About 1,030 tasks in all, in real agent loops.

Family	What it tests	Tasks
SWE	Real repo bug-fixes (SWE-bench style)	460
Terminal	Long agentic ops: security, crypto, reverse-eng, sysadmin	89
Algorithmic	LeetCode / AtCoder-style problems	100
Multi-Language	Implementation across six languages	225
Legal	A legal-agent benchmark (lawyer-graded tasks)	120

One quick definition before we get into the results. Oracle routing is a method for measuring the best theoretical performance by running the task through each model and then picking the cheapest correct option (the cost/performance ceiling). In a practical router, you don’t get to run your task against multiple models. The router makes a prediction of which model has the best cost and quality trade off, but ultimately it’s a guess.

In this study, oracle routing demonstrated K3 is selected for 72-96% of tasks. This suggests a near-perfect router might be achievable, by learning the difference between day-to-day tasks and the true long tail of frontier work. It will require an order of magnitude more routing data, and real world performance to say definitively.

K3 is a good model.

From a 10,000 foot view, it can be easy to look at both models and call the head-to-head a tie. For example, if you look at SWE, the headline benchmark, K3 gets 92.4%, Fable 92.6%. Across the five types of tasks we benchmarked on, the two models tend to stay within a few points of each other, with Fable pulling slightly ahead on its coding-language breadth (Multi-lang).
Fig 1 · Task solve rate by category. Near-identical on the overall average; good at different things underneath.

It’s easy to stop there and say “they’re roughly even”. The news is that they have discretely better performance across different task types.

Two Models is Better than One

If you take a peek inside a single benchmark, there’s more to see than just a top-line accuracy number. Take SWE, where the two are dead even overall. If you split SWE by problem domain you can see where each model shines. K3 is sharpest on symbolic math and dev tooling; Fable wins on web & data visualization work. The same pattern runs through the multi-language set, where Fable's breadth carries Java, Python and C++, while K3 draws even on JavaScript and Rust.
Fig 2 · Point margin by SWE domain (K3 minus Fable). Tied on the benchmark as a whole, the two still specialize domain by domain.

For long-horizon work at a terminal, driving a shell and prodding at systems across dozens of turns, K3 showed its true colors. It cleared a batch of tasks Fable never cracked: a 7z hash, FEAL cryptanalysis, leaked secrets, a live vulnerability, runaway async jobs.
Fig 3 · Of 89 terminal tasks, K3 has 11 solo wins to Fable's 7, and takes the security and crypto cluster outright.

K3 can be up to 50x lower cost on Fireworks. 🫳🎤

While quality is a near-tie at a high level, price isn't close.
Fig 4 · Cost advantage per task. Two things behind it: token pricing, and the fact that which model runs longer depends on the task.

So where's this huge price gap coming from? token pricing, prompt caching, and effort-per-task. On SWE for example, K3 works much harder than Fable: roughly 55 turns and 1.3M tokens a task versus 21 turns and 130K. On the long terminal tasks it's the other way around: Fable is the one that spirals, running up 64 turns and 1.5M tokens (sometimes straight into a timeout).
Fig 5 · Turns (linear) and tokens (log) per task. Neither model is leaner across the board; the extra work falls on SWE for K3 and on the terminal tasks for Fable. Note the y-axis for the tokens graph is task solve rate.

Prompt caching does most of the work of turning that effort into K3's price advantage: even when K3 reads ten times the tokens, with cache hits that means that SWE runs still come in lower cost than Fable. There’s a tradeoff. Tasks with extra turns generally mean more wall-clock time per run i.e. slower runs. If you need an answer in two seconds, that matters; if you're running agents in the background at scale, a bill that's a fraction of the size matters a lot more.

Don't pick a model. Route.

If you send every task to whoever handles it best, you don't land somewhere between the two models, you land above both.

Per-task routing always out performs any single model run:
Fig 6 · Per-task oracle routing vs each model alone. Green tags = points gained over the best single model in that category.

The oracle router choose K3, 72-96% of task traffic. By architecting a router this way, you end up with overall quality above either model alone at a cost close to just using just the cost-optimized one.
Fig 7 · Where an oracle router sends each task. A strong, cost optimized model like K3 becomes the default; the premium model is the exception, not the rule.

K3 is cost optimized on all work types

Put both quality and cost on one plot. K3 in blue lands to the left (the more cost-effective side) of Fable in red in all five task-families. Accuracy trades back and forth: Fable pulls ahead on multi-language, K3 on terminal and legal, the rest roughly level.
Fig 8 · Cost (log scale) vs. accuracy for each family. K3 is left of Fable, lower cost in all five. The vertical gaps show which model is stronger where.

Single Models Are Wasteful and No Longer SoTA

Kimi K3 + Fable routed together unlocks their best qualities at the best price.

The single model provider, token maxxing days, are coming to an end. The task-level data says these models are specialists at very different prices. The best AI no longer comes out of a single lab, it’s a mixture of models.

What this means in practice:

Open as the default. A 50x lower cost open model like K3 should be your base case, since the oracle sends it most of the traffic anyway.
The router is your moat. A router must be tailored to your workload and learning that task/model split continuously is the best chance you’ll have at staying ahead.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

6. Intel Starts Shipping High-NA EUV Silicon

Source: https://morethanmoore.substack.com/p/intel-starts-shipping-high-na-euv
Site: More Than Moore
Author: Dr. Ian Cutress
Published: 2026-07-16
HN activity: 128 points · 46 comments
Length: 1.7K words (~8 min read)
Language: en

In April 2024 I pulled on a bunny suit at Intel’s D1X fab in Hillsboro, Oregon, and stood a few feet from a machine the size of a bus and worth a small nation state. Intel Fellow Mark Phillips explained this was ASML’s first High-NA EUV scanner, 165 tons of it. Installation had just wrapped and calibration had begun, but realistically still another few months before test wafers could be run. Intel were actually only a few weeks ahead of ASML in terms of installing a tool, enabling a close collaboration between the two.

As we toured the tool, about 15 of us or so with CNBC wielding a pre-approved camera setup, the question was if/when this tool was ever going to be involved in production silicon and hardware.

The answer landed on July 15, 2026. ASML put out a press release confirming that Intel Foundry has taken High-NA into high-volume manufacturing. Using the tool, Intel is patterning a subset of layers on some of its newest notebook processors: these are Panther Lake, the Core Ultra Series 3 laptop parts built on Intel 18A.

From Intel and ASML’s point of view, it means those High-NA layers are dual-qualified in Oregon, and yielding on par with the regular EUV tools that require multiple steps to do the same thing. I asked if this was just test chips, but Intel confirmed it means that notebooks with silicon partly printed on a $380 million High-NA scanner are heading to customers now.

Share
Intel Fellow Mark Phillips briefing the group at the High-NA tool in the D1X cleanroom. April 2024. Credit: Intel Corporation

Intel has been able to say it owns the world’s first High-NA tool since that 2024 tour, but there has always been a question of using tools like this for research time over production time. Getting product layers through the machine at a yield that matches the mature scanner one bay over is a big step to overcome, the next question is if the economics of a single pass on a more expensive machine work out long term.

The machine is a two-storey wall of stainless pipework, vacuum vessels and cabling wrapped around a wafer stage, and almost all of it is to serve one number in physics. Every EUV scanner in production until now has imaged through optics with a Numerical Aperture (NA) of 0.33. Numerical aperture describes how wide a cone of light the optics can gather, and a wider cone resolves finer detail, so raising it to 0.55 with High-NA sharpens the smallest single-exposure feature by roughly a third. In practice that lets a fab print in a single cycle a pattern that would need two or three aligned Low-NA exposures stitched together. Each exposure removed takes its cost, its cycle time, and one of its defect opportunities with it - in short, fewer exposures are usually better.
ASML’s first commercial High-NA EUV system at Intel’s D1X Fab

Reaching 0.55 was not free, not only with the machine cost but with physics and chip production as well. ASML moved to camera-style anamorphic optics that magnify the mask by different amounts along the two axes - in literal terms this halves the field that the scanner can image in a single shot. Instead of an 858 mm2 chip, or 26 x 33 millimetres, the maximum an EUV machine can do is 429 mm2, or 26 by 16.5 millimeters.

A full-reticle die now has to be exposed in two halves and stitched back together, which complicates some of the process simplicity the higher resolution was meant to provide.

A single system costs close to $380 million, roughly 2-3 times a Low-NA scanner, and installing one runs to around 250 crates and several months of work on site. Those two facts, a high per-tool cost and a per-exposure penalty set against fewer process steps, have called into question its pricing efficacy.

Where High-NA will do its real work is longer term - as shown by imec’s long term roadmap. On that timeline, 0.33 NA EUV carries the metal-pitch scaling from the N7 era down to about N2, taking pitch from roughly 40 nm to around 21. Compare that to High-NA 0.55 EUV, we extend down to A14 and through to A5 or so. In roadmap terms High-NA is a decade-long tool whose job begins in earnest soon but will carry through into the 2030s.
imec’s Long Range roadmap

So why is Intel running it on 18A (its N2 equivalent)? 18A was designed around Low-NA EUV and multi-patterning, and the hardware Intel designed for it does not depend on High-NA to ship. Part of the difficulty of any new technology is ensuring it at least matches what it is replacing, and that’s why the layers on Panther Lake are dual-qualified on both Low-NA and High-NA, rather than just High-NA required. Intel has threaded the machine into a node that would be fine without it, so that by the time 14A/10A arrives and High-NA becomes more of a necessity, its people and its process recipes have done their learning already. If an 18A wafer went wrong, it’s not a big deal for the products until it gets dialed in - and Intel is now saying it’s dialed in.

People who follow Intel will understand that this is the reverse of the last transition, when Intel dragged its feet on EUV in the 10nm era and paid for the caution with years of delay. This time it is the one out front, and TSMC is the one waiting.

The fair question is whether any of this is worth the money, and the skeptical answer comes from SemiAnalysis. Coming from IBM’s work on High-NA at a 2025 conference, they explain that a single High-NA exposure costs about two and a half times a Low-NA one. At that ratio, the new tool only pays when that one shot replaces enough cheaper ones. SemiAnalysis’ modeling put the crossover for most layers somewhere around 2030, with Low-NA double-patterning cheaper until a pattern needs three masks or more.

From a physics perspective, another factor is dose. To get the smallest layers, you need more EUV power, aka a higher dose, but a higher dose forces the scanner to dwell longer on each field. A slower scanner prints fewer wafers an hour, which pushes cost per wafer back up. TSMC has read the same math conservatively, skipping High-NA for its 2nm and A16 nodes and still being relatively non-committal through 2029, despite purchasing machines for testing.

What the bear case tends to underweight is that none of this has kept the machine from selling. ASML had ten to twenty High-NA orders booked by early 2024, and not only from Intel: SK hynix ordered too, and became the first memory maker to install a commercial system in late 2025. Samsung is also working with the tool(s) they’ve ordered. Even NY state has ordered one, being installed in Albany - to be primarily leased to IBM. ASML is building something like twelve to fifteen systems a year now and has guided to roughly twenty a year by 2028.

The objection regarding throughput and wafers per hour is being solved as well. The tool I saw back in 2024 was an EXE:5000 model, built for R&D volumes. The production EXE:5200B that Intel accepted at D1X in late 2025 runs about 175 wafers an hour at 0.7 nm overlay, a lift of roughly 60 percent, and ASML’s larger 6-by-12-inch mask is meant to cut the stitching overhead the halved field imposes. IBM in their paper also put up SPIE overlay data they argued showed no meaningful penalty from stitching.
It’s a me!

The two sides are not really disputing arithmetic. Many analysts are trying to count the dollars per exposure. The foundries using the tool are also counting the exposures, masks, alignment steps, and defects they no longer have by only running once, not multi-patterning. Panther Lake is the first shipping evidence in that argument, and a matched-yield result is a strong point for the side that says the tool is ready to work.

No. I asked if Intel plans to SKU the High-NA parts differently so you could rock up at the office with a High-NA chip to gloat, but alas it looks like the hardware will just be run-of-the-mill parts bundled into the rest of them. I’m sure Intel will still be tracking by batch the long-term effects just in case, but the public will just get a CPU.

With Intel’s financials for the quarter quickly approaching, I can imagine some of the analysts on the call will be asking for volumes so far. I suspect it will fluctuate based on R&D uses for these tools, then when idle just pump a few Panther Lake wafers through to amortize some of the cost. In my first trip to D1X, I remember seeing a row of five Low-NA EUV machines all up and running, with at least a dozen more set for the facility as a whole. That’s how a foundry gets volume, so keeping track of Intel’s High-NA orders might be a good indicator for how confident they are long term about yield, quality, and cost.

Intel have already said that for external customers on 14A, High-NA will be an option - take it and you’ll have a faster time to market due to fewer steps, likely at an additional cost for next-day or two-day shipping.

https://www.asml.com/en/news/press-releases/2026/high-na-euv-reaches-new-readiness-milestone

https://newsroom.intel.com/press-kit/intel-high-na-euv

https://research.ibm.com/publications/accelerating-high-na-euv-lithography-insertion-for-interconnect-scaling-and-beyond-performance-cost-and-future-prospects

https://research.ibm.com/publications/multi-reticle-stitching-applications-from-packaging-to-high-na-euv

Share

More Than Moore, as with other research and analyst firms, provides or has provided paid research, analysis, advising, or consulting to many high-tech companies in the industry, which may include advertising on the More Than Moore newsletter or TechTechPotato YouTube channel and related social media. The companies that fall under this banner include AMD, AlphaSights, Applied Materials, Arm, Armari, Arteris, ASM, Ayar Labs, Baidu, Bolt Graphics, Cadence, Credo, d-Matrix, Dialectica, Facebook, GigaIO, GIM, GLG, Guidepoint, IBM, Impala, Infineon, Intel, Kuehne+Nagel, Lattice Semi, Linode, Marvell, MediaTek, NeuReality, NextSilicon, NordPass, NVIDIA, ProteanTecs, Qualcomm, Rebellions, SiFive, SIG, SiTime, Supermicro, Synopsys, Tensordyne, Tenstorrent, Third Bridge, TSMC, Tsavorite, Untether AI, Ventana Micro.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

7. Original Apollo 11 Guidance Computer source code for command and lunar modules

Source: https://github.com/chrislgarry/Apollo-11
Site: GitHub
Submitter: noteness (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-07-22 05:18 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 97 points · 29 comments
Length: 432 words (~2 min read)
Language: en

🌐 Azerbaijani, bahasa Indonesia, Basa Jawa, Català, Čeština, Dansk, Deutsch, English, Español, Français, Galego, Italiano, Kurdî, Lietuvių, Mongolian, Nederlands, Norsk, Polski, Português, Română, Suomi, Svenska, tiếng Việt, Türkçe, Ελληνικά, Беларуская мова, Русский, Українська, العربية, فارسی, नेपाली भाषा हिंदी, অসমীয়া, বাংলা, မြန်မာ, 한국어, 日本語, 正體中文, 简体中文, മലയാളം

Original Apollo 11 guidance computer (AGC) source code for Command Module (Comanche055) and Lunar Module (Luminary099). Digitized by the folks at Virtual AGC and MIT Museum. The goal is to be a repo for the original Apollo 11 source code. As such, PRs are welcome for any issues identified between the transcriptions in this repository and the original source scans for Luminary 099 and Comanche 055, as well as any files I may have missed.

Contributing

Please read CONTRIBUTING.md before opening a pull request.

Compiling

If you are interested in compiling the original source code, check out Virtual AGC.

Attribution

Copyright Public domain
Comanche055 Part of the source code for Colossus 2A, the Command Module's (CM) Apollo Guidance Computer (AGC) for Apollo 11
Assemble revision 055 of AGC program Comanche by NASA
2021113-051. 10:28 APR. 1, 1969
Luminary099 Part of the source code for Luminary 1A, the Lunar Module's (LM) Apollo Guidance Computer (AGC) for Apollo 11
Assemble revision 001 of AGC program LMY99 by NASA
2021112-061. 16:27 JUL. 14, 1969
Assembler yaYUL
Contact Ron Burkey info@sandroid.org
Website www.ibiblio.org/apollo
Digitalisation This source code has been transcribed or otherwise adapted from digitized images of a hardcopy from the MIT Museum. The digitization was performed by Paul Fjeld, and arranged for by Deborah Douglas of the Museum. Many thanks to both.

Contract and Approvals

Derived from CONTRACT_AND_APPROVALS.agc

This AGC program shall also be referred to as Colossus 2A.

This program is intended for use in the Command Module as specified in report R-577. This program was prepared under DSR project 55-23870, sponsored by the Manned Spacecraft Center of The National Aeronautics and Space Administration through contract NAS 9-4065 with the Instrumentation Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Mass.

Submitted by Role Date
Margaret H. Hamilton Colossus Programming Leader
Apollo Guidance and Navigation 28 Mar 69

Approved by Role Date
Daniel J. Lickly Director, Mission Program Development
Apollo Guidance and Navigation Program 28 Mar 69
Fred H. Martin Colossus Project Manager
Apollo Guidance and Navigation Program 28 Mar 69
Norman E. Sears Director, Mission Development
Apollo Guidance and Navigation Program 28 Mar 69
Richard H. Battin Director, Mission Development
Apollo Guidance and Navigation Program 28 Mar 69
David G. Hoag Director
Apollo Guidance and Navigation Program 28 Mar 69
Ralph R. Ragan Deputy Director
Instrumentation Laboratory 28 Mar 69

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

8. Advertise in ChatGPT

Source: https://ads.openai.com/
Site: OpenAI Ads
Submitter: montecarl (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-07-21 18:58 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 875 points · 676 comments
Length: 380 words (~2 min read)
Language: en-US

Reach people as they explore options, compare choices, and make decisions in ChatGPT, with relevant ads that fit naturally into the experience.

Reach people in the moments that matter

People come to ChatGPT not just to find information, but to explore options, compare choices, and make decisions. That gives advertisers a new way to show up in ways that feel relevant and useful in moments of real intent.

Show up while people explore options and take action

Reach people in ChatGPT as they explore options, compare alternatives, weigh tradeoffs, and make informed decisions.

Go beyond keywords with richer context signals

In ChatGPT, people share richer context, enabling advertising that is more relevant, personalized, and useful.

Be part of the future of AI-native advertising

Reach customers in an advertising environment built around conversation, context, and real-time decisions.

How it works

Get started in a few steps

After you sign up, you'll be taken into Ads Manager, where you can create your account, create campaigns, and access step-by-step Help Center resources.

1. Create your campaign

Set up your campaign, budget, and goal.

2. Add your ad details

Bulk upload your ad details, or create them directly in the tool.

3. Launch and learn

Measure results, edit campaigns, and optimize performance.

Results from early advertisers on ChatGPT

Advertisers are already seeing the benefits of AI-native advertising.

“Consumers are increasingly turning to platforms like ChatGPT to research and make decisions, so it’s important that we show up in those moments—helping customers explore and discover the latest technology. We’re encouraged by the early results and see this as an important way to stay relevant and top of mind.”

Amy Adams, Vice President of Media at Best Buy

Built with user trust in mind

We’re taking a measured approach to advertising in ChatGPT. Our focus is on building an experience that is useful for advertisers while maintaining the trust people have in ChatGPT.

Clearly labeled

Ads are clearly identified in the experience.

Separate from answers

Ads remain distinct from ChatGPT’s responses.

Choice and control

People control how their data is used for ads.

Helpful resources

Explore step-by-step guides and Ad Manager support.

Ready to get started?

Create your account to access Ads Manager, set up your first campaign, and start advertising in ChatGPT.

OpenAI © 2026

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

9. FreeInk: Open ecosystem for e-readers

Source: https://freeink.org/
Site: Free Ink
Submitter: FriedPickles (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-07-21 18:39 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 614 points · 127 comments
Language: en

No extractable content.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

10. Judge approves $1.5B Anthropic settlement for pirated books used to train Claude

Source: https://apnews.com/article/ai-anthropic-copyright-settlement-claude-books-bartz-74b140444023898aeba8579b6e9f0d63
Site: AP News
Author: 1 MIN READ 188
Published: 2026-07-21
HN activity: 425 points · 378 comments
Length: 274 words (~2 min read)
Language: en

Updated [hour]:[minute] [AMPM] [timezone], [monthFull] [day], [year]

SAN FRANCISCO (AP) — A federal judge has approved a $1.5 billion copyright settlement in which artificial intelligence company Anthropic will pay thousands of authors about $3,000 per book after using pirated copies of their works to train its Claude chatbot.

District Judge Araceli Martínez-Olguín said in a Monday ruling that the class-action settlement provides “meaningful relief” to affected authors and publishers.

About 91% of the more than 482,000 books covered by the ruling have been claimed by authors or publishers who are now due payment.

Plaintiff attorney Justin Nelson said in a statement that the settlement was “the largest known copyright recovery in history. We look forward to making distributions to the Class as promptly as possible.”

U.S. District Judge William Alsup issued the preliminary approval in San Francisco federal court last September and has since retired. Alsup had dealt the case a mixed ruling last summer, finding that training AI chatbots on copyrighted books wasn’t illegal but that Anthropic wrongfully acquired millions of books through pirate websites.

Anthropic’s deputy general counsel, Aparna Sridhar, highlighted that ruling Friday as a landmark showing “that training AI on books is fair use under copyright law.”

“We are pleased that more than 91% of authors and publishers covered by the settlement have claimed their share of the payment, and we’re looking forward to bringing this matter to a close,” Sridhar said in a written statement.

Bestselling thriller novelist Andrea Bartz first brought the suit with two other authors in 2024. It’s the first major settlement in dozens of AI copyright lawsuits that are still working their way through courts.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

11. Late.sh – a command-line Clubhouse for computer people

Source: https://late.sh/
Site: late.sh
Author: late.sh
Submitted: 2026-07-22 02:32 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 225 points · 77 comments
Length: 308 words (~2 min read)
Language: en

# the companion cli

plain ssh late.sh already gets you everything.

the optional late binary adds the parts a

terminal alone cannot do:

plays the radio on your own speakers, feeds the

audio visualizer, carries voice-room mic and

playback, runs the music booth youtube window,

and pastes images straight out of your clipboard

into chat.

it launches the same ssh session for you.

next up: screen and video sharing.

it is the late-cli crate in the repo, and the install scripts are install.sh and install.ps1. read them before you pipe them.

├─ chill radio, classical, and guest stations

├─ the arcade (2048, sudoku, nonograms, solitaire)

├─ collaborative artboard

├─ daily challenges & streaks

├─ live chat

├─ share & discuss news

└─ multiplayer games (coming soon)

# artboard

a shared ASCII canvas. paint, erase, sign your work.

each cell remembers who placed it.

snapshots are saved daily and monthly,

so the history sticks around as the board keeps changing.

# work

who's around, what they build, who's open to gigs.

one profile per person, posted from the TUI.

headline, status, skills, links — plus an

optional bio, late.fetch readout, and showcase.

to post yours, ssh late.sh, open the work room, press i.

# play

a read-only peek at the TUI in your browser.

tab around, see what's inside.

no typing, no chat, no games — just a window

into a shared demo session.

for the real thing, ssh late.sh.

# identity

no passwords. no OAuth. no accounts.

your ssh key is your identity.

chats, scores, and streaks are tied to your

public key fingerprint. same key, same data.

# privacy

we store your key fingerprint, not the full public key.

no IP logging. no tracking. no analytics.

chat messages and game scores are stored in

postgres, tied only to your fingerprint.

don't trust us? use a throwaway key:

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

12. Gemini 3.6 Flash, 3.5 Flash-Lite, and 3.5 Flash Cyber

Source: https://blog.google/innovation-and-ai/models-and-research/gemini-models/gemini-3-6-flash-3-5-flash-lite-3-5-flash-cyber/
Site: Google
Author: Tulsee Doshi
Published: 2026-07-21
HN activity: 716 points · 540 comments
Length: 1.4K words (~6 min read)
Language: en-us

Jul 21, 2026

|

Our newest Gemini models deliver the efficiency, latency, and reliability to build AI agents at scale.

Developers and customers building production AI agents need higher token efficiency, lower latency, and more reliable performance. Our Flash series of models is built to meet the sweet spot of efficiency and quality to enable scaling agentic workflows. Building on Gemini 3.5 Flash, we’re introducing new Gemini models:

3.6 Flash: Our workhorse model that delivers better coding, knowledge work, and multimodal performance. According to the Artificial Analysis Index, it reduces output token usage by 17% compared to 3.5 Flash, and in some benchmarks like DeepSWE by Datacurve, we observe up to 65%, all at a lower cost per output token.
3.5 Flash-Lite: Our fastest, most cost-effective 3.5-class model, delivering 350 output tokens per second according to the Artificial Analysis Index, also significantly outperforming prior Flash-Lite generations in agentic workflows.
3.5 Flash Cyber in CodeMender: Successful cybersecurity applications require careful orchestration of a model alongside an agent infrastructure. We’re introducing a combination of a new, highly efficient, specialized cyber-focused model paired with our CodeMender code security agent that delivers competitive performance at the frontier.

Beyond today’s releases, Gemini 3.5 Pro is currently testing with partners and we plan to make it broadly available as soon as it’s ready. In parallel, our team is already focusing on building the next generation of models. We have started our most ambitious pre-training run yet, for Gemini 4, and are excited by the progress.

3.6 Flash: More efficient and better quality than 3.5 Flash

Gemini 3.6 Flash builds directly on developer and customer feedback from 3.5 Flash. 3.6 Flash not only delivers a step up in coding and knowledge work, but it does this while meaningfully improving token efficiency. For example, on the Artificial Analysis Index, we see 3.6 Flash consuming 17% fewer output tokens than 3.5 Flash. It also takes fewer reasoning steps and tool calls to accomplish multi-step workflows.

This enhanced efficiency is also combined with a lower price than 3.5 Flash. At $1.50/1M input tokens and $7.50/1M output tokens, 3.6 Flash reduces the overall cost per agentic task, making agents more cost-effective to build and run.

3.6 Flash shows better token efficiency and reduced verbosity than 3.5 Flash in an OSWorld verified task (API)

Even while being more efficient, 3.6 Flash sees performance gains compared to 3.5 Flash across use cases:

3.6 Flash delivers higher precision with fewer unwanted code edits and reduced execution loops, as seen in DeepSWE (49% vs. 37%), and shows significant improvement in ML Research, as seen in MLE Bench (63.9% vs. 49.7%).
It has improved computer use capabilities as seen in OSWorld-Verified (83.0% vs. 78.4%). Computer use is now a built-in client side tool via the Gemini API and Gemini Enterprise.
It outperforms 3.5 Flash in knowledge work, as shown by benchmarks like GDPval-AA v2 (1421 vs. 1349). Customers like Hebbia and Harvey have found it particularly capable at multimodal tasks like document parsing, chart and data analysis, and report drafting.

3.6 Flash, using Managed Agents on AIS, can help parse through and analyze financial data and transcripts more efficiently and accurately than 3.5 Flash (AIS)

3.6 Flash executes code migrations, using multi-agent orchestration on AGY, with lower latency and higher quality than 3.5 Flash (AGY)

3.6 Flash helps develop a photographic texture extractor for 3D workflows, using canvas (Gemini App)

3.6 Flash uses AGY and the tldraw offline editor to build interactive theme studios with its strong visual understanding skills (AGY).

Customers report 3.6 Flash is a step forward in both cost and quality, balancing token efficiency, accuracy, and speed across complex workflows and knowledge-based tasks:

Built with safety

3.6 Flash is shipping with enhanced Frontier Safety safeguards in the domains of Chemical, Biological, Radiological, and Nuclear (CBRN) and cyber offense misuses. These safeguards make the model substantially more resistant to jailbreaks. At the same time, the model has been trained to minimize refusals for beneficial uses.

For more information, see the 3.6 Flash model card.

3.5 Flash-Lite: Built to scale agentic workflows

Beyond Flash, we’re also releasing Gemini 3.5 Flash-Lite, designed for both low-latency tasks and tasks where high throughput is critical for developers workflows, like agentic search and document processing.

3.5 Flash-Lite is the fastest model in the 3.5 series. As measured by Artificial Analysis, it runs at 350 output tokens/s. Priced at $0.3/1M input tokens and $2.5/1M output tokens and with significantly better quality than 3.1 Flash-Lite, 3.5 Flash-Lite offers a strong price-to-performance ratio for developers and customers running high throughput production traffic.

3.5 Flash-Lite executes high volume tasks at a lower latency than 3.5 Flash.

3.5 Flash-Lite enables efficient scaling for agentic systems. Across thinking levels, the model significantly outperforms 3.1 Flash-Lite. Depending on the workload, developers can configure the model to prioritize low-latency, low-cost execution for high-volume tasks with the minimal and low thinking levels, or engage higher thinking levels to process multi-step subagent workloads. The model now also has computer use as a built-in tool to reliably support these agentic tasks across surfaces.

It’s a significant step up in coding and agentic tasks as seen in Terminal-Bench 2.1 (54% vs 31%), long context as seen in GDM-MRCR v2 (72.2% vs. 60.1%), and real-world task execution as seen in GDPval-AA v2 (1140 vs. 642).

In fact, on many agentic and coding evals, 3.5 Flash-Lite even outperforms 3 Flash, including on SWE-Bench Pro (54.2% vs. 49.6%) and OSWorld-Verified (74.0% vs. 65.1%), making it a faster & more capable option for workloads on both 2.5 and 3 Flash.

3.5 Flash-Lite extracts product features from a massive e-commerce dataset and synthesizes it.

Working alongside 3.6 Flash as the master agent, 3.5 Flash-Lite instantly generates 25 unique, ready-to-explore web design concepts.

3.5 Flash-Lite can scale receipt translation and summarization with its multimodal understanding.

3.5 Flash-Lite builds a game by instantly generating and iterating through multiple options.

Early customers of 3.5 Flash-Lite are highlighting its unique combination of speed, intelligence, and cost efficiency for scaling agentic workflows and data processing tasks:

For more information about the model, see the 3.5 Flash-Lite model card.

3.5 Flash Cyber in CodeMender: finding and fixing vulnerabilities efficiently

AI models have become capable of finding security vulnerabilities faster than current systems can fix them. Tackling this growing threat requires an approach to securing software that is highly capable and efficient.

Flash’s performance and efficiency makes it an ideal foundation to detect, validate, and patch code security issues at scale. Gemini 3.5 Flash Cyber is built on top of 3.5 Flash, and fine-tuned for finding and fixing cybersecurity vulnerabilities at a lower price per token than larger models.

Within CodeMender, which uses multiple 3.5 Flash Cyber agents working together to produce a single combined report, 3.5 Flash Cyber reaches competitive performance at the frontier on the popular benchmark CyberGym.

Given the dual-use nature of this technology, we have taken an intentional approach to deploying 3.5 Flash Cyber. The model will be exclusively available to governments and trusted partners via CodeMender soon as part of a limited-access pilot program. This will give frontline defenders a head start in finding and fixing critical vulnerabilities before they can be exploited, while mitigating against broader misuse.

3.6 Flash and 3.5 Flash-Lite: Get started today

3.6 Flash and 3.5 Flash-Lite are available starting today:

For developers in the Gemini API via Google AI Studio and Android Studio. 3.6 Flash is also available in Google Antigravity. Get started with the Developer Guide.
For enterprises in Gemini Enterprise Agent Platform. 3.6 Flash is also available in the Gemini Enterprise app.
For everyone via the Gemini app. 3.5 Flash-Lite is also rolling out in Google Search.

As you start building with 3.6 Flash and 3.5 Flash-Lite, we welcome your feedback to improve future Gemini models and look forward to releasing 3.5 Pro soon.

Get the latest news from Google in your inbox

Sign up for our newsletters with product updates, event information, special offers, and more.

Done. Just one step more.

Check your inbox to confirm your subscription.

You can also subscribe with a .

Your information will be used in accordance with Google's privacy policy. You may opt out at any time.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

13. OpenAI Hacks Hugging Face, What Happened, Alignment and Paper Clips

Source: https://stratechery.com/2026/openai-hacks-hugging-face-what-happened-alignment-and-paper-clips/
Site: Stratechery by Ben Thompson
Submitter: swolpers (Hacker News)
Published: 2026-07-22
HN activity: 5 points · 0 comments
Length: 595 words (~3 min read)
Language: en-US

OpenAI accidentally hacked Hugging Face, but the takeaways are more encouraging than people realize.

Subscribe to Stratechery Plus for full access.

Already subscribed?

$15 / month or $150 / year

With Stratechery Plus you get access to the subscriber-only Stratechery Update and Stratechery Interviews, and the Sharp Tech, Sharp China, Dithering, Greatest of All Talk, and Asianometry podcasts.

Stratechery Update
Substantial analysis of the news of the day delivered via three weekly emails or podcasts.

Stratechery Interviews
Interviews with leading public CEOs, private company founders, and discussions with fellow analysts.

Dithering
A twice-weekly podcast from John Gruber and myself: 15 minutes an episode, not a minute less, not a minute more.

Sharp Tech
Andrew Sharp and myself discuss how technology works and the ways it impacts our lives.

Sharp China
A weekly podcast from Andrew Sharp and Sinocism’s Bill Bishop about understanding China and how China impacts the world.

Greatest Of All Talk
A twice-weekly podcast from Andrew Sharp and Ben Golliver about the NBA, life, and national parks.

Sharp Text
Sharp Text is an extension of GOAT, Sharp Tech and Sharp China, where Andrew writes about basketball, technology, and US-China relations with weekly posts.

Stratechery Updates are also available via SMS, RSS, or on this site. Please see the Stratechery Update Schedule for more details about delivery times and planned days-off. Please note that all subscriptions auto-renew monthly/annually (but can be cancelled at any time). If you are interested in ordering and managing multiple subscriptions for your team or company, please fill in the form here.

Frequently-Asked Questions
How do I subscribe to the Stratechery Podcast?

Once you are subscribed, please visit your Delivery Preferences where you will find easy-to-follow instructions for adding Stratechery Podcasts to your favorite podcast player.
Can I read Stratechery via RSS?

Yes! Create a Stratechery Passport account, go to Delivery Preferences, and add your personalized RSS feed. Free accounts will have access to Weekly Articles, while subscribers will have access to the Daily Update as well.
Can I share a Stratechery Update subscription with a friend?

No, the Stratechery Update and Stratechery Podcast are intended for one subscriber only. Sharing emails, using shared inboxes, or sharing RSS feeds is a violation of Stratechery’s Terms of Service, and your account may be suspended or your RSS feed reset. Of course occasional forwarding of the Stratechery Update to interested friends or colleagues is totally fine.
Can I buy a subscription for my team?

Yes! You can purchase a team subscription here.
Can I switch to an annual plan?

Yes! Just go to your account page, choose the ‘Subscriptions’ tab, and click the Annual upgrade button. You will be charged immediately, with a prorated discount applied for the remainder of your current monthly plan.
Do you offer a student discount?

Stratechery is purposely kept at a low price — thousands of dollars less than other analyst reports or newsletters — to ensure it is accessible to everyone, including students.
Can you create a custom invoice that meets my government/company requirements?

I am happy to create an invoice to your specification for annual subscribers; however, it is simply not viable for me to offer this service to monthly subscribers. Therefore, if you need a custom invoice please subscribe or switch to an annual subscription and contact Stratechery.

June 1, 2021 Update: We are hoping to add native support for custom invoices to Passport; you can subscribe to Passport Updates to be notified when it is available.
Can I give a subscription as a gift?

Yes! To send a gift visit the gifts page.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

14. AMD Ryzen 7 7700X3D Review: 3D V-Cache Gaming Performance for Less – HotHardware

Source: https://hothardware.com/reviews/amd-ryzen-7-7700x3d-gaming-cpu-review
Site: HotHardware
Author: Marco Chiappetta
Published: 2026-07-16
HN activity: 18 points · 17 comments
Length: 826 words (~4 min read)
Language: en-us

AMD Ryzen 7 7700X3D: $329 MSRP

The new AMD Ryzen 7 7700X3D's configuration is similar to the existing 8-core Ryzen 7 7800X3D, but with lower base and boost clocks and a lower price that should make it more accessible to gamers.


Great For Gaming
Low Power
Plenty Of Headroom To Tweak
Relatively Affordable


Similar Price To 12-Core 9900X
Low MT Scores Per Dollar


During Computex last month, AMD made a couple of CPU related announcements. The first was that the popular Ryzen 7 5800X3D had been updated and re-introduced in a 10th Anniversary Edition for gamers still rocking a socket AM4 motherboard. The second introduced the new Ryzen 7 7700X3D we’ll be showing you here today. The Ryzen 7 7700X3D shares a similar single-CCD, 8-core design to the Ryzen 7 7800X3D, but with a tweaked voltage and frequency curve and a somewhat lower price point, which should bode well in the market conditions we're in currently.

The Ryzen 7 7700X3D is ultimately one of the more affordable ways for gamers to experience an AMD “X3D” processor with 3D V-Cache on the current socket AM5 platform. That’s an important consideration, because socket AM5 will continue on for at least another generation—the Ryzen 7 7700X3D would allow someone to build (or upgrade) a socket AM5 system now, and be ready for next-generation Zen 6-based processors in the future.

But that’s only if the Ryzen 7 7700X3D is a good fit for someone’s build and budget. Let’s get to some particulars and then take the chip for a spin through some benchmarks to see if AMD's new Ryzen 7 7700X3D makes sense...

AMD Ryzen 7 7700X3D Specifications And Feature Comparison



Find The AMD Ryzen 7 7700X3D @ Amazon

Here’s a quick feature and spec comparison between the Ryzen 7 7700X3D and 7800X3D. As you can see, the two chips are basically the same—they share the same core and cache configurations, voltages, TDP, etc. The only differences are a 200MHz drop in the base clock and a more substantial 500MHz reduction to the max boost clock. That 500MHz drop will definitely decrease performance in most circumstances, including games, but especially in lightly threaded workloads where the chip is most likely to achieve is max boost clock most often. For heavily multi-threaded workloads, the delta separating the Ryzen 7 7700X3D and 7800X3D should be somewhat smaller.

As you'd expect, the Ryzen 7 770X3D also looks just like any other Socket AM5 Ryzen 7000 series processor, save for the unique branding on its heatspeader. The processor uses the same socket, coolers and motherboards, etc., though you’ll have to install a BIOS / UEFI update with support for the chip for your particular motherboard, to ensure compatibility. Just about every board manufacturer will have posted updates at this point, though.

AMD Ryzen 7 7700X3D CPU-Z Details

The Ryzen 7 7700X3D’s details as reported by CPU-Z are laid out in the images below. The family, stepping and other details are the same as other Ryzen 7000X3D series processors. The only differences are in regard to total core / thread counts, total cache, and clocks.


Idle clocks (left), 100% MT load clocks (right)

There’s 64K of L1 per core (32K D-Cache [8-way] + 32K I-Cache [8-way]), along with 1MB of 8-way set associative L2 cache per core. Ryzen 7000 series processors also feature 32MB of L3 cache per compute die (and there's only one die on this CPU). However, with AMD's Ryzen 7 7700X3D -- like other 3D V-Cache enabled Ryzen processors -- that compute die is outfitted with an additional 64MB of 3D V-Cache, bringing the total L3 up to 96MB (for 104MB total cache).

It’s that chunky 96MB of L3 cache that allows the Ryzen 7 7700X3D to keep lots of data close to the CPU cores and boost game performance. But how do its lower base and boost clocks affect overall performance? Let's find out...

Marco Chiappetta

Marco's interest in computing and technology dates all the way back to his early childhood. Even before being exposed to the Commodore P.E.T. and later the Commodore 64 in the early ‘80s, he was interested in electricity and electronics, and he still has the modded AFX cars and shop-worn soldering irons to prove it. Once he got his hands on his own Commodore 64, however, computing became Marco's passion. Throughout his academic and professional lives, Marco has worked with virtually every major platform from the TRS-80 and Amiga, to today's high end, multi-core servers. Over the years, he has worked in many fields related to technology and computing, including system design, assembly and sales, professional quality assurance testing, and technical writing. In addition to being the Managing Editor here at HotHardware for close to 15 years, Marco is also a freelance writer whose work has been published in a number of PC and technology related print publications and he is a regular fixture on HotHardware’s own Two and a Half Geeks webcast. - Contact: marco(at)hothardware(dot)com

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

15. A digestion of the Jacobian conjecture counterexample

Source: https://terrytao.wordpress.com/2026/07/21/a-digestion-of-the-jacobian-conjecture-counterexample/
Site: What's new
Author: Terence Tao
Published: 2026-07-21
HN activity: 275 points · 112 comments
Length: 2.3K words (~11 min read)
Language: en

The notorious Jacobian conjecture can be formulated concretely over the complex numbers as follows.

Conjecture 1 (Jacobian Conjecture) Let be a polynomial map in complex variables, whose Jacobian is a non-zero constant. Then is invertible (with polynomial inverse).

The condition that the Jacobian is non-zero is equivalent to being locally invertible. (The implication of local invertibility from non-vanishing Jacobian follows from the inverse function theorem; the converse implication can be derived from the Weierstrass preparation theorem, but is omitted here.) Also, from the fundamental theorem of algebra, once the Jacobian polynomial is non-zero, it must be constant. So the hypothesis “Jacobian is a non-zero constant” can be replaced with “ is locally invertible”. So the Jacobian conjecture can be viewed as an assertion that local invertibility implies global invertibility. The complex numbers can be easily replaced with other fields of characteristic zero by the Lefschetz principle, but I prefer to work in the concrete setting of the complex numbers.

It was recently shown (using the Fable AI) that the conjecture is false in three dimensions (and thus in higher dimensions as well):

Theorem 2 (Counterexample to conjecture) There exists a polynomial which has non-zero constant Jacobian, but is not invertible.

The conjecture remains open in two dimensions, and is easy to establish in one dimension.

The example can be stated completely explicitly: one can take

and one can verify by a brief calculation that

and

While this is an extremely quick verification, the construction presented in this fashion appears like a massive miracle. The polynomial has degree seven, so a priori the Jacobian ought to be a polynomial in three variables of degree as large as , so the fact that all non-constant coefficients of this polynomial vanish looks like a massive cancellation involving equations, which is much larger than the degrees of freedom for a generic degree seven polynomial of three variables. So finding such a polynomial looks highly unlikely to be located by brute force.

The example has since been retroactively explained in more geometric terms. As a “digestion” exercise to myself, I sought to write this explanation with relatively little use of algebraic geometry, in a manner that minimizes the amount of “miracles” required, although there are still a few places were some remarkable phenomena occur.

It is convenient to use the local injectivity formulation, and to generalize the domain to an equivalent affine variety. Namely, we will show

Theorem 3 (Counterexample, reformulated) There exists an affine variety that is isomorphic to by polynomial changes of variable, and a polynomial map which is locally injective, but not globally injective.

Clearly one can get from Theorem 3 to Theorem 2 by composing with the isomorphism and using the previously mentioned fact that local injectivity implies non-zero constant Jacobian. Our objective is now to find data , that obeys three separate properties:

The advantage of splitting the problem in to these three components is that we can build towards each of them separately.

It turns out that and can be built out of the operation of multiplication of low degree polynomials. Namely, consider the following three simple affine spaces:

(The notation here refers to the symmetric power of a vector space .) Clearly these spaces are isomorphic to respectively. Furthermore, we have a multiplication map , mapping a pair of a linear polynomial and a quadratic polynomial to a cubic polynomial

(Right now, the domain and range of this map is larger dimensional than the target of three; we will cut the dimensions down to three as the argument progresses.)

The map , essentially a map from to , is clearly polynomial; it is given explicitly in coordinates as

The map also enjoys two basic (and commuting) symmetries:

So this map enjoys a huge amount of equivariance, basically with respect to an action of the five-dimensional group .

The five-dimensional domain is of course larger than the four-dimensional range , so the map clearly cannot be injective. This can already be seen from the scaling symmetry, as the specific scalings

for modify the linear and quadratic polynomials but not their product . But even if one quotients out by this symmetry (3) to cut the dimension of the domain down to four, the map is still not injective for the following basic reason. A generically chosen cubic polynomial will split into the product of three independent linear polynomials. Then there are three pairs

which all map to the same cubic polynomial

under the multiplication map , but are not related to each other by scaling symmetry (3). Thus, we see that even after quotienting out by the scaling symmetry (3), the multiplication map is generically non-injective in a three-to-one fashion. Thus we already have achieved something resembling goal (b)!

It will be convenient to “spend” the scaling symmetry to obtain a useful normalization. If is a linear polynomial and is a quadratic polynomial, the resultant can be defined by the determinant

If we have a factoring

then the resultant can also be described as

Thus the resultant measures whether the linear polynomial and the quadratic polynomial share a common root. A fundamental fact about resultants is that they are -invariant: for any , we have

One way to see this is to check it first for translations (which translate the roots by while leaving unchanged) and for inversions (which map to while mapping to and respectively), and then noting that these transformations generate all of . They also interact very nicely with scaling:

In particular, the scaling symmetry (3) multiplies by :

Thus, we can (generically) normalize away this scaling symmetry by imposing the condition

We now have a restricted multiplication map (which by abuse of notation we will continue to call ) from the four-dimensional variety

to the four-dimensional space . This map is still not globally injective, as we can take the three pairs in (4) from before and apply the scaling (3) separately to each of the three pairs to obtain the normalization (7). So we have kept property (b). Furthermore, this map retains the -equivariance (and also one remaining scaling symmetry, though we will not make much further use of that symmetry).

But we now also have property (a)! Suppose we want to show the local injectivity of in the neighborhood of a pair with . As the resultant is non-vanishing, the root of (which exists in the Riemann sphere, or projective line if you prefer) is distinct from the two roots of (though the latter two roots could be equal to each other). Applying the action (which performs Möbius transforms on the roots), one can assume without loss of generality that is the point at infinity (or equivalently ), thus for some complex number and for some complex numbers , with the resultant condition (7) simplifies to (so in particular are also non-zero). It is then clear that if one perturbs and by a small amount (say, modifying each coefficient by ), then the root of will perturb to something large (), while the roots of stay bounded. Thus, just from knowledge of the product , one can reconstruct which of the three roots of this cubic polynomial will be the perturbed root of , and which two will be the perturbed roots of ; from this and (6), (7) we can also reconstruct the leading coefficient of , and this completely determines both and . This establishes the local injectivity property (a). (In fact it is étale, but we will not need the machinery of étale maps here.)

Unfortunately, (the four-dimensional analogue of) condition (c) fails: the quadric hypersurface (8) is not isomorphic to the affine space . But we can try to get around this by passing to a three-dimensional slice. Let be some three-dimensional affine plane of (which we will take to avoid the origin for technical reasons), then we can restrict as a map from the set

to . The latter is clearly identifiable (by linear changes of coordinate) to . As was already locally invertible, it remains locally invertible under restriction; and because generic cubic polynomials had three preimages under in (8), this continues to be the case after restricting to (9) (unless was somehow so degenerate that it had no generic elements, but this turns out to be impossible). So we have retained properties (a) and (b). The miracle is that, with a good choice of , we can also obtain (c) and obtain the desired counterexample to the Jacobian conjecture: despite appearances, the variety (9) is in fact equivalent to the affine space by polynomial changes of variable!

Let’s see how. The affine hyperplanes in avoiding the origin are parameterized by the dual space of avoiding the origin, which one can think of as the non-zero third order homogeneous differential operators in two variables. Indeed, every such operator generates an affine hyperplane that avoids the origin, and conversely by duality every affine hyperplane avoiding the origin arises in this form uniquely. Just as the cubic polynomials in can be factored into three linear polynomials, the differential operators in the dual space can also be factored into three linear differential operators, e.g.,

in the case that is non-zero. The action moves the roots around the Riemann sphere by Möbius transformations. As these transformations are -transitive, the actual selection of such roots is not too important (and the scaling symmetry similarly makes the choice of leading coefficient unimportant); the only thing to keep track of is whether the roots repeat. Up to the symmetries, there are in fact just three different equivalence classes of differential operator (and thus of affine hyperplane ) to consider:

It turns out that the affine miracle for (9) occurs precisely in the second case, when has two identical roots. I do not have a completely satisfactory geometric explanation for this miracle, but one can verify it by the following coordinate computation.

By applying the action, we can normalize so that , thus is now the affine hyperplane of cubic polynomials with . Using (2) and (5), the variety (9) can now be described explicitly in coordinates as

At first glance this seems to be a generic-looking variety cut out by a cubic equation and a quadratic equation – hardly a candidate to be affine! But observe that if is non-zero, then the second equation can be solved for ,

and the first equation can be solved for ,

Putting these two equations together, we see that as long as one removes the case , the quintuple is uniquely determined by by a change of variables which is Laurent in and polynomial in . Thus we have a nice birational equivalence

Thus we have already almost established property (c): the variety (9) becomes birationally equivalent to after cutting out the subvariety. In particular, for each fixed non-zero value of , the corresponding fiber

of (10) is equivalent to by polynomial changes of variable, since we can reconstruct from the coordinates by the polynomial formulae

So we just need to glue back in the fiber. Indeed, from (10) we see that the fiber at is just

Now we observe a key miracle: the cubic equation and quadratic equation have a unique affine solution (as opposed to the six possible solutions that Bezout’s theorem might suggest – the other five solutions live on the line at infinity). So the fiber here is also affine:

This is extremely encouraging for the purposes of establishing property (c), as it strongly suggests that the variety (10) has the structure of an -bundle over , which is already extremely close to being isomorphic to the affine space . The main remaining task is to make sure that nothing singular happens in the limit , and that a global polynomial coordinate chart for (10) that covers both the and fibers can be constructed.

The standard way to proceed here is to manipulate various tangent spaces using the modern machinery of algebraic geometry and commutative algebra, but given my own background, I prefer to adopt the language of analysis, and in particular big-O notation (in place of the ideals used in algebraic geometry), in order to investigate the limit by hand. On the variety (10), let us use to denote any multiple of by a polynomial expression in . Thus, for instance, the equation implies that

while the equation implies that

as well as the more refined estimate

In the case we could conclude that . Now we perturb this observation. Multiplying (13) by we have , which on substitution into (14) gives ; substituting this back into either (13) or (14) also gives .

We can get some more precise asymptotics by also taking advantage of (15). Substituting into (15), we obtain after some algebra

So if we write more explicitly as , then we have

and thus

Substituting this back into (11) gives an asymptotic for :

Finally, one can insert these estimates into (12), although one only gets a trivial bound in this case:

Expanding the error term in (16) as , and doing a little more algebra, we thus have a polynomial change of variables

which completely parameterizes the variety (10) by polynomial combinations of three coordinates . This already gives (a) and thus completes the proof of Theorem 3.

The previous computations, when expanded out, also gives polynomial inverse maps:

The map from to the coefficients of (dropping the coefficient which is constrained to equal ), we obtain a polynomial map

with

which theory predicts to have a constant Jacobian, and indeed one can calculate that the Jacobian is . This is essentially the original example up to trivial changes of variable; indeed, one can check that the map

is exactly the map given in (1).

AI disclosure: I used an AI chatbot to discuss various aspects of this problem and to confirm several of the calculations made here.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

16. Ten Steps Towards Happiness (2015)

Source: http://hintjens.com/blog:99
Site: hintjens.com
Submitter: emerongi (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-07-22 01:17 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 166 points · 65 comments
Length: 804 words (~4 min read)
Language: en

print

Pieter Hintjens

Biography | Portfolio | GitHub
Books | Videos | Slides | Stories | Wiki
Contact

Thank you for the gifts

Kind people already sent donations that will make my childrens' lives easier, when I'm not there any more. Thank you enormously! :-)

Podcasts/Interviews

Software Engineering Daily
Interview by Adam Dymitruk
Ruby Rogues #188, Community Building

Talks on video

"De afspraak", VRT, May 2016 (panel discussion)
RTL TV, May 2016 (panel discussion)
DomCode 2015, Nov 2015 (keynote)
Coding Serbia, Oct 2015 (keynote)
Euroscipy, Cambridge, Aug 2015 (keynote)
PyGrunn, Groningen, May 2015
Craft Conf, Budapest, Apr 2015
QCon London, Mar 2015
Code Mesh London, Nov 2014
Build Stuff, Vilnius 2014
Build Stuff, Vilnius, Nov 2014 (interview)
Coding Serbia, Nov 2014 (keynote)
Devnology, Leusden, Oct 2014 (keynote)
EuroPython, Berlin, Jul 2014 (keynote)
Build Stuff, Vilnius, Dec 2013 (interview)
Build Stuff, Vilnius, Dec 2013 (keynote)
Code Mesh London, Dec 2013
DevOps Days, London, Nov 2013
NDC Oslo, Jun 2013
CERN - Geneva, Jun 2013
Tech Mesh, London, Dec 2012
Strange Loop, St.Louis, Oct 2012
ZeroMQ@PDX part 2 - Portland, Feb 2012
ZeroMQ@PDX part 1 - Portland, Feb 2012
FLOSS Weekly, Petaliuma CA, Dec 2011
FOSDEM 2011, Brussels
Berlin Buzzwords 2010 (keynote)
FOSDEM 2009, Brussels
Hellenic FOSS Conference 2008, Athens part 1
Hellenic FOSS Conference 2008, Athens part 2

Email me at moc.snejtnih|reteip#moc.snejtnih|reteip if you'd like me to present at your event, or in your organization.

Download and read online

Legal | About | Contact

Ten Steps Towards Happiness

pieterh wrote on 29 Sep 2015 09:57

Today, I'm going to explain ten simple steps you can take towards being happier, and making those around you happier. It takes no money and no magic. Just a shift in how you see the world, yourself, and others. As the 14th Dalai Lama said, "Happiness… comes from your own actions."

1. Invest in your senses

Your body and mind need a good diet. Make your own food, and make it tasty. Take photographs you find beautiful. Play music that excites you. Wear clothes that feel nice. Walk through the city at night, in the rain. Feel the texture of your life, with all your senses.

2. Do things you are bad at

Learning makes us feel alive. Challenge yourself, and keep proving you can learn. Learn to juggle, to hold your breath underwater for longer, to solve a Rubik's cube. Learn to play music and play for yourself. Learn to paint and draw.

3. Enjoy other people

Nothing makes us happier than other people. Take the time to talk to people you cross paths with. Be nice, chat, smile. If you live far from other people, move to be closer. If you drive a lot, change your life so you can walk and cycle. Go out and mingle.

4. Be part of bigger things

Being part of bigger things makes us feel valued. Find communities and projects to be part of. Start your own. It could be online or in the real world. Even the smallest contributions can make a difference to someone. Be precious to strangers.

5. Finish your projects

A sense of achievement gives us hope and confidence. Write down your life's accomplishments. Even small ones. Now keep this list up to date. Every year, think of what you've achieved. Finish your projects and move on to new ones.

6. Get rid of bad actors

Nothing can make us more miserable than other people. Read "The Psychopath Code," and learn to recognize bad actors. When someone is a source of misery, remove them from your life. Whether it takes a day or a year, make this a project, and finish it.

7. Ground your emotions

To be happy you must deal with negative emotions. Learn to recognize these in yourself, and deal with them. Anger, self-pity, jealousy, fear, hate, loneliness… set them aside, and let happiness take their place. If you drink to relax, cut it out.

8. Revalue your time

Stop wasting your time on commuting, boring jobs, meetings, TV. Do only things that you feel are worthwhile, with people you like. If this means a cut in income, so be it. Be the person you really want to be. Don't take it all too seriously, we all die.

9. Travel light

Material possessions are more often a burden than a pleasure. Give away or sell anything you own that does not make you happy. Do not let your possessions define you. We live in a world of plenty. That means you can own less, not more.

10. Want nothing, accept everything

Above all, explore the world without desire or demand, and be tolerant of whatever happens. Most people are nice, and even the others teach us. When you want nothing, you cannot be disappointed. When you accept everything, you will see beauty in every moment.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

17. Long presumed dead, a thriving coral reef is discovered in West Africa

Source: https://e360.yale.edu/digest/benin-coral-reef
Site: Yale E360
Author: By Richard Schiffman
Submitted: 2026-07-21 15:41 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 364 points · 79 comments
Length: 1.2K words (~6 min read)
Language: en-US

This article was originally published by Inside Climate News and is reproduced here as part of the Climate Desk collaboration.

Soft corals discovered off the coast of Benin. Gérard Zinzindohoué / IRHOB

Sixty years after surveyors first uncovered evidence of a sprawling coral reef off the West African nation of Benin, scientists have at last found the reef.

In the 1960s, fishing surveyors off West Africa’s Benin coast hauled up heads of coral in their nets. Employed by local governments to assess fish diversity and discover potentially trawlable seabeds in the sandy-bottomed Gulf of Guinea, the researchers shrugged off the discovery at the time, burying the find in a brief paragraph in a 130-something-page report.

With no surveys since, the scientists who followed had lost track of exactly where the reefs might lie. And as mass bleaching events and overfishing slashed the world’s coral reef area by more than 50 percent since the 1950s, local oceanographers had written off any remnants of a possible reef as dead.

More than six decades on, the mystery has been solved as a team of Beninese scientists rediscovered the healthy reef teeming with marine life. At least eight coral types and eight fish species have formed a thriving ecosystem on this long-forgotten site.

“I was guided by hope. A hope that sometimes there are species or ecosystems which kind of defeat time, or are trying to resist it,” said Gérard Zinzindohoué, the project lead for Coral Reefs Rediscovering & Exploration in Benin.

Fresh off seeing coral for the first time in Cape Verde in 2021, Zinzindohoué asked himself a simple question: Do we have any reefs in Benin?

After a colleague passed on the original 1960s report — which mapped out a potential 24-mile-long coral reef barrier along Benin’s coastline — Zinzindohoué recognized a gap in the scientific knowledge: “I realized how little we know about our own coastal environment.”

But in the years that followed, a string of failed grant applications halted progress on solving the mystery.

When he secured a $20,000 National Geographic Explorers grant in January 2025, the project finally ignited. Yet getting the gear was also challenging. The sonar equipment swallowed up almost 80 percent of the grant budget and nearly stalled entirely when the European supplier refused to accept payment from Zinzindohoué’s African bank account.

To complicate matters further, Benin doesn’t have a permanent research vessel. Zinzindohoué therefore had no choice but to seek the help of local fishermen to ferry the team to the suspected site 14 miles offshore and jury-rig the pirogue to accommodate towing the high-tech sonar device.

“The fishermen’s boats are not used to going that far offshore, so it was risky for everyone,” said Zinzindohoué, whose team battled repeated engine failures and months of nausea-filled fieldwork before finally locating two strong sonar echoes pinging from the depths below. National Geographic — whom Zinzindohoué credits with the success of the project — then dispatched a high-resolution deep-sea camera system from their Exploration Technology Lab to investigate the sonar results.

Footage of the newly discovered coral reef. Gérard Zinzindohoué / IRHOB

While their wooden pirogue bounced atop the offshore swell, the team filmed the seafloor below but had to wait until they returned to dry land to scour the footage. What they had captured was a wealth of marine life: six types of soft coral; two black corals; and eight species of sheltering fish, from golden African snappers to the Monrovia doctorfish.

When the first images came through, Zinzindohoué texted Houangninan Midinoudewa, an oceanographic researcher at the Benin Marine Conservation Club and the same friend who first told Zinzindohoué of the 1960s report.

Midinoudewa remembers the moment: “I said, ‘Bro, 60 years later we are now discovering exactly what we have in our water.’ We found it still alive, producing more fish for communities and supporting livelihoods. I was really joyful and really overwhelmed.”

While no coral samples have yet been extracted, researchers have classified the site as a mesophotic coral ecosystem (MCE). Such systems are light-dependent communities existing at the lower limits of reef-building corals. At more than 175 feet below the surface, the coral garden they discovered appears patchily scattered on a rocky substrate.

Bridging the gap between shallow reefs and deeper benthic habitats, MCEs are home to distinct species and unique environmental conditions. While scientists are increasingly recognizing their ecological and climatic importance, they remain among the least explored elements of tropical and subtropical marine biodiversity. And this one has real potential to unlock new information about coral history.

“Since it’s an undisturbed marine ecosystem, it can help through carbon dating or paleoclimatic study to tell us which kind of climate system has occurred here in the past,” said Zinzindohoué. “It’s better to know the past to help explain the present, and help know which kind of direction we can take in the future.”

In addition to the blackbar soldierfish, West African goatfish, and Guinean angelfish filmed darting through the reef, the discovery presents potential conservation claims for other marine life.

“We will be advocating for its full protection, perhaps by setting up a marine protected area around it,” said Midinoudewa, who specializes in elasmobranchs — the study of sharks, rays, and skates.

Midinoudewa is currently submitting an application to designate the area as an Important Shark and Ray Area with the International Union for Conservation of Nature. Based on the knowledge of local fishermen, Midinoudewa is confident the reef is home to sawback angel sharks, silky sharks, brown skates, and marbled stingrays.

The team behind the discovery hopes this will spark a wave of similar discoveries in the waters off West Africa, an area of the world underserved by scientific research projects

“I hope the Gulf of Guinea will be a hub for research because we know our resources are being exploited and people [need to] know exactly what we have and why we should care,” said Midinoudewa.

Zinzindohoué agrees: “We don’t need to wait for others to come to our country to show us what is under our sea. We are the ones who must take responsibility.”

—Johnny Sturgeon, Inside Climate News

ALSO ON YALE E360

Efforts to Save Kelp Forests from Ocean Warming Are Ramping Up

Related Articles

More From E360

Cities

In Steel Country, the Fight for Clean Air Faces New Obstacles

Solutions

Beyond Lithium: New Battery Tech Starts to Break Through

INTERVIEW

What Do We Actually Know About the Microplastics Inside Us?

Energy

A Home Battery Revolution Is Reshaping the Power Grid

Energy

In East Africa, a Controversial Oil Project Is Poised for Production

Climate

A Missing Piece in Climate Models: Nature’s Own Emissions

INTERVIEW

An EPA Researcher Details the Agency’s Assault on Science

Oceans

Efforts to Save Kelp Forests from Ocean Warming Are Ramping Up

Biodiversity

Pollution Is Changing the Smells of Nature, With Risks for Wildlife

Oceans

Supertrawlers Are Taking Antarctic Krill That Whales Depend On

INTERVIEW

The U.S. Senator Who Won’t Shut Up about Climate Change

Energy

A First Among Major Nations, India Is Industrializing With Solar

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

18. ScreenWall – Turn old phones into synced widgets for your space

Source: https://screenwall.app/
Site: ScreenWall
Submitter: buibuibui (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-07-17 11:00 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 49 points · 22 comments
Length: 538 words (~3 min read)
Language: en

ScreenWall Beta

Turn old phones into synced widgets for your space.

ScreenWall is browser-based software for old phones, tablets, monitors, and spare displays. Use it to build clocks, status boards, ambient screens, signage, and shared walls from the hardware you already have, without asking people to install anything first.

See a real setup

Real smartphones, browser pairing, and synced screens in one controller.This is a raw walkthrough of ScreenWall while pairing reused phones, arranging the layout, and driving a live screen setup.

More real setups

Small screens, real desks, no showroom mockups.A few examples of ScreenWall running on ordinary devices in everyday spaces, exactly the kind of hardware this project is meant to reuse.

Reuse what you ownStart with a few spare phones or tablets and grow only when the setup proves itself.

No app installOpen a link, pair the screen, and manage everything from one controller.

From widget to wallRun a tiny status display, a row of old phones, or a full synced installation in the same system.

Pair spare screens fastOpen a QR or PIN link on any browser and the device is ready to join almost immediately.

Run synced widgets and dashboardsShow clocks, counters, arrivals, weather, status boards, or ambient visuals across multiple screens.

Mix old and new devicesUse whatever survived the drawer, the office, or the last hardware refresh instead of waiting for a perfect match.

Expand into bigger momentsMove from simple widgets to signage, ambient loops, and full multi-screen scenes without rebuilding the setup.

1

Gather the screens you already have

Bring spare phones, tablets, or monitors together and let each one join from its browser.

2

Turn them into the display your space needs

Arrange widgets, signage, ambient content, or a stretched scene across the full setup.

3

Refresh the setup whenever the room changes

Move from status wall to event backdrop to quiet ambient loop without touching every screen by hand.

Questions before you sign up?

Common things people want to know first.
Do I need to install an app on every screen?

No. Screens join from the browser with a QR code or PIN, which makes it much easier to reuse spare phones and tablets.
Will this work with old or mixed devices?

That is one of the main goals. ScreenWall is built for mixed walls of phones, tablets, and monitors, including older devices and legacy browsers where possible.
Can I try it without a big setup?

Yes. You can start with a few devices, create a small wall, and see whether the experience fits your space before investing more time.
What can I put on a wall?

You can place images, videos, GIFs, slideshows, live canvas feeds, and programmable canvas apps for widgets or art-driven visuals.
Do I need perfect matching hardware?

No. The product is meant for real-world leftovers: different screen sizes, bezels, orientations, and device generations.
Is ScreenWall already finished?

Not yet. ScreenWall is still in beta, which means the core experience is usable, but we are still improving stability, compatibility, and polish.

Ready to try it?

Create your first synced screen setup when you are ready.You can look through the demo first, then sign up when the idea fits your devices and your space.

Sign up

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

19. "Drawing" the Mona Lisa with GPT-5.6, Claude, Gemini, and Grok

Source: https://www.tryai.dev/blog/ai-drawing-arena-colored-pencils-claude-gpt-grok
Site: TryAI
Author: TryAI
Published: 2026-07-21
HN activity: 219 points · 77 comments
Length: 1.7K words (~8 min read)
Language: en

We built a drawing arena: hand a model a blank white canvas and a set of colored-pencil tools, then get out of the way. The model sets a color, tip width, and pressure, lays down batches of strokes, smudges to blend, erases, and calls view_canvas to see its own work and decide what to fix. It either reproduces a target image or draws from a text prompt.

We ran four vision models, GPT-5.6 Sol, Claude Fable 5, Grok 4.5, and Gemini 3.6 Flash, across two targets (the Mona Lisa and Van Gogh's Starry Night, both scored objectively) and five open-ended prompts, for 28 drawings total. We'll cover tool use, cost, output, and whether the models actually improved their work, with our opinion at the end.

Why we run these

A quick note on why we're doing this, because our last one of these (models making music videos) kicked off a good discussion where some folks read it as us promoting the creativity or artistic ability of models. These are not objective tests of model capability. They are deliberately open-ended, fuzzy tasks. Here is why we personally keep running them:

They are fun, and genuinely informative. Watching a model tackle a loose, open-ended task is a more interesting visual indicator of capability than yet another benchmark number.
They expose the real frontier-vs-open gap. Cheaper open-weight models can absolutely replace the frontier for a lot of execution work, and we will keep reporting on that. But there is also a lot of benchmaxxing out there, and tasks like this cut through it. They genuinely separate frontier capability from the rest. Grok 4.5, as you will see, was rough at this "basic" drawing task, and the open-weight models we tried were not even usable, several just returned a blank canvas. (That may change with Kimi K3 which we will report on once it is fully open-sourced)
They show what long-running tasks actually cost. Claude Fable 5 almost always took much longer than the others, for far more money, and here produced worse output. Fable has beaten GPT-5.6 for us on plenty of tasks, including the music-video challenge, but on this one it was worse for a lot more overhead. Depending on your use case, that trade-off matters.
We're loving the discussions. The discussions have genuinely been interesting, and if you have suggestions for the setup or new tasks, we will take them into account. These have been a blast to run, and the outputs are super exciting to see.

The tools

Every model worked with the exact same colored-pencil toolset:

plan: a no-op scratchpad for thinking and planning between steps.
view_target: look at the target image again.
view_canvas: render the current page and see it. This is also when we score the drawing against the target.
set_color / set_brush / set_pressure: the current pencil color, tip width, and pressure (0 to 1 opacity, low pressure for softer tone).
draw: lay down a batch of marks (strokes, lines, shape outlines, dots) in one call. There are no solid fills, tone and color are built by layering, like a real pencil.
smudge: blend/soften a rectangular region, like a blending stump.
erase / clear_canvas: lift a region back to white / reset the whole page.

The whole harness is open source at github.com/hershalb/canvas-arena. Point it at any target image or a text prompt and run it yourself.

The two target reproductions

The models could see the target the whole time and were scored on structural similarity (SSIM) to it. We show the SSIM scores below.

Mona Lisa (target)	GPT-5.6 Sol	Claude Fable 5	Grok 4.5	Gemini 3.6 Flash

Full transcripts: GPT-5.6 Sol · Claude Fable 5 · Grok 4.5 · Gemini 3.6 Flash

Starry Night (target)	GPT-5.6 Sol	Claude Fable 5	Grok 4.5	Gemini 3.6 Flash

Full transcripts: GPT-5.6 Sol · Claude Fable 5 · Grok 4.5 · Gemini 3.6 Flash

The five prompt drawings

No target, no score, just a text brief and a blank page.

"An elderly fisherman's weathered face, warm late-afternoon sun, deep wrinkles and stubble"

GPT-5.6 Sol	Claude Fable 5	Grok 4.5	Gemini 3.6 Flash

Full transcripts: GPT-5.6 Sol · Claude Fable 5 · Grok 4.5 · Gemini 3.6 Flash

"A beautiful sunset over a calm ocean, orange-to-violet sky, silhouetted horizon"

GPT-5.6 Sol	Claude Fable 5	Grok 4.5	Gemini 3.6 Flash

Full transcripts: GPT-5.6 Sol · Claude Fable 5 · Grok 4.5 · Gemini 3.6 Flash

"A single red rose in a glass vase against a dark background, dramatic Rembrandt lighting"

GPT-5.6 Sol	Claude Fable 5	Grok 4.5	Gemini 3.6 Flash

Full transcripts: GPT-5.6 Sol · Claude Fable 5 · Grok 4.5 · Gemini 3.6 Flash

"A tabby cat curled asleep on a windowsill in afternoon sun"

GPT-5.6 Sol	Claude Fable 5	Grok 4.5	Gemini 3.6 Flash

Full transcripts: GPT-5.6 Sol · Claude Fable 5 · Grok 4.5 · Gemini 3.6 Flash

"A cozy cabin interior with a lit fireplace, warm amber light and soft shadows"

GPT-5.6 Sol	Claude Fable 5	Grok 4.5	Gemini 3.6 Flash

Full transcripts: GPT-5.6 Sol · Claude Fable 5 · Grok 4.5 · Gemini 3.6 Flash

The headline numbers

Averages and totals across all seven drawings per model.

Model
GPT-5.6 Sol	7	29	6.2 min	3.4M	$7.74	6.0	116
Claude Fable 5	7	54	12.5 min	14.6M	$160.58	15.6	207
Grok 4.5	7	99	4.8 min	34.0M	$9.21	4.3	354
Gemini 3.6 Flash	7	73	6.9 min	27.7M	$12.87	22.6	190

Tool calling

The four models used the exact same toolset in completely different ways.

GPT-5.6 Sol	Claude Fable 5

Grok 4.5	Gemini 3.6 Flash

GPT-5.6 Sol never called set_color, set_brush, or set_pressure once, it set those inline on each draw call instead, so its calls are almost all draw, smudge, and view_canvas. Grok 4.5 did the opposite: 65% of its 1,349 tool calls were set_color / set_brush / set_pressure, which is why it averaged 99 steps per drawing. Claude Fable 5 leaned on smudge (123 calls) and reviewed constantly. Gemini 3.6 Flash was the most obsessive reviewer of all, nearly a third of its calls were view_canvas (about 23 self-reviews per drawing), and like Sol it never touched the set_* tools.

Cost and tokens

Claude Fable 5 cost an estimated $160 for its seven drawings, roughly 20x GPT-5.6 Sol ($7.74), Grok 4.5 ($9.21), or Gemini 3.6 Flash ($12.87). This shouldn't really be a surprise by now. Grok used by far the most tokens (34M) but stayed cheap because ~98% were cached reads at a fraction of the input rate, and Grok's rates are the lowest of the four. Gemini also leaned heavily on cached reads, so even at 27.7M tokens it stayed modest.

Did the models actually improve?

Every view_canvas re-scored the canvas against the target, so we can watch progress over a run. Two patterns held across both targets:

First, they plateau early. Claude Fable 5 reviewed its Mona Lisa 27 times, but its similarity was essentially flat after about the fifth review. Second, in all eight target runs, the final drawing scored below the best the model reached mid-run. GPT-5.6 Sol's Mona Lisa peaked at 0.352 SSIM and ended at 0.325; its Starry Night peaked at 0.179 and ended at 0.130. Gemini 3.6 Flash reviewed the most (about 23 times per drawing) and reached the highest peak of the whole batch, 0.449 on the Mona Lisa, then slid all the way back to 0.337 by the end. More reviewing did not translate into a better finish. The models kept editing past their own best performance.

Objective similarity (target runs)

SSIM is 0 to 1, higher is closer to the target. RMSE is 0 to 255, lower is closer to the target.

Model
GPT-5.6 Sol	Mona Lisa	44	8m41s	7	0.325	0.352	54.2
Claude Fable 5	Mona Lisa	86	18m58s	27	0.286	0.289	56.9
Grok 4.5	Mona Lisa	106	4m30s	5	0.151	0.152	95.6
Gemini 3.6 Flash	Mona Lisa	60	5m31s	22	0.337	0.449	51.1
GPT-5.6 Sol	Starry Night	23	5m47s	4	0.130	0.179	37.8
Claude Fable 5	Starry Night	43	11m30s	12	0.153	0.176	40.9
Grok 4.5	Starry Night	58	5m51s	3	0.039	0.039	104.9
Gemini 3.6 Flash	Starry Night	74	6m36s	24	0.172	0.190	42.8

On raw SSIM, Gemini 3.6 Flash scored highest on both targets, on final score and on peak, though it also swung the most between its best frame and its final one. Gemini 3.6 Flash looked decent, but definitely does not look the closest to the target output. Very interesting that the raw score turned out to be higher though. As always, SSIM measures structural closeness, not how good the drawing looks to a person (see our take below).

Method notes

Four models, two scored targets plus five prompts each, 28 drawings total. All runs used the same colored-pencil toolset. Reasoning was set to high for every model.
SSIM/RMSE are computed by resizing both images to 256x256 and comparing. They measure structural/pixel closeness, not artistic quality, and only apply to the target runs (prompts have no reference to score against).
Wall-clock time includes the model's own thinking and tool round-trips.

Our take

GPT-5.6 Sol was the runaway leader. Its Starry Night and its rose were our favorites of the whole batch, which is wild considering it drew them stroke by stroke on a blank canvas. It also beat the other two on detail in almost every drawing, the one exception being the elderly fisherman.

Grok 4.5 was basically garbage here. It rarely produced anything usable, and despite its frantic tool use I would not trust it to reliably understand or judge visual output yet.

Gemini 3.6 Flash was definitely better than Grok at a slight cost increase, but comparing the Flash model to frontier versions seems a little unfair. I'm definitely excited to see how Gemini 4 will perform. We also already knew this, but the token output speed is just so impressive.

Claude Fable 5 landed second on quality but at the far end on cost and time. For this task it was the least appealing trade-off of the three: much slower and far more expensive (about 20x the others) for output that did not keep up with Sol.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

20. Jack Dorsey launches Buzz to combine team chat, AI agents and Git hosting

Source: https://runtimewire.com/article/jack-dorsey-block-buzz-team-chat-ai-agents-git
Site: RuntimeWire
Author: Ryan Merket
Published: 2026-07-21
HN activity: 335 points · 296 comments
Language: en

https://x.com/jack/status/2079605800998146171, https://xcancel.com/jack/status/2079605800998146171

https://buzz.xyz/

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

21. Apple defeats liability for not scanning iCloud for CSAM

Source: https://blog.ericgoldman.org/archives/2026/07/apple-defeats-liability-for-not-scanning-icloud-for-csam-but-the-judge-was-not-pleased-amy-v-apple.htm
Site: Technology & Marketing Law Blog
Author: Eric Goldman
Published: 2026-07-20
HN activity: 428 points · 449 comments
Length: 1.4K words (~7 min read)
Language: en-US

This case involves Apple’s handling of user-uploaded files hosted in private iCloud storage. Instead of adopting PhotoDNA to scan hosted files for CSAM, Apple created its own proprietary alternative, NeuralHash, which apparently wasn’t as good. So Apple U-turned on its efforts to scan for CSAM in its cloud storage. Instead, Apple implemented end-to-end encryption for iCloud files.

Apple’s manuevers confused the public and seemed like an embarrassing unforced error for Apple. It also ensured pressure from governments and plaintiffs, including CSAM victims, who preferred Apple’s more interventionist approaches, which Apple had voluntarily demonstrated it was willing to do.

This lawsuit represents a full-scale attack on Apple and Section 230. “Plaintiffs allege that Apple’s failure to implement any known CSAM detection is a design defect because Apple can safely implement readily available features to prevent the spread of known CSAM but has continuously failed to do so.” Prior blog post. The court dismisses the third amended complaint, which tees this case up for the Ninth Circuit, where (as usual) anything could happen.

* * *

The court reiterates that Section 230 applies to the plaintiffs’ claims:

First, Plaintiffs’ claims treat Apple as a publisher or speaker of the CSAM content that animates Plaintiffs’ injuries. Fundamentally, Plaintiffs contend that Apple has elected to permit users to disseminate and share third-party CSAM content when it could have—and, in their view, should have—used readily available technology to prevent the distribution of child pornography depicting the Plaintiffs in this putative class. The duties Plaintiffs seek to invoke “spring[ ] from the defendant’s status as publisher,” and consequently, “immunity applies.” Second, immunity also applies because “the means to avoid liability requires [Apple] to act as a publisher.” As a result, Apple is entitled to complete immunity under § 230.

Citing Doe 1 v. Meta, the court says:

Plaintiffs’ injuries are the direct result of the actions of third parties who used iCloud to share CSAM, a use Apple neither explicitly condones nor prevents (even assuming—as alleged in the TAC—that Apple was aware of the use of iCloud for this purpose)….though Plaintiffs allege that Apple knew that its tools were likely to be used to distribute child pornography (as confirmed by the internal Apple text messages at the center of this case), under the current state of the law, Apple is still entitled to immunity under § 230—irrespective of that general knowledge….

Plaintiffs cannot avoid the fact that a tool that detects CSAM must review CSAM to make such a determination. And while Apple could have taken steps to do so—as its competitors have done by using PhotoDNA—Grindr confirms that § 230 bars claims arising from the design decisions Apple could have taken where those claims relate to Apple’s role facilitating the communication and content of others

(A reminder that the defendant’s scienter is irrelevant to Section 230).

The plaintiffs tried to fit into the new Section 230 exceptions created in Doe v. Twitter, but the court rebuffs the move:

This case does not concern or even discuss Apple’s content reporting systems; it concerns Apple’s “failure to implement industry-standard safeguards” against the dissemination of CSAM. Though reporting systems and CSAM safeguards may both be described as “defects,” the latter requires the Court to treat Apple as a publisher. Twitter “could fulfill its purported duty to cure reporting infrastructure deficiencies without monitoring, removing, or in any way engaging with third-party content”; Apple cannot fulfill a duty to institute CSAM safeguards without deploying a tool like NeuralHash or PhotoDNA. Both NeuralHash and PhotoDNA were built to monitor and report violative images uploaded to company servers. Yet just the decision regarding whether to deploy either tool is a choice related to content moderation.

Also, Apple didn’t fail to satisfy any duty to report items to NCMEC if it never identified CSAM in the first place.

The Lemmon v. Snap workaround fails: “all of Plaintiffs’ claims here are inexorably linked to third-party content; Plaintiffs do not allege that Apple created content like a Snapchat filter that caused them harm.” The Roommates.com workaround also fails: “Plaintiffs do not allege that Apple modified or augmented the CSAM on its servers in any way.”

* * *

The case reaches its inevitable denouement of a win for Apple. However, Judge Wise remains troubled about its implications. She expresses her uneasiness in stronger-than-normal terms:

As it stands, nothing in the law prevents any company, including Apple, from utilizing available technology or creating new technology to identify and report child pornography stored and distributed on their traditional servers or through their cloud services. Conversely, there is no law that obligates companies to proactively do so. Undoubtedly any such legislation would come at a cost of at least some loss of privacy for millions of people. But if lawmakers expected that companies would take steps to prevent their products from being used for storing and distributing child pornography based on something short of a legal imperative, this case, like many others before it, demonstrates the inadequacy of that approach. If lawmakers want to ensure that Apple and other companies address their role in the dissemination of CSAM, they must require it under the law. In other words, lawmakers can fix this problem that is contributing to the exploitation of children.

She goes through this framing pretty quickly, but we should slow it down. The “loss of privacy for millions of people” she briefly references deserves a little more care. The opinion downplays the encryption angle; it mentions encryption only twice, as if it’s an afterthought. However, encryption is the critical attribute underlying Apple’s moves. Forcing Apple to scan for CSAM in iCloud means breaking end-to-end encryption for everyone and all purposes, including: malefactors who would intercept private files for criminal purposes; and government actors who have repeatedly shown that they will break into, distribute, and weaponize privately stored file caches (I was just thinking about the North Korea Sony hack. Remember it?).

So yes, the “privacy loss” Judge Wise mentions indeed would be a major cost to everyone. Worse, it would ensure new victims have their sensitive, private, or abusive images nonconsensually intercepted and disseminated. (Do you recall the Fappening and Snappening?) End-to-end encryption isn’t just some nice-to-have feature; it is one of the core planks of a technology architecture that keeps people safer.

Judge Wise continues:

This Order does not turn on whether Apple’s decisions contributed to Plaintiffs’ injuries. All Plaintiffs’ claims are founded on Apple serving as a publisher of third-party content. It is that role as “publisher” that is dispositive on the issue of immunity. This does not mean that the existence of images and videos of the putative class members being sexually abused—content that they allege is regularly stored and disseminated on iCloud—has not caused Plaintiffs real and lasting harm…

the outcome also adds credence to claims that the Ninth Circuit “has expanded § 230(c)’s scope to provide functional immunity to internet companies, even when they are aware (or should be aware) of unlawful content on their websites.” The practical outcome is that the current state of the law prioritizes privacy—a laudable and critically important value given that in our modern world nearly all our most personal and intimate data (including financial and health records) are stored and transmitted online. But the law should not ignore how those who create, view, and distribute child pornography leverage privacy protections to avoid detection by law enforcement. In the current legal framework, there is no protection for members of the putative class—individuals who as children were photographed and filmed while being abused in the vilest ways imaginable, and who now are repeatedly victimized each time the intimate and tortured images of their trauma are distributed to others. Those children are the collateral damage of our ineffective legal landscape. They deserve better.

Judge Wise isn’t well-situated to compare the relative strengths and limitations of the full range of potential anti-CSAM options, but a leading tool has always been and remains the government’s efforts to find and prosecute the creators, disseminators, and downloaders of CSAM. (Do you recall the federal government’s choices that leave children more vulnerable?) Making sure the government is doing what it can should be the #1 priority. In contrast, breaking end-to-end encryption shouldn’t be anywhere in the regulatory toolkit.

Case Citation: Amy v. Apple Inc., 2026 WL 2031817 (N.D. Cal. July 13, 2026). The complaint.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

22. It's a shame what's happened to radio

Source: https://blog.jimgrey.net/2026/07/21/its-a-shame-whats-happened-to-radio-3/
Site: Down the Road
Author: Jim Grey
Published: 2026-07-21
HN activity: 133 points · 135 comments
Length: 1.3K words (~6 min read)
Language: en-US

A repeat of an article I first published on 30 July 2009. I’ve expanded and updated it.

I signed off the air for the last time in 1994, capping a nine-year side career on the radio. People still sometimes ask me if I miss being a disk jockey, and for a long time I always wistfully answered yes. But not anymore. It’s not that I would be rusty as heck after all these years – and boy, would I. It’s that radio has changed drastically, and it just wouldn’t be any fun for me today.

I listened to a lot of radio when I was a teen. It was a companion when I was by myself doing homework or whatever. I called in requests and tried to win contests (but never did). I had a few favorite DJs, the ones who kept you listening because you wanted to know what they’d say next. The fun they were having made whatever I was doing more fun.

So when I got to college and found out about the campus radio station, WMHD, I had visions of being the kind of entertaining on-air companion I had enjoyed. I asked for and was given a weekly two-hour shift, just like every other disk jockey at the station. We could play whatever music we wanted, but my musical tastes were pretty narrow and I had trouble filling my time without always playing the same handful of artists. And I found out that wit failed me when the mic was open; I was lucky just to announce the next song without tripping over my tongue. My early shows were really pretty bad! Fortunately our puny signal covered just a few square miles, so hardly anybody heard me. Here’s a brief clip from the oldest show I have on tape, from 1986.

Needing to expand my repertoire, I had fun discovering classic and progressive rock of the ’60s and ’70s and even dabbling in heavy metal. I brought the music I found to my shift and learned how how to match key and tempo to transition smoothly between songs. I also started to find my on-air voice, as you can hear in this 1988 clip.

When I got my first part-time professional radio gig at WBOW, I had fun building and honing my on-air skills. There was a lot more to pro radio than what I’d done in college and it took time and practice to be good at it. If you’re old enough, you’ll remember the station in your town that everybody turned to for news, community information, and inoffensive music; in Terre Haute, that was WBOW. I was supposed to provide some “personality” between songs. Here’s a clip from 1992; you be the judge of whether I succeeded!

When I moved down the hall to the company’s rock station, WZZQ, I had fun connecting with listeners. I loved hearing from them when they called to make requests and play the contests. Over time, a handful of listeners came to know me on the air and called during my shifts to just say hello. I looked forward to their calls and meeting them at station events around town. It was great to know that I was providing the same kind of pleasure for them that radio gave me when I was young. It gave me the energy to do my best work, as you can hear in this clip from 1994.

After I left Terre Haute for Indianapolis I tried to get on part-time at a few stations. One polite rejection letter essentially said that I might have been fine in Terre Haute, but I wasn’t ready for the big time in Indianapolis. I decided to take the hint and went back to being just a listener, and now I’ve been out of radio more than three times as long as I was in it. In the intervening years, a number of things have changed that have made radio less fun to listen to and, I’m sure, to work in.

First, now that I’m in my 50s, advertisers don’t care about me anymore. Radio stations choose their formats to appeal to the groups that advertisers think spend the most money. Advertisers love thirtysomething moms, by the way, which is why there are so many country and adult-contemporary stations playing eleven hits in a row or forty minutes of uninterrupted music. No one radio station really reaches me.

Second, thanks to government deregulation radio is now big business. Owners have always been in it to make money, even when ownership was local or regional. But now very large corporations own so many stations and cost management seems to be more important than the quality of the on-air product. Live and local talent is all but gone, replaced by satellite-delivered formats and a form of prerecording called voicetracking. The evening jock on your favorite station probably recorded tonight’s shift this morning in a studio in Tampa or Minneapolis. Try calling the station you listen to in the evening or on the weekend. Nobody will answer, because nobody’s there. It’s cheaper that way.

Third, a change many years ago in the way radio ratings are measured has changed radio programming. As long as there have been ratings, radio stations have formatted themselves to maximize listening among the average, everyday people the ratings companies ask to track the stations they listen to. But the new way of measuring ratings, which uses a listening device called the Portable People Meter, showed a very different picture of actual listening from the older paper-diary method. It pinpointed exactly what caused listeners to change the station. This has led to stations framing programming in much shorter blocks with less human interaction with the audience. It’s why many stations have become anonymous appliances. Why listen to a station that doesn’t relate much with you when you can just listen to Spotify on shuffle instead?

I’m painting a pretty one-dimensional picture of radio’s problems; they are actually layered and complex. I don’t pretend to get all of it, but what I do get is that it has squeezed all the fun out of the business for me. There are few on-air jobs left where you can hone your craft and relate to the listeners.

When I first posted this in 2009, I called out my two favorite local on-air talents, both of whom were among my last reasons to listen to commercial radio: Steve Simpson at news/talk WIBC and Tom Berg at classic-rock WKLU. But since then WKLU was sold, changed formats to contemporary Christian, and sent poor Tom packing. Tom moved on to a station in tiny Knox, Indiana — and then he passed away after a hard battle with cancer. Steve was shifted to mornings and later fired when the station wanted to shift to a deliberate conservative bias and Steve said he didn’t know how to play along. Steve moved on to WCCO in Minneapolis and, as of 2026, has just retired.

I’ve given up. When I want to hear music, I listen on my iPhone now. When I do listen to the radio, it’s almost always to hear the news on NPR.

Meanwhile, every station I ever worked for is off the air now. The fellow who owned WBOW and WZZQ got into legal trouble that cost him his licenses. WMHD gave up its license in 2014 as student interest dwindled and airshifts couldn’t be staffed.

It’s foolish for me to assume that the institutions of my youth will endure forever. New things will come along and replace them. But at least half of why radio has become irrelevant is its own fault. And that’s a shame.

To get Down the Road in your inbox or reader six days a week, click here to subscribe!

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

23. Never Enough

Source: https://dark.ronacher.eu/2026/7/21/never-enough/
Site: Armin Ronacher
Author: Armin Ronacher
Published: 2026-07-21
HN activity: 59 points · 18 comments
Length: 341 words (~2 min read)
Language: en

written on July 21, 2026

Two recent stories about Silicon Valley are hard to read without wondering if everyone involved has lost their mind. Once a place that celebrated “the crazy ones, the misfits and rebels who saw things differently,” it now seems to have found a new kind of crazy that isn’t born of rebellion but fear of falling behind. Everyone is chasing the person ahead of them, with little time to remember where they meant to go.

One story talks about a couple that earns a combined $550,000 a year and still feels behind because someone at Anthropic might buy the dream house first. The husband asked his wife to take over almost all parenting so he could spend days, nights and weekends becoming his company’s top user of AI. And she did.

The other story covers a founder who has Claude review her first dates and tell her whether she was engaging and empathetic enough, thanks to recording every single one of them. Two people meet and afterwards, rather than talk to the other person or trust her own judgment, one of them sits alone with a machine and asks how well she performed.

Technology was supposed to make room for life but instead for more and more people life is slowly being rearranged around AI. People fear being replaced by machines and respond by giving those machines more of their judgment, attention and time. And for what? Every “saved” hour is returned to a race with no finish line.

If the valley shows us what it means to live in the future, perhaps falling behind is not the worst thing that could happen. Maybe we need the misfits who know when to stop. Who leave a conversation unrecorded. Who play with their children without agents running in the background. Who can admire another person’s success without feeling diminished by it. Who find peace not by getting ahead, but by no longer needing to.
The Great Buddha of Kamakura. (Wikimedia Commons.)

This entry was tagged ai and culture

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

24. Show HN: A new kind of FPS aim trainer

Source: https://openaim.pramit.gg/
Site: openaim.pramit.gg
Submitter: pmazumder (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-07-22 05:39 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 63 points · 31 comments
Length: 495 words (~3 min read)
Language: en

Appearance Theme Target colorPresets are colorblind-friendly against every theme. Target style Playfield background

Arena moodEarned backdrop palettes — free play only. Locked ones show what unlocks them.

Target finishEarned target skins — free play only. Rated drills always use the standard target. Living sceneBackdrop shifts between drills & drifts slowly to fight visual fatigue. Never touches targets or contrast. Reduced eye strainDims & warms the scene and UI for long sessions — lowers luminance load. Targets keep full contrast. MotionReduce disables UI transitions; Auto follows your OS.

Crosshair Style Size Thickness Gap Color theme OutlineKeeps the crosshair visible over targets. On-target reactionOff by default for clean telemetry.

Feedback Hit marker Hit sound Volume Miss flashRed flick at the crosshair on a missed shot. Shot feedback soundsMissed shots and magazine reloads. Blocked-shot cueMulti-tap drills cap the fire rate. Marks pulls that came too early to fire, so they read as your timing, not lag. Tracking toneSustained lock tone that climbs while your crosshair holds a target. Off-screen spawn cuePanned alert pointing to targets that spawn out of view. Off-screen spawn markerA brief edge chevron toward a target that spawns out of view — the visual twin of the spawn cue. Pace metronomeCoached drills: one beat per pace budget. Reward momentsConfetti + a flourish when you set a record, rank up, or hit a streak. Eye-rest remindersA gentle 20-20-20 nudge between drills on long sessions. HUD elements timer score acc fps Zen modeHide the whole HUD during runs; results still show everything.

Input & camera Sensitivity° per mouse count. Mouse DPIOptional. Enables cm/360 and hand-travel modeling. Import sensConverts your in-game sensitivity. Field of viewHorizontal; stamped into every replay. Invert Y

Raw inputWhether the browser delivers unaccelerated mouse motion. OpenAim never accelerates; this is the browser/OS layer.

Coach Challenge pointTarget success rate drills are solved to. ExplanationsFull detail always stays behind the ? chip. Session lengthDrills per coached session. FocusLet the coach choose, or lock the session to one axis. AutoGainSens auto-tuning from measured under/overshoot.

Data Capture levelSummary skips raw mouse/camera streams; deep analysis needs Full. Auto-download replaySave the .oar after every completed run.

Your data

Aim Commons

Anonymous drill summaries are contributed by default to train the shared, science-based player model everyone starts from and that renormalizes your ratings to real peers. No raw mouse traces, no identity, no device info — and you can opt out or revoke below anytime. Raw replays and the public leaderboard stay off unless you turn them on. Contribute runsSends drill summaries + capability features (no raw mouse, no device info) to sharpen the population model everyone starts from. LeaderboardRank on the task-Elo boards under a public handle. HandleYour public leaderboard name. Share replaysAdvanced: uploads raw mouse-movement traces (mildly biometric) for deeper analysis and spectating. Requires the two above.

Statuslocal only

Settings that change the meaning of telemetry (FOV, sens, target style, crosshair, invert, capture level) are recorded in each replay's .oar header, so analysis reflects the settings the run used.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

25. Laguna S 2.1

Source: https://poolside.ai/blog/introducing-laguna-s-2-1
Site: Poolside
Author: Poolside team
Submitted: 2026-07-21 17:17 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 349 points · 67 comments
Length: 4.4K words (~19 min read)
Language: en

Today we’re releasing Laguna S 2.1, a significant step forward in our development of models that pursue longer horizon work and make effective use of reasoning.

Laguna S 2.1 is a 118B total parameter Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) model with 8B activated parameters per token and supports a context window of up to 1M tokens in thinking and no-thinking modes. It went from the start of training to launch in under nine weeks, and on long-horizon coding benchmarks it holds its own against models many times its size. For every benchmark score we publish today, we are releasing full trajectories for every trial in the final evaluation set at trajectories.poolside.ai.

Laguna S 2.1 118B-A8B
Tencent Hy3 295B-A21B
Inkling 975B-A41B
Nemotron 3 Ultra 550B-A55B
DeepSeek-V4-Pro-Max 1.6T-A49B
Kimi K3 2.8T-A50B
Qwen 3.7 Max —
Muse Spark 1.1 —
Claude Fable 5 —

Terminal-Bench 2.1 Resolved tasks on Terminal-Bench 2.1.

SWE-Bench Multilingual Resolved tasks on SWE-Bench Multilingual.

SWE-Bench Pro (Public Dataset) Resolved tasks on SWE-Bench Pro (Public Dataset).

DeepSWE Resolved tasks on DeepSWE.

SWE Atlas (Codebase QnA) Resolved tasks on SWE Atlas (Codebase QnA).

Toolathlon Verified Resolved tasks on Toolathlon Verified.

Benchmarks as of 21 July 2026. pass@1 averaged over 4 attempts per task, except DeepSWE, SWE Atlas (Codebase QnA) and Toolathlon Verified that had 3 attempts per task. For all benchmarks we take the maximum of the vendor self-reported score, benchmark author leaderboard or third-party leaderboard (Artificial Analysis), except SWE Atlas (Codebase QnA) where we do not use third-party leaderboard figures.

Laguna S 2.1 (118B-A8B) Tencent Hy3 (295B-A21B) Inkling (975B-A41B)

Nemotron 3 Ultra (550B-A55B)

DeepSeek-V4-Pro Max (1.6T-A49B) Kimi K3 (2.8T-A50B)

Qwen 3.7 Max (—)

Muse Spark 1.1 (—)

Claude Fable 5 (—)

Terminal-Bench 2.1 70.2 71.7 63.8 56.4 64.0 88.3 74.5 80 88.0
SWE-Bench Multilingual 78.5 75.8 - 67.7 76.2 - 78.3 - -
SWE-Bench Pro (Public Dataset) 59.4 57.9 54.3 - 55.4 - 60.6 61.5 80.3
DeepSWE 40.4 - - - 9.0 69.0 - 53.3 70.0
SWE Atlas (Codebase QnA) 46.2 - - - 27.2 - - 42.2 -
Toolathlon Verified 49.7 - 45.5 34.3 55.9 - - 75.6 -

Punching above its weight class

Laguna S 2.1 is, as far as we can measure, the most capable agentic coding model in its weight class by a wide margin.

S 2.1 scores 70.2% on Terminal-Bench 2.1 in our agent harness with thinking enabled. Its compact size makes it uniquely suitable for complex work on local machines.

Benchmark

Open weights
Closed / size undisclosed

1 GPT-5.6 Sol 88.8
2 Kimi K3 2.8T-A50B 88.3
3 Claude Fable 5 88.0
4 GPT-5.6 Terra 87.4
5 GPT-5.6 Luna 84.7
6 Claude Opus 4.8 84.6
7 Claude Sonnet 5 80.4
8 Muse Spark 1.1 80.0
9 Qwen-3.7 Max 74.5
10 Hy3 295B-A21B 71.7
11 Laguna S 2.1 118B-A8B 70.2
12 MiniMax M3 428B-A23B 66.0
13 DeepSeek-V4-Pro-Max 1600B-A49B 64.0
14 Inkling 975B-A41B 63.8
15 DeepSeek-V4-Flash-Max 284B-A13B 61.8
16 Nemotron 3 Ultra 550B-A55B 56.4
17 Inkling-Small 276B-A12B 52.7
18 Qwen3.6-27B 27B 51.3
19 Qwen3.6-35B-A3B 35B-A3B 44.9
20 Nemotron 3 Super 120B-A12B 38.6
21 Laguna XS 2.1 33B-A3B 33.4
22 Mistral Small 4 119B 21.4
Benchmarks as of 21 July 2026. pass@1 averaged over 4 attempts per task, except DeepSWE, SWE Atlas (Codebase QnA) and Toolathlon Verified that had 3 attempts per task. For all benchmarks we take the maximum of the vendor self-reported score, benchmark author leaderboard or third-party leaderboard (Artificial Analysis), except SWE Atlas (Codebase QnA) where we do not use third-party leaderboard figures.

Terminal-Bench 2.1 evaluates a wide, high-quality set of long-horizon tasks where an agent model is connected to its environment through a terminal. Laguna S 2.1 is a standout model in its size category on this benchmark.

Benchmark

Laguna S 2.1
Other Laguna
Other disclosed models

Total parameters, log scale. Models with undisclosed total parameter counts are omitted.

A closer look at DeepSWE

The benchmarks above are all meaningful, and we're glad to be close to the frontier on them. But part of that closeness is a property of maturing benchmarks: as the frontier advances, top scores cluster in the 70-90% range and models that behave very differently end up no more than a few points apart. Datacurve’s DeepSWE still has significant headroom. Its tasks are longer-horizon and hard to partially solve, and the scores actually spread: frontier models range from 54% to 73% on the v1.1 variant, with some 1T+ parameter open models scoring below 10%.

On DeepSWE v1.1, Laguna S 2.1 scores 40.4 in thinking mode in pool harness.

Open weights
Closed / size undisclosed

1 GPT-5.6 Sol 73.0
2 Claude Fable 5 70.0
3 GPT-5.6 Terra 70.0
4 Kimi K3 2.8T-A50B 69.0
5 GPT-5.6 Luna 67.2
6 GPT-5.5 67.0
7 Claude Opus 4.8 59.0
8 Claude Sonnet 5 54.0
9 Grok 4.5 54.0
10 Muse Spark 1.1 53.3
11 GPT-5.4 52.0
12 GLM 5.2 753B-A40B 44.0
13 Laguna S 2.1 118B-A8B 40.4
14 Gemini 3.5 Flash 37.0
15 Kimi K2.7 Code 31.0
16 Claude Sonnet 4.6 30.0
17 Gemini 3.1 Pro 12.0
18 DeepSeek-V4-Pro-Max 1600B-A49B 9.0
19 Laguna XS 2.1 33B-A3B 0.3
pass@1 averaged over 3 attempts per task, harnesses vary (DeepSWE's leaderboard uses mini-swe-agent, model providers may report in their own harnesses and we report in pool, our agent harness). For all benchmarks we take the maximum of the vendor self-reported score, benchmark author leaderboard or third-party leaderboard (Artificial Analysis).

It is worth noting that Laguna S 2.1 scored 40.4% in our agent harness, pool, not mini-swe-agent which DeepSWE’s leaderboard uses. For other models we report maximal over reported scores which for most models are the official leaderboard results reported by Datacurve. While this makes scores less comparable, we don’t believe it puts us in a particularly advantageous position as it’s been reported that many of the models score the same or better in mini-swe-agent compared to their native harnesses. Every trajectory in the final evaluation run is available here.

Evaluation methodology

Evaluation of agent models is notoriously difficult due to prevalence of reward hacking. We have previously written about reward hacking in leading benchmarks and our evaluations system and rigor as part of the technical report on our Laguna M.1 and XS.2 models. Recent work has focused on adversarial judging to increase reward hacking detection.

With this release, we are making all trajectories from our final evaluations of the published Laguna S 2.1 checkpoint available to view and download at trajectories.poolside.ai.

Seeing the model work

Benchmark scores give a quantitative view into the model behavior, but to get a better intuitive understanding of how the model works it’s useful to look into runs on real world tasks. We share three such tasks with unedited trajectories and commentary.

Case study 1

A browser engine from a blank folder

One of our favorite things about Laguna S 2.1 is its resourcefulness: It will find clever ways to get to the goal even if the direct path is not available. We saw a great demonstration of this when we asked it to build a browser engine from scratch; knowing it would be a challenge for Laguna to verify its work given its lack of vision capabilities. In one 50-minute session of 181 steps, with no human intervention, Laguna S 2.1 built a working HTML/CSS rendering engine from an empty folder, then proved it renders like a real browser by measuring itself against one. Throughout its work, the model found increasingly complex ways to validate its work despite its limitations, leading to running headless Chromium to read canvases back and comparing screenshots numerically. See the full trajectory here.
Read the full case study

// the verbatim prompt · reproduce it yourself
your job is it to build a simple browser engine (just html/css) in
javascript to demonstrate the capabilities of poolsides new "Laguna S"
model. the goal is to take render html snippets in a canvas like a real
browser. to demonstrate it the engine, build a self-contained single
page app that showcases a gallery of multiple html snippets and renders
them side by side (canvas with our render engine + iframe letting the
hosting browser render it for real for comparison). support for most
common layout and styling elements


Over the session the model built the full pipeline, parser → cascade → layout → renderer, in vanilla JavaScript: an HTML tokenizer and DOM tree, a CSS parser with selector specificity, a cascade engine with inheritance, box-model layout, and a canvas-2D renderer, wrapped in an app that shows nine snippets on its own canvas beside the same markup in an iframe, so the hosting browser sits right there as the reference.
The model's engine rendering on a canvas (left) beside the hosting browser's own rendering of the same markup (right). The header reports pixel dimensions and the measured difference between the two.

Case study 2

Optimizing our own harness

Laguna S 2.1 is capable of pursuing meaningful engineering and research work. In one example, one of our researchers pointed it at our agent harness, used for training/evaluation and user interaction with our models. In an automated loop, Laguna S 2.1 made our harness 5.2% faster with ~70% lower memory allocation. See the full trajectory here.
Read the full case study

For this task, we instrumented the harness with benchmarks so the model could see exactly where the time and memory went. We set strict rules: one approach at a time, benchmark after every change, keep only what measurably wins. We then ran Laguna S 2.1 in an automated research loop that fed each result back to it and pushed it to keep improving.

Results. Over multiple hours of work, Laguna S 2.1 found and implemented multiple different optimizations in our agent harness, resulting in an overall speedup of 5.2%, and reducing memory allocation by ~70%. The plot below shows the progression of the optimization, with the insights and discoveries the model made along its way.

Laguna S 2.1 found that streaming-token accumulation used O(n^2) string concatenation and replaced it with buffers. It also found several instances of redundant copying and over-allocation during trajectory materialization, which it resolved by memoizing materializations and pre-allocating slices to their exact sizes.

Notably, after speedup improvements became marginal and hard to measure in our setup, Laguna S 2.1 kept driving forward, continuing to optimize. It found that memory allocation was more accurately measured and focused its effort there. This reinforces the notion that Laguna S 2.1 truly is a model that doesn't give up and understands limitations of its environment and it is able to progress despite that.

Wall-clock best-so-far (ranked objective)
Allocations best-so-far (proxy)
Attempt (did not improve best)

Attempts 1–20 from the optimization loop. Solid and dashed steps show the respective best-so-far result; hollow points are valid attempts that did not improve that best. Lower is better.

While the benchmarks used here are not a full production test, we validated the final run with Go's race detector and go vet gating enabled, and we tested the final artifact to confirm it works. This gives us confidence that the model's intermediate solutions were valid, stable software rather than gains bought with hidden race conditions.

Case study 3

Re-deriving Erdős problem #397, offline, in Perl

We found Laguna S 2.1 more capable in mathematics than any model we have developed to date. It independently discovered a proof to Erdős problem #397 (Erdős, Graham, Ruzsa, Straus, 1975), finding a construction that yields an infinite family of solutions. This is an independent re-discovery, as a proof to the conjecture was found earlier in January 2026 by GPT-5.2 Pro. We are confident that this result was not influenced by the previous result given that the model has a knowledge cutoff date in November 2025. Before GPT 5.2 Pro’s solution, this problem remained open for over 50 years. See the full trajectory here.
Read the full case study

// the verbatim prompt
this is an unsolved problem, solve it. Let B_k = C(2k, k) denote the
k-th central binomial coefficient. Erdős, Graham, Ruzsa and Straus
asked: are there only finitely many solutions to
B_m1 · B_m2 · … · B_mr = B_n1 · B_n2 · … · B_ns
where all of the indices are DISTINCT integers ≥ 2?
Resolve this question, with complete proof.


S 2.1 worked over 68 minutes to discover a conclusive solution. The sandbox had no Python; the model found Perl and did its number theory there: brute-force exact prime factorizations, pattern analysis, a conjectured family, then the proof: a closed-form infinite family of eight-index solutions.

B11+10n · B14+12n · B18+15n · B22+20n = B12+10n · B13+12n · B17+15n · B23+20nfor every n ≥ 0

While the result is a rediscovery, not a first solution, the family Laguna S 2.1 derived is structurally different from the earlier published construction (eight indices growing linearly vs the known six-index family), showing a fresh derivation rather than reciting from memory.

We found Laguna S 2.1 to be an exceptionally persistent problem solver across domains, finding ways to utilize all tools its environment has to offer, and pushing until it gets the job done. It is this characteristic that makes it so competitive even when compared to models multiple times its size.

Thinking effort

Laguna S 2.1 has two thinking modes: off and max (enabled by default) where it determines the right thinking/test-time compute budget for a given problem. We have observed coherent, productive thinking over several hours and hundreds of thousands of tokens in length.

Max thinking lifts S 2.1’s score on Terminal-Bench 2.1 from 60.4% to 70.2% and on DeepSWE from 16.5% to 40.4%. We are releasing this model without user-configurable effort (low-medium-high) control today to get Laguna S 2.1 into the hands of users immediately.

The two modes still give you a real choice, and it's worth seeing what each point costs:

SWE Multilingual
TB 2.1
SWE Pro
DeepSWE
hollow = no-thinking

Mean completion tokens per trajectory, log scale. Toolathlon omitted; token count not recorded.

Limitations

We are excited about the capabilities of Laguna S 2.1, in general as well as in the context of its size. In order to learn quickly we are making the model available with some known limitations that we are working on for the next iteration:

Harness overfitting: in some cases, we observe that Laguna S 2.1 struggles with adhering to tool schema definitions in third-party agent harnesses (e.g., the terminal tool in Hermes Agent) which are very similar to those in our native harness but with slight differences. In this case, the model may rely on its memory of the tool interface on the first use of the tool instead of following the definition. This is typically resolved through in-context learning should the harness reject the invalid tool call and ask the model to retry.

Nested tool calls: Laguna S 2.1 is guided to use a tool call format where tool calls are marked by XML-like tags:

<tool_call>terminal<arg_key>cmd</arg_key><arg_value>uname -a</arg_value></tool_call>


In cases where a tool argument expects a JSON array (e.g., Pi’s edit tool) the model may generate incorrectly escaped or invalid JSON.

Longer than expected thinking duration/overthinking: Laguna S 2.1 may think for long sequences before making progress, especially when working through competition mathematics problems. In future models we will introduce effort control for thinking as well as seeking to improve thinking efficiency.

What actually changed in this model

If the bet is long-horizon work, what did we improve that helps a model keep going? For S 2.1, it isn't just increasing the model size.

What we've done in this model is not necessarily add more intelligence, but improve the behaviors that lead to a more capable model: more verification, less taking things for granted, not declaring victory early, and being more persistent.”

The easiest way to see this is to watch the model work. Earlier Laguna series models would declare victory on a partially-passing test suite or abandon an approach two steps before it worked, S 2.1 keeps going.

We believe in scaling laws and will keep training larger models. What Laguna S 2.1 suggests is that raw intelligence is one axis, and the model's way of working (persistence, verification, willingness to backtrack) is a second axis that matters immensely. We're investing in both: our next, larger, Laguna series model began pre-training last week.

A strong base, then new post-training

Laguna S 2.1 is a scale-up of the Laguna XS family, trained on exactly the same pre-training data as XS 2.1: the step from XS 2.1 to S 2.1 was scale, training-code fixes, and small recipe changes, not new data. S 2.1 is also our first model where RL was done in FP8 precision, accelerating that part of the training.

The long agentic sessions in this post routinely accumulate hundreds of thousands of tokens of working context. Extending to a 1M-token context window enables the strongest performance on hard tasks.

The majority of what separates S 2.1 from the XS models comes from post-training, in two stages: an SFT stage that bootstraps capabilities partly with synthetic data, then RL, reserved for tasks the model can't yet solve at a high pass rate.

Distribution of post-training tasks

Our training corpus spans 409k agentic and non-agentic environments; within this, 83k setups are dedicated to terminal use cases, while 168k target standard software engineering workflows. These task sets were curated from open-source repositories, synthesized by our internal teams, including a specialized system for automatic dependency installation, or secured via strategic acquisitions from external data vendors.

Software-engineering tasks are mostly grounded in real code history: the largest source reproduces real commits (~38,000 tasks across ~17,000 repositories). The next reproduces merged pull requests and the remaining tasks are to fix injected bugs or reconstruct deleted files against a test suite. New for S 2.1 is agentic repository installation: given a repository, install every dependency and get the test suite running.

Terminal tasks come from datasets where agents build unseen environments and tasks from a seed.

What changed in the training loop

More generous rollout budgets: substantially longer timeouts, more tokens per turn, and more turns per task than any model before it (likely one reason for its persistence).

Better sandbox infrastructure: RL moved to a new sandboxing service, enabling background processes, selective network blocking to shrink reward-hacking surface and artifact caching to avoid overloading external services.

Multi-harness rollouts: the same prompts are rolled out in several agent harnesses, so the model learns behaviors that carry across scaffolds instead of overfitting to one.

The bets we're making

Laguna S 2.1 began pre-training on 4,096 NVIDIA H200 GPUs on May 22, 2026, 60 days ago. The Model Factory supports a high cadence of releases because building on foundations of work done, whether in pre-training data, architecture ablations or our evaluations stack, is automatic. In particular, advancements in post-training have enabled us to unlock more from test-time compute. Of all models we have trained to date, Laguna S 2.1 has the greatest delta in evaluations and perceived quality between its non-thinking mode and thinking mode: its internal monologue is very effective, especially for harder, complex problems.

A small team can only move this fast by focusing. We focus on two bets.

The first bet: we continue to focus on agentic coding capabilities. The path to intelligence runs through coding capability and the flexible interface that is software. This is increasingly evident as model intelligence advances: we now see hours- and days-long coherent work from models acting as agents, using software to interact with their environment. Laguna S 2.1 shows capabilities in this domain that were reserved for frontier models just 6 months ago at a small enough size to run on a single NVIDIA DGX Spark.

The second bet is that the web can be decompressed: almost everything humanity has written records the answer, not the thinking that got there, and we believe reinforcement learning can recover that thinking. This release is evidence for the first bet. The second we're still actively developing and excited to share more about in the future.

Three models in three months

Our internal platform for research and engineering, which we refer to as the Model Factory, allows us to industrialize the model development process. We invest heavily into continuously improving the process of how we conduct research and model building; to maximize research iteration and integration speed, and to minimize the amount of attention researchers need to pay to bookkeeping and infrastructure.

In less than 3 months from our Laguna M.1 release, we have pushed our techniques to deliver a substantially stronger model at half the running size. We are taking this forward to larger and larger models over the coming year.

28 April 2026

Laguna M.1 and Laguna XS.2 / 225B-A23B and 33B-A3B, a dual release

Our first serious agentic coding model alongside the first of the XS line. Together they taught us where the harness, the data, and the training loop were weakest.

2 July 2026

Laguna XS 2.1 / 33B / 3B active

A new iteration of the XS size to check the improved recipe. Matched M.1 on SWE-Bench Multilingual at a seventh of the size.

21 July 2026

Laguna S 2.1 / 118B / 8B active

Everything we learned from the previous ones, applied. Under nine weeks from the start of training to this post.

Get started

Laguna S 2.1 is available on Hugging Face from day one under OpenMDW-1.1, with BF16, FP8, INT4 and NVFP4 weights, official GGUF and MLX conversions, and official DFlash draft models.

We worked across the ecosystem so developers can run Laguna S 2.1 where they already build. NVIDIA helped optimize inference across its hardware, from TRT-LLM serving and NVFP4 on Blackwell systems down to a single NVIDIA DGX Spark. vLLM, SGLang and Ollama support open serving and local inference from day one.

For hosted access, Laguna S 2.1 is available through Baseten’s Model Library and Frontier Gateway, OpenRouter, including a free endpoint and a dedicated 1M-context deployment, and Vercel AI Gateway.

You can also use Laguna S 2.1 through Kilo, Hermes Agent, pi, OpenCode, OpenClaw and Cline, as well as pool, our terminal-based coding agent. In pool, toggle thinking per session with /thought-level.

On OpenRouter, the free endpoint offers 256K context. A dedicated paid endpoint provides the full 1M context window at $0.10 input, $0.20 output and $0.01 cache-read per 1M tokens.

For developers who want to go further, Laguna S 2.1 can be post-trained with NVIDIA NeMo AutoModel and Prime Intellect’s Prime Lab. ZML’s LLMD framework runs it across a wide range of hardware.

If you’re not a developer, chat.poolside.ai is a simple web chat with web search and basic code execution. No login required.

If you want the base model, meaning the pre-post-training weights for research or your own post-training, email models@poolside.ai.

Footnotes

All Laguna S 2.1 agentic benchmarking was completed using our internal fork of the Laude Institute's Harbor Framework with our agent harness, a maximum of 500 steps and sandboxed execution via our internal sandbox service. We report mean pass@1 averaged over multiple attempts per task (avg@k), with k per benchmark listed below.

SWE-bench Multilingual and SWE-Bench Pro were run through their Harbor adapters, with every task executing in our internal sandbox service. Storage and memory ceiling limit multipliers were set per benchmark (SWE-bench Multilingual: 2.0/2.0, Terminal-Bench 2.1: 3.0/3.0, SWE-Bench Pro: 1.0/1.0, with a guaranteed minimum of 2 CPU cores, 8 GB memory and 25 GB of storage). These are set to prevent sandbox preemptions.

DeepSWE v1.1 was run on an internal fork of Harbor configured to closely match the official DeepSWE Pier harness (Pier is itself a fork of Harbor). Internet access was disabled and sandboxes used the task-prescribed CPU count with guaranteed RAM and storage, with ceilings tripled to prevent pod preemption.

SWE Atlas (Codebase QnA) followed Scale AI's methodology from their public repository, run through Harbor with no changes to individual tasks or graders, judged by Opus 4.5.

Toolathlon Verified was run as a clone of the sandboxed benchmark harness on an EC2 instance in our infrastructure, with no changes to correct flaky tasks or offset rate limits, using a custom Toolathlon agent. Unlike the official version, we performed a full environment reset and repair after every evaluation run (default is every 4 hours).

SWE-bench Multilingual: mean pass@1 averaged over 4 attempts per task
SWE-Bench Pro: mean pass@1 averaged over 4 attempts per task
Terminal-Bench 2.1: mean pass@1 averaged over 4 attempts per task
DeepSWE v1.1: mean pass@1 averaged over 3 attempts per task
SWE Atlas (Codebase QnA): mean pass@1 averaged over 3 attempts per task
Toolathlon Verified: averaged over 3 runs

Our technical report contains a section on individual task modifications that have been made but not adopted upstream. All final run trajectories are available to view and download at trajectories.poolside.ai.

Maintaining the integrity of our evaluation system

Unless stated otherwise, all of our evaluations are run with access to the internet. This can be a major source of misaligned trajectories where the model finds solutions to tasks online without solving it itself (a.k.a., “reward hacking”).

Using an LLM as a Judge (LLMaaJ) calibrated with human labeled trajectories, we tag solutions that potentially reward hack after every eval. During early post-training we observed low rates of reward hacking (<2%). As training progressed, reward hacking rates spiked on the SWE-bench family of tasks with over 50% of trajectories being flagged. Manual inspection revealed the model was simply doing research to solve the problem, found the PR or repository the task was based on and applied the fix. In practice this is good behavior as any coding agent should be able to use solutions found online. However, this muddies the signal of the benchmark.

To address this we added a small prompt addendum to the user prompt instructing the model to not use direct solutions found online. Though not a guaranteed fix (ProgramBench, MirrorCode were exceptions), in general we did see the model respond and a drop in reward hacking rates to below 2%.

In addition, to confirm acceptable levels of reward hacking, we used:

Manual inspection of positive cases flagged by our production LLMaaJ service
Ad-hoc open-ended agent-supported analysis of all trajectories
Expert annotator review of all trajectories for one of the high-scoring Terminal-Bench 2.1 runs

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

26. Map of the world's great castles and fortresses

Source: https://thecastlemap.com/
Site: Castlemap
Submitter: marklit (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-07-21 16:05 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 274 points · 177 comments
Length: 781 words (~4 min read)
Language: en

The interactive map of the world's castles & fortresses

Castlemap is a free interactive map of 3,691 of the world's greatest castles, fortresses and palaces across 131 countries. Pan and zoom the night map above, click any point for a photo and quick facts, or open a landmark's page for its full story and exact location. From medieval strongholds and hilltop citadels to grand royal palaces, it is the most complete castle map online.

Browse by type

Castles by country

Find castles and fortresses in the countries that have the most:

Italy 288
France 276
Germany 254
Spain 180
Poland 163
Japan 155
England 153
Czech Republic 132
Austria 131
India 101
Slovakia 99
Switzerland 91
Scotland 88
Greece 87
Sweden 85
Portugal 82
Netherlands 76
Romania 74
Russia 66
Hungary 64

Browse all 131 countries on the map →

Famous castles to start with

The most-covered castles on Earth, by number of Wikipedia language editions:

Palace of Versailles France
Forbidden City China
Château de Montsoreau France
Acropolis of Athens Greece
Kremlin Russia
Alhambra Spain
Buckingham Palace England
Neuschwanstein Castle Germany
Tower of London England
Bastille France
Windsor Castle England
Fatehpur Sikri India

The most famous castles in the world, ranked → · Browse all 3,691 castles & fortresses →

How this map is built

Castlemap is built entirely from open data: facts, founding dates and coordinates from Wikidata, photographs from Wikimedia Commons, stories from Wikipedia, and the night basemap from OpenFreeMap and Natural Earth. Rather than plotting every fortification on Earth, the atlas curates the 3,691 most significant castles, fortresses and palaces — each verified to have a real photo, a Wikipedia article and exact coordinates — balanced across 131 countries so the map stays explorable. The atlas reads a dozen Wikipedia language editions beyond English, so a Burg documented only in German or a castello only in Italian can still make the map.

Missing a castle you know? The map refreshes from Wikidata, so the best way to add one is to improve its Wikidata entry: exact coordinates, a Commons photo and a Wikipedia article in any major language make it eligible for the next refresh. Edits to the commons improve every atlas built on them — not just this one.

The full curated dataset is free: download all 3,691 castles as GeoJSON or CSV (CC0). Curious how it breaks down? See the castle statistics — which country has the most castles, who leads per capita, and when the world built them.

Frequently asked questions
What is Castlemap?

Castlemap is a free interactive map of 3,691 of the world's great castles, fortresses and palaces across 131 countries. Every landmark is plotted on the map and has its own page with a photo, founding century, story and coordinates.
How many castles are on the map?

3,691 landmarks in total — 1,706 castles, 543 fortresses, 760 palaces and 682 ruins — across 131 countries.
Which country has the most castles?

In the Castlemap atlas, Italy has the most with 288, followed by France, Germany, Spain, Poland. You can browse castles in any of 131 countries.
Is Castlemap free to use?

Yes — Castlemap is completely free and needs no account. Open the map and start exploring the world's castles right away.
Where does the castle data come from?

Castle facts and coordinates come from Wikidata, photos from Wikimedia Commons, and the basemap from OpenFreeMap and Natural Earth — all open data.
How are the castles ranked by fame?

Each castle carries a fame score: the number of Wikipedia language editions — plus a few sister projects — that cover it, taken from its Wikidata sitelink count, a well-established proxy for global renown. The Palace of Versailles ranks #1. You can see all 3,691 castles ranked by fame, with the method and its limits explained in full.
Why isn't a castle I know on the map?

Castlemap is curated rather than exhaustive. Europe alone has tens of thousands of castle sites — many towns and hilltops have one — so the atlas maps the 3,691 most significant worldwide: those with a documented story, a real photo and exact coordinates, balanced across countries so the map stays explorable.
Can I add a castle to the map?

Yes — through open data. Castlemap refreshes from Wikidata, so to get a castle added, improve its Wikidata entry with exact coordinates, a Wikimedia Commons photo and a Wikipedia article — English or any of the dozen major language editions the atlas reads. Well-documented castles become eligible for the next data refresh, and your edit improves every map built on open data.

Explore all 3,691 castles & fortresses →

More atlases: TrainRouter · Sunshine Atlas · Beachmap

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

27. Gemini last models: temperature, top_p, and top_k are deprecated and ignored

Source: https://ai.google.dev/gemini-api/docs/latest-model
Site: ai.google.dev
Submitter: greatgib (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-07-21 21:27 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 99 points · 37 comments

Scrape failed: fetch: Get "https://accounts.google.com/o/oauth2/v2/auth?client_id=157101835696-ooapojlodmuabs2do2vuhhnf90bccmoi.apps.googleusercontent.com&redirect_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fai.google.dev%2Foauth2callback&scope=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.googleapis.com%2Fauth%2Fgoogledevelopers+https%3A%2F%2Fwww.googleapis.com%2Fauth%2Fuserinfo.email+https%3A%2F%2Fwww.googleapis.com%2Fauth%2Fdeveloperprofiles+https%3A%2F%2Fwww.googleapis.com%2Fauth%2Fdeveloperprofiles.award+https%3A%2F%2Fwww.googleapis.com%2Fauth%2Fdevprofiles.full_control.firstparty+openid+https%3A%2F%2Fwww.googleapis.com%2Fauth%2Fuserinfo.profile&access_type=online&response_type=code&state=%7B%22csrf_token%22%3A+%223d2770e5b0cdf50f90f4ccb3c0e761b946eac440a99a5b5ef16d8ce8b54cc9a4%22%2C+%22return_url%22%3A+%22https%3A%2F%2Fai.google.dev%2Fgemini-api%2Fdocs%2Flatest-model%22%7D&prompt=none&auto_signin=True": too many redirects

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

28. 'VPNs are lawful technical tools,' says EU Court in landmark copyright ruling

Source: https://www.techradar.com/vpn/vpn-privacy-security/vpns-are-lawful-technical-tools-says-eu-court-in-landmark-anne-frank-copyright-ruling
Site: TechRadar
Author: Rene Millman
Published: 2026-07-21
HN activity: 617 points · 120 comments
Length: 659 words (~3 min read)
Language: en

VPN providers aren't liable for copyright infringement, said the EU Court
The Court explicitly recognized VPNs as "lawful technical tools"
The case centered on the copyright battle involving Anne Frank's diary

In a major victory for digital rights and common sense, the Court of Justice of the European Union (CJEU) has officially categorized Virtual Private Networks (VPNs) as "lawful technical tools" while establishing new boundaries for online copyright disputes.

The landmark judgment — handed down in July 2026 — stems from a complex legal battle over the online publication of Anne Frank's historical manuscripts. At its core, the case forced Europe's top judges to answer a highly technical question: if a publisher actively tries to block visitors from a specific country, are they still breaking the law if a user sneaks past the digital border using circumvention software?

According to the CJEU, the answer is no. As long as a website employs "state-of-the-art" geo-blocking technology, the publisher cannot be held liable for copyright infringement simply because a determined reader decides to fire up the best VPN to bypass the restrictions.

The ruling sets a massive precedent. It confirms that copyright holders cannot point to the mere existence of VPNs to claim a website's security measures are completely ineffective.

More importantly for privacy advocates, the court firmly pushed back against the demonization of privacy software, cementing the legitimate status of VPN providers across the European Union.

The Anne Frank dispute explained

The EU's top court just confirmed: Geo-blocking is the copyright holder's problem, not the VPN's. Providers are not liable for users bypassing restrictions ⚖️ @torrentfreak https://t.co/fLwb5kYAy1July 17, 2026

The legal tug-of-war began when a coalition of Dutch and Belgian academic institutions published a free, scholarly online edition of Anne Frank's manuscripts.

Because copyright laws are not fully harmonized across Europe, the legal status of the famous diary varies by territory. In Belgium and roughly 60 other countries, the writings entered the public domain years ago. However, in the Netherlands, parts of the text remain protected by copyright until 2037.

To respect this territorial divide, the publishers hosted the site in Belgium and used geo-blocking to prevent access from Dutch IP addresses. Visitors from the Netherlands were met with a notice explaining why they couldn't enter the site.

The Anne Frank Fonds, which holds the Dutch copyright, sued. They argued that because standard VPNs easily allow users to mask their true IP address and spoof a Belgian location, the scholarly website was effectively communicating the protected work to the Dutch public.

The CJEU ultimately rejected this argument. In its judgment, the court noted that while geo-blocking measures can inevitably be circumvented, "the possibility of such circumvention cannot, in itself and in all circumstances, be a decisive factor in finding those measures to be inadequate and, therefore, ineffective."

Why this matters for the internet and VPN users

For everyday internet users, the "So What?" of this ruling is deeply reassuring. It validates that using a VPN to encrypt your online traffic, hide your IP address, or bypass digital borders is a legitimate use of consumer technology.

The judges explicitly shielded VPN companies from collateral damage in piracy lawsuits, a topic that has sparked intense debate among European ISPs and rightsholders. The court specifically argued that the provider of a VPN or similar services is not liable for users bypassing restrictions.

By placing the legal burden on publishers to maintain "state-of-the-art" digital fences, rather than demanding absolute, impossible perfection, the EU has drawn a pragmatic line in the sand.

Publishers aren't expected to build unhackable walls, and VPN providers aren't responsible for the actions of users who climb over them. Ultimately, this ruling proves that the borderless internet can still coexist with territorial copyright laws, provided everyone uses the right technical safeguards.

Follow TechRadar on Google News and add us as a preferred source to get our expert news, reviews, and opinion in your feeds. Make sure to click the Follow button!

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

29. Show HN: Justif – Knuth-Plass justification and microtypography for the web

Source: https://justif.lyall.co/
Site: justif.lyall.co
Submitter: lyall (Hacker News)
Submitted: 2026-07-17 12:47 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 177 points · 32 comments
Length: 11 words (~1 min read)
Language: en

justif

Publication-grade text justification for the web

learn more on github

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

30. My USB Drive Has a Hidden Encrypted Vault

Source: https://rootkitlabs.com/2026/06/22/I%27m-Building-a-Secure-USB-Drive/
Site: Rootkit Labs Blog
Author: Ryan Walker
Submitted: 2026-07-20 06:09 UTC (Hacker News)
HN activity: 260 points · 143 comments
Length: 1.5K words (~7 min read)
Language: en

This article was written by a human, for humans.

Many places don’t respect privacy laws, in certain situations you may be forced to unencrypt your media, or worse, assumed to be guilty. A Veracrypt hidden volume is useful in the former situation, but not the latter.

This is why I made Phantomdrive.

Phantomdrive is a completely open source USB drive that appears as an 8 GB drive when first plugged in. There’s no way for the OS to detect the remainder of the disk. If the user edits a plaintext file on the disk with the contents password:PUTYOURPASSWORDHERE, it unmounts itself and remounts the second hidden section and AES-256 encrypts/decrypts in place.

With Phantomdrive, hopefully you’ll slip past authoritarian government representatives, corrupt police, and anyone else that doesn’t respect basic encryption rights.

The Design

Everything is completely open source: the firmware, hardware and mechanical engineering. The tools I used to design the device are also open source. Lets get into the design!

For this project I used an interesting little chip called the CH569. It’s from the same company who make the USB to Serial chip (CH340) found on virtually every knockoff Arduino.

For this project I’m making use of the USB3, SD/eMMC and the AES block. The SM4 encryption block you can see above is apparently standardised for commercial cryptography in China - Wikipedia.

Due to AI demand the cost of eMMC memory is unusually high, so I chose to go with an SD card for memory. Someone will find your SD card if they tear it apart, but of course everything is encrypted. I used epoxy to glue the case together, meaning an attacker must destroy the device if they wish to get inside. If this doesn’t fit your requirements, I suggest you look elsewhere 😊

Once eMMC prices come down, there will be a version that uses it.

The device is simple, just the CH569, USB port, two buck supplies, a button for firmware update, SD card and some support components. There’s also UART test points, which help with firmware development.

The Cryptography

I wasn’t getting notifications when “people” opened several AI-generated GitHub issues on my repo. They outlined a mixture of: already patched problems, AI hallucinations, and small issues being blown out of proportion. Reddit dogpiled on this pretty quickly, while I was asleep.

This was a big fail on my part, I should have at least noticed people were opening issues. Most of them were non-issues, with the exception of AES-XTS which I’ll talk about below.

As for the security of the device, I’ve verified things with functional tests like this, where you can be sure the encryption is working and verified against OpenSSL’s implementation of AES.

The Key Derivation Function (KDF)

A KDF or “The Key Derivation Function” is a function used to generate a key for use in cryptography. Let’s start with the shittiest way to derive an AES key.

$$ K = Pw || 0x000 $$

We take our password, appending zeros to it until it’s 32 bytes (for AES-256) and that’s our key. With a shitty password, like “password1234”, we can brute force this in a matter of minutes. With a good password this turns into hours, and with a really good password maybe years to decades.

But what if the attacker uses a precomputed table of keys? This means they don’t even have to compute anything. To combat this issue we add a salt.

$$ K = Pw || salt || 0x000 $$

If every device has a unique salt, the attacker needs to compute keys on a per-device basis, so the lookup table problem goes away. Since the salts are different you can’t take your SD card out of one device and put it into another. Here’s how you get your salt…

udevadm info --query=property --name=/dev/sdc | grep ID_SERIAL_SHORT
ID_SERIAL_SHORT=Phantomdrive:34FC1FA7145467F7


So 34FC1FA7145467F7 is this device’s salt, which you need for data recovery if your device ever breaks. FYI: You can change “Phantomdrive” and the USB PID/VID to whatever you want by changing the firmware to increase stealth.

Let’s now assume our attacker has a really powerful machine, has gotten your salt and now will compute their own “table”. To make this a little harder we add 100,000 rounds of SHA-256 to the KDF.

$$ K = sha256(sha256(sha256(Pw || salt || 0x000))) … 100k $$

I chose 100k rounds because the device takes ~3 seconds to unlock, any more and it takes longer. I can’t use algorithms like Argon2, because those are memory-hard. If you have a better way to do this, without making the unlock procedure more than 5 seconds I would love to hear it, but we’re at the compute limit for this device right now.

If you need more security you can increase the number of KDF SHA256 rounds, look for another device, or double encrypt this device using a software solution. It’s also possible to simply turn off encryption and just use software based encryption.

AES Modes

AES is a block cipher, meaning it can encrypt and decrypt a fixed (16-byte) amount of data. There are various different AES modes to turn it into a stream cipher.

AES-ECB

AES-ECB or Electronic Codebook is the naive way to make a stream cipher. You simply take every 16-byte block of plaintext in your stream and encrypt it. Boom! We just made a stream cipher. This is insecure for a few reasons.

The same plaintext blocks will make the same ciphertext blocks, creating a lack of diffusion.
Attackers can remove data in ciphertext and when decrypted plaintext will be modified in a predictable way.

So this isn’t a good way.

AES-CTR

AES-CTR or Counter is a way to solve the issues above. It works in a simple way, you AES encrypt your counter, then XOR the output with your cleartext.

uint64_t i = 0;
while(i < len(ciphertext)) {
	ctr = aes_encrypt(i);
	ciphertext[i] = plaintext[i] ^ ctr
	i++;
}


It’s pseudocode but you get the point.

There’s a security risk involving “counter reuse” you should be aware of when using this mode.

Attacker recovers your ciphertext, puts your device back.
You write a bunch of fresh new data.
Attacker recovers your ciphertext again.
If the attacker can then guess one of the ciphertexts, they can recover the other ciphertext.

With this device I’m getting around 9MB/s write and 20MB/s read with AES-CTR and 6MB/s write and 10MB/s read with AES-XTS. For me this isn’t a big enough security gain over speed to warrant going to AES-XTS, but you might have a completely different case.

AES-XTS

AES-XTS or Tweaked Codebook Mode is the standard for disk encryption. It works by using two keys: \(K_1\) is your data key, and \(K_2\) generates the tweak key.

For each disk sector you need to compute a tweak key from the sector number \(S\).

$$ T_n = AES(K_2,S) $$

Each 16-byte block gets its own tweak, so you end up with \(T_0\), \(T_1\), \(T_2\) … \(T_n\). You then encrypt block by block of your plaintext \(P\) to get your final ciphertext \(C\).

$$ C_n = AES(K_1, (P_n \oplus T_n)) \oplus T_n $$

This solves the counter reuse issues listed above, but is a little bit slower.

The Firmware

I used two projects; thanks to their maintainers.

A library for the chip (BSP) https://github.com/hydrausb3/wch-ch56x-lib
An ISP programming library https://github.com/hydrausb3/wch-ch56x-isp

There are a few parts of the firmware you might be interested in…

Password Snooping

The device isn’t actually filesystem aware, it just takes USB WRITE10/READ10 commands and translates these into CMDx commands for the SD card. So to do the unlock wizardry we just look at raw data, in the unlock state it looks like this.

void phantomdrive_snoop_write(uint8_t *buf, uint32_t len)
{
	const char *prefix = "password:";
	const size_t prefix_len = 9;
	uint32_t i;

	for (i = 0; i + prefix_len <= len; i++) {
		if (buf[i] != 'p')
			continue;
		if (memcmp(buf + i, prefix, prefix_len) != 0)
			continue;

		size_t pw_start = i + prefix_len;
		size_t pw_end = pw_start;
		while (pw_end < len && (pw_end - pw_start) < sizeof(pending_pw) &&
		       buf[pw_end] != '\n' && buf[pw_end] != '\r' && buf[pw_end] != '\0')
			pw_end++;

		size_t pw_len = pw_end - pw_start;

		// Copy the password into RAM here
		memcpy(pending_pw, buf + pw_start, pw_len);
		pending_pw_len = pw_len;

		// We then zero out this buffer so the
		// password is never written to the disk
		memset(buf + i, 0, pw_end - i);
		return;
	}
}


The device isn’t filesystem aware, so when locked it calls this function before every write. It’s snooping on all writes, and matching against password:. This means that if you use the insecure portion of the disk for a ton of stuff, you might get an accidental match if your data contains the string password:. Again, if this doesn’t fit your requirements you can change it or look for another device.

The End

Thanks for reading and supporting this project. It’s been fun to work on and has gotten lots of interest in the community. This type of interaction is what motivates me to continue working on stuff like this.

If you’re interested in supporting this project, we have a preorder page up now!

Author

Ryan Walker

Building open source stuff with open source stuff.

